Gems
from

Daniel
Written by
Second Advent Believers

Compiled by
Patrick M. Jones
pjones4@hotmail.com

3 Angels Publishing
633 Pennwood Drive
Coalmont, TN 37313
United States of America

© 2011

DEDICATION

DEDICATION
TO

William Miller
Baptist Minister, 1782-1849,
This dedicated leader of the Second Advent Movement in America
had the following dream on December 3, 1847:
I dreamed that God, by an unseen hand, sent me
a curiously wrought casket about ten inches long by six
square, made of ebony and pearls curiously inlaid. To
the casket there was a key attached. I immediately took
the key and opened the casket, when, to my wonder
and surprise, I found it filled with all sorts and sizes
of jewels, diamonds, precious stones, and gold and
silver coin of every dimension and value, beautifully
arranged in their several places in the casket; and
thus arranged they reflected a light and glory
equaled only to the sun.
[The ‘casket’ represents the great truths of the
Bible, relative to the second advent of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which were given Bro. Miller to publish to the
world. The’“jewels, diamonds, etc.’ of ‘all sorts and
sizes’ so “beautifully arranged in their several places in
the casket” represent the children of God, (Mal. 3:17)
from all the churches, and from almost every station,
and situation of life, who received the advent faith, and
were seen to take a bold stand in their several stations,
in the holy cause of truth.—James White, 1849.]
I thought it was not my duty to enjoy this wonderful sight alone, although my heart was overjoyed at
the brilliancy, beauty, and value of its contents. I therefore placed it on a center table in my room and gave out
word that all who had a desire might come and see the
most glorious and brilliant sight ever seen by man in
this life.
The people began to come in, at first few in
number, but increasing to a crowd. When they first
looked into the casket, they would wonder and shout for
joy. But when the spectators increased, everyone would
begin to trouble the jewels, taking them out of the casket and scattering them on the table.
I began to think that the owner would require the
casket and the jewels again at my hand; and if I suffered
them to be scattered, I could never place them in their
places in the casket again as before; and felt I should
never be able to meet the accountability, for it would be
immense. I then began to plead with the people not to
handle them, nor to take them out of the casket; but the
more I pleaded, the more they scattered; and now they
seemed to scatter them all over the room, on the floor
and on every piece of furniture in the room.
I then saw that among the genuine jewels and
coin they had scattered an innumerable quantity of
spurious jewels and counterfeit coin. I was highly
incensed at their base conduct and ingratitude, and
reproved and reproached them for it; but the more I

reproved, the more they scattered the spurious jewels and false coin among the genuine.
I then became vexed in my physical soul and began to use physical force to push them out of the room;
but while I was pushing out one, three more would enter
and bring in dirt and shavings and sand and all manner
of rubbish, until they covered every one of the true jewels, diamonds, and coins, which were all excluded from
sight. They also tore in pieces my casket and scattered
it among the rubbish. I thought no man regarded my
sorrow or my anger. I became wholly discouraged and
disheartened, and sat down and wept.
While I was thus weeping and mourning for
my great loss and accountability, I remembered
God, and earnestly prayed that He would send me
help.
Immediately the door opened, and a man entered
the room, when the people all left it; and he, having a
dirt brush in his hand, opened the windows, and began
to brush the dirt and rubbish from the room.
I cried to him to forbear, for there were some
precious jewels scattered among the rubbish.
He told me to “fear not,” for he would “take care
of them.”
Then, while he brushed the dirt and rubbish,
false jewels and counterfeit coin, all rose and went out
of the window like a cloud, and the wind carried them
away. In the bustle I closed my eyes for a moment;
when I opened them, the rubbish was all gone. The precious jewels, the diamonds, the gold and silver coins,
lay scattered in profusion all over the room.
He then placed on the table a casket, much larger
and more beautiful than the former, and gathered up the
jewels, the diamonds, the coins, by the handful, and cast
them into the casket, till not one was left, although some
of the diamonds were not bigger than the point of a pin.
He then called upon me to “come and see.”
I looked into the casket, but my eyes were
dazzled with the sight. They shone with ten times
their former glory. I thought they had been scoured in
the sand by the feet of those wicked persons who had
scattered and trod them in the dust. They were arranged
in beautiful order in the casket, every one in its place,
without any visible pains of the man who cast them in. I
shouted with very joy, and that shout awoke me.
Early Writings, 81-84

i

GEMS FROM DANIEL

PREFACE:
This volume is the first in a set of two volumes—
the other, a commentary on Revelation.

cation of the last persecuting power on Earth—the antiChrist. The “little horn” of Daniel 7 and the “beast”
of Rev. 13:1-10 have identical characteristics!
So necessary is it that these two books be studied
together is seen by the fact that the book of Daniel is
symbolized in the book of Revelation as “a little book
open.” Daniel had been told to seal up his book (after
being written) until the ‘time of the end’—1798. (John
was specifically told not to seal his book of Revelation,
and no other book of the Bible was ever closed up or
sealed.) But John saw that the book of Daniel would be
opened. In 1798, this historically happened. God’s
people saw the fulfillment of the 1260 day prophesy and
began to study the portion of Daniel that had yet been
unfulfilled—the 2300 day prophecy of Daniel 8:14.
Proof that the little book is indeed the book of Daniel is
seen in the fact that it is only after John “eats” this once
closed (but now open) little book, that all the symbols
and imagery from the book of Daniel explode into the
book of Revelation—even those same time periods!
Both Daniel and Revelation are vital for God’s
people to understand.

WHY DANIEL & REVELATION GO TOGETHER
Daniel, written in the sixth century BC, and Revelation, written at the end of the first century AD, contain
some of the most important visions and dreams to be
found in the Bible. All of the visions are prophetic and
contain a train of events that occurred from the days
they were written to the last days.
There are many similarities to be found in these
two books. In fact, Revelation explains and complements the book of Daniel, in just the same way that the
New Testament does to the Old Testament. This unity
of thought between two different writers over six hundred years apart is remarkable and can only be explained by the common source of inspiration—the Holy
Spirit—working on the minds of two men consecrated
to God. What are some of the similarities between these
two books?
“The blessing that introduces the reading of
Revelation (1:3) and concludes the reading of Daniel
(12:12) indicates the intention to couple the vision of
John precisely with that of Daniel….” Doukhan,
DVE, 56.
Daniel and John had the same experience. Daniel
was one of many captives from Israel in the Babylonian
empire. John was one of many Christian prisoners in
the Pagan Roman empire. For their faith in God, both
were persecuted. Daniel was thrown into the den of
lions, John into a pot of boiling oil. Both came out
alive. Both lived to a great age. Both were beloved of
God. Both communicated with the angel Gabriel.
Both saw Jesus on the Sabbath day. See Dan. 10 and
Rev. 1.
Both Daniel and Revelation mention the same
prophetic time period—the 1260 days. Daniel mentions
it two times in two prophecies and John mentions it five
times in three prophecies for a total of seven times! It
must be important!
God gave both Daniel and John visions that used
the same symbols! Notice:
God gave both Daniel and John visions that used
the same symbols! Notice that we find the symbols of a
lion, bear, leopard, and ten horns used in both Daniel 7:4-7 and Revelation 12:1,2. Notice also, that if
you add up the number of heads and horns they are the
same! 7 and 10. There are two wings of an eagle used
in both Daniel 7:4 and Revelation 12:14.
Even when the same symbols are not used, there
are similarities. There is an interesting and very important connection between both books in their identifi-

“Daniel and Revelation must be studied, as
well as the other prophecies of the Old and New
Testaments. Let there be light, yes, light, in your
dwellings. For this we need to pray. The Holy Spirit, shining upon the sacred page, will open our understanding, that we may know what is truth....
“There is need of a much closer study of the
word of God; especially should Daniel and the
Revelation have attention as never before in the history of our work. We may have less to say in some
lines, in regard to the Roman power and the papacy;
but we should call attention to what the prophets and
apostles have written under the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit of God. The Holy Spirit has so shaped
matters, both in the giving of the prophecy and in
the events portrayed, as to teach that the human
agent is to be kept out of sight, hid in Christ, and
that the Lord God of heaven and His law are to be
exalted. Read the book of Daniel. Call up, point by
point, the history of the kingdoms there represented.
Behold statesmen, councils, powerful armies, and
see how God wrought to abase the pride of men, and
lay human glory in the dust....
“The light that Daniel received from God was
given especially for these last days. The visions he
saw by the banks of the Ulai and the Hiddekel, the
great rivers of Shinar, are now in process of fulfillment, and all the events foretold will soon come to
pass. Consider the circumstances of the Jewish

ii

PREFACE
nation when the prophecies of Daniel were given.
“Let us give more time to the study of the Bible. We do not understand the word as we should.
The book of Revelation opens with an injunction to
us to understand the instruction that it contains.
‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of this prophecy,’ God declares, ‘and keep
those things which are written therein: for the time is
at hand.’ When we as a people understand what this
book means to us, there will be seen among us a
great revival. We do not understand fully the lessons that it teaches, notwithstanding the injunction
given us to search and study it.
“In the past teachers have declared Daniel and
the Revelation to be sealed books, and the people
have turned from them. The veil whose apparent
mystery has kept many from lifting it, God’s own
hand has withdrawn from these portions of His
word. The very name ‘Revelation’ contradicts the
statement that it is a sealed book. ‘Revelation’
means that something of importance is revealed.
The truths of this book are addressed to those living
in these last days. We are standing with the veil removed in the holy place of sacred things. We are
not to stand without. We are to enter, not with careless, irreverent thoughts, not with impetuous footsteps, but with reverence and godly fear. We are
nearing the time when the prophecies of the book of
Revelation are to be fulfilled....
“We have the commandments of God and the
testimony of Jesus Christ, which is the spirit of
prophecy. Priceless gems are to be found in the
word of God. Those who search this word should
keep the mind clear. Never should they indulge perverted appetite in eating or drinking. If they do this,
the brain will be confused; they will be unable to
bear the strain of digging deep to find out the meaning of those things which relate to the closing scenes
of this earth’s history.
“When the books of Daniel and Revelation
are better understood, believers will have an entirely
different religious experience. They will be given
such glimpses of the open gates of heaven that heart
and mind will be impressed with the character that
all must develop in order to realize the blessedness
which is to be the reward of the pure in heart.
“The Lord will bless all who will seek humbly
and meekly to understand that which is revealed in
the Revelation. This book contains so much that is
large with immortality and full of glory that all who
read and search it earnestly receive the blessing to
those ‘that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep
those things which are written therein.’ One thing
will certainly be understood from the study of Revelation—that the connection between God and His
people is close and decided. ” Testimonies to Ministers, pp. 112-114; Faith I Live By, p. 345.

When the Bible was restored to God’s people at
the beginning of the Reformation (1517 AD), there was
almost universal agreement among the Reformers that
the anti-Christ was papal Rome—the woman ‘drunken
with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus’ (Rev 17: 6).
This is because the prophecies were interpreted historically.
HISTORICISM—is method of interpretation that
believes that from John`s day, there has been a chronological fulfilment in history of the prophecies of Daniel
and Revelation. This commentary is based on Historicist principles. In the ranks of Historicist commentators are such illustrious names of the past as Wycliffe,
Martin Luther, John Knox, Newton, John Wesley, etc.
The Historicist Interpretation is based on fulfilled
prophecy—in following it we tread the solid ground of
accomplished facts. Prophecy is history foretold. History is prophecy fulfilled. With the books of Daniel and
Revelation in the one hand and the History book in the
other hand, we are able to confirm the chronological
fulfilment of the events foretold in these prophetic
books.
The main reason why there is now so much confusion about these two books today—almost 500 years
since the Reformation first began—stems from the fact
that there are two other schools of interpretation now
being used.
1—PRETERISM—This school interprets on the
principal belief that all fulfilment of Revelation is past.
2—FUTURISM—This school believes that chapters 4 (or 6) to 22 of Revelation are still awaiting fulfilment and that Daniel’s 70th week and is still future.
How did these different ways of seeing come
about? Joseph Tanner, the Protestant writer, gives this
record:
“So great a hold did the conviction that the
Papacy was the Antichrist gain upon the minds of
men, that Rome at last saw she must bestir herself,
and try, by putting forth other systems of interpretation, to counteract the identification of the Papacy with the Antichrist.
“Accordingly, towards the close of the century of the Reformation, two of the most learned
doctors set themselves to the task, each endeavoring by different means to accomplish the same
end, namely, that of diverting men’s minds from
perceiving the fulfilment of the prophecies of the
Antichrist in the papal system. The Jesuit Alcasar devoted himself to bring into prominence the
preterist method of interpretation,... and thus endeavored to show that the prophecies of Antichrist
were fulfilled before the popes ever ruled at
Rome, and therefore could not apply to the Papacy.
“On the other hand, the Jesuit Ribera tried to
set aside the application of these prophecies to the
papal power by bringing out the futurist system,
which asserts that these prophecies refer properly,
not to the career of the Papacy, but to that of some

METHODS OF INTERPRETATION

iii

GEMS FROM DANIEL
future supernatural individual, who is yet to appear, and to continue in power for three and a half
years. Thus, as Alford says, the Jesuit Ribera,
about AD 1580, may be regarded as the founder of
the futurist system in modern times. [This theory
was designed to throw dust in the eyes of the Reformers, who recognized the Papacy as Antichrist.
Futurism was adopted and enlarged upon by J. N.
Darby who organized the Plymouth Brethren
around 1830—and it is sad to say that, today, a
large body of Protestantism believes it.]
“It is a matter for deep regret that those who
hold and advocate the futurist system at the present
day, Protestants as they are for the most part, are
thus really playing into the hands of Rome, and
helping to screen the Papacy from detection as the
Antichrist. It has been well said that ‘futurism
tends to obliterate the brand put by the Holy
Spirit upon popery.’ More especially is this to be
deplored at a time when the papal Antichrist seems
to be making an expiring effort to regain his former hold on men’s minds.—Daniel and the Revelation, Rev. Joseph Tanner, B. A., pp. 16, 17. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1898.
The Historicist method of interpretation was the
key to understand the Bible prophecies which brought
about the Reformation and which will bring the Reformation to completion. Careful and prayerful study of
Daniel and Revelation together will not only reward the
student with a flood of light upon the whole Bible.
Daniel and Revelation will also confirm the absolute
Sovereignty of the Lord God in the affairs of both individuals and nations. The Word of God will truly becoming ‘a lamp unto your feet and a light unto your
path.’ Psalm 119:105.
“Great truths that have lain unheeded and unseen since the day of Pentecost, are to shine from
God’s word in their native purity. To those who truly love God the Holy Spirit will reveal truths that
have faded from the mind, and will also reveal truths
that are entirely new. Those who eat the flesh and
drink the blood of the Son of God will bring from
the books of Daniel and Revelation truth that is inspired by the Holy Spirit. They will start into action forces that cannot be repressed. The lips of
children will be opened to proclaim the mysteries
that have been hidden from the minds of men. The
Lord has chosen the foolish things of this world to
confound the wise, and the weak things of the world
to confound the mighty. Fundamentals of Christian
Education, p. 474.

and the faith of Jesus.” Rev. 14:12. A parallel verse
describes them as “those that keep the commandments
of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.” Rev.
12:17. The “testimony of Jesus” is identified as “the
spirit of prophecy” in Rev. 19:10. The gift of prophecy
is included in the gifts that God bestows on His church
as prophesied in Joel 2, Ephesians 4. This gift was bestowed upon the Second Advent movement in the writings of Ellen G. White. This commentary holds that her
writings are inspired, and are used to bring light upon
the verses of Daniel and Revelation. She herself has
said of her writings:
“I recommend to you, dear reader, the
Word of God as the rule of your faith and practice. By that Word we are to be judged. God has, in
that Word, promised to give visions in the ‘last
days’; not for a new rule of faith, but for the comfort of His people, and to correct those who err
from Bible truth. Thus God dealt with Peter when
He was about to send him to preach to the Gentiles.
(Acts 10.)” Early Writings, p. 78.
THE PURPOSE OF DANIEL & REVELATION
The final link between both books of
prophecy is their single purpose. Daniel expressed it
this way:
“My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as
before him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.” Daniel 6:22.
Daniel portrayed a life of obedience to the ten commandments and was innocent in God’s eyes (first four
commandments) and in the king’s eyes (last six commandments.)
The same thought is expressed by John: “Here is
the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.”
Revelation 14:12.
“The purpose of God in the prophetic books of
Daniel and John is simply to save every one from sin by
faith in Jesus Christ. This is not just a mental assent to
truth, but a receiving of the life and power of God. God
wants every one on planet earth to obey the ten commandments by the power of Jesus Christ through the
indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit.
One thing is for sure—God’s last day church will
participate in the fulfillment of the last portions of the
prophecies of Daniel and Revelation. Today is the day
of opportunity to be part of that remnant body of believers. It is vital that we correctly understand the prophecies of Daniel and Revelation to guide our steps aright.
May God bless this volume is our prayer.

USE OF THE SPIRIT OF PROPHECY

The book of Revelation describes God’s last day
church as those that “keep the commandments of God

iv

ABBREVIATIONS

ABBREVIATIONS USED IN
GEMS FROM DANIEL
4SDABC—Nichol, Francis D. The Seventhday Adventist Bible Commentary. Vol. 4.
Washington, D.C.: Review and Herald Publishing Association, 1957.

2003.

11:40-45. From the internet.

French, Arthur J.. Daniel on Solid Ground,
Review & Herald Pub. Ass., Washington
D.C. 21740, 1988.

LaRondelle, LFTLD—LaRondelle, Hans.
Light for the Last Days, Pacific Press, 1999.

Andrews, CRBJ—Andrews, J.N..
The
Commandment to Restore and to Build Jerusalem, SDA Publ. Ass., Battle Creek, Mi,
1865.

Froom, 4PFOOF—Froom, LeRoy Edwin.
Prophetic Faith of our Fathers, Vol. 4, Review and Herald , Washington D.C., 1954.

Andrews, JEO—Andrews, J.N.. The Judgment. Its Events and Their Order, Pacific
Press Publishing, Oakland, CA, 1890.

Gane, WAJ—Gane, Roy. Who's Afraid of
the Judgment?, Pacific Press Pub. Ass., Boise, Idaho, 2006.

Anderson, UDP—Anderson, R.A.. Unfolding Daniel’s Prophecies, Pacific Press Pub.
Ass., Mountain View, Ca, 1975. .

Gilbert, MIHS—F.C. Gilbert. The Messiah
in His Sanctuary, Leaves of Autumn, Payson,
AZ, 1985.

Bates, WAHH—Bates, Joseph. Waymarks
and High Heaps. EGW CD Rom. 1847.

Goldstein, 1844MS—Goldstein, Clifford.
1844 Made Simple, Pacific Press Pub. Ass.,
Boise, Idaho, 1988.

Berry, Two Troubles—Berry, Maurice. Two
Troubles, Unpublished paper on Daniel
11:40-45.
Biblical
Institute—Biblical
Institute—
Summary of lectures by James White and
Uriah Smith. SDA Publ. Ass. 1878. (EGW
CD-Rom Comprehensive Research Edition2008).

Handwerk, Jean, The Significance of Clovis:
Christ’s
Mediation
Replaced—
Handwerk, Jean. Cornerstone Newsletter
2009 (Unpublished).
Haskell, SDP—Haskell, Stephen N.. Story
of Daniel the Prophet, Bible Training School,
New York City, NY, 1904

Bohr, ND7—Bohr, Stephen. Notes on Daniel 7. Download from Internet.

Heiks, AD508—Heiks, Heidi. AD 508.
From website: www.thesourcehh.org, 2008.

Bohr, ND9—Bohr, Stephen. Notes on Daniel 9. Download from Internet.

Heiks, AD538—Heiks, Heidi.
AD 538
Source Book, TeachServices, 2010.

BRI, 2SOD—Bible Research Institute, Symposium on Daniel, Vol. 2, Review & Herald
Pub. Ass., Maryland, 1986.

Heiks, Source—Heiks, Heidi, 508, 538,
1798, 1843 Source Book (Preliminary), Hope
International, 2007.

Bunch, BOD—Bunch, Taylor G.. The Book
of Daniel. Leaves of Autumn Books, Inc.
Box 440, Payson, AZ 85547, 1986.

Heiks. TDSB—Heiks, Heidi, The “Daily”
Source Book, TEACH Services, Brushton,
NY, 2008.

Burnside,DPUF—Burnside, George. Daniel, Prophecy Unfolds the Future, Leaves of
Autumn Books, Inc., P.O. Box 440, Payson,
AZ 85541.

Heiks, KON—Heiks, Heidi, King of the
North. TEACH Services, Brushton, NY,
2009.

Cardona, 1335-AE—Cardona, Alvin. The
1260, 1290, 1335 Day Prophecies—an Abbreviated Exposition. www.scribd.com.

Hiddekel—Brinsmead, Robert D.. Vision by
the Hiddekel, International Health Inst.,
Denver, CO, 1970.

Cox, Daniel—Cox, Kenneth, Daniel, Remant
Pub. 2009.

Jones, CWCP—Jones, Alonzo Trevor. The
Consecrated Way to Christian Perfection,
Mountain View, CA, Pacific Press, 1905.

Crosier, O.R.L. Day Star Extra, 1846, reprinted in the Advent Review, Sept. 1850—
Crosier, O.R.L. Day Star Extra, 1846.

Jones, GCDB—Jones, Alonzo Trevor. General Conference, The Daily Bulletin, Feb. 22,
1899.

Doukhan, DVE.—Doukhan, Jacques B..
Daniel, Vision of the End, Andrews University Press, Berrien Springs, MI, 49104, 2nd
edition, 1989.

Jones, IIR—Jones, Alonzo Trevor. Individuality in Religion, Battle Creek, MI.

Ferrell, BD—Ferrell, Vance. A Biblical
Defense, Harvestime Books, Altamont, TN,

Jones, GNOT—Jones, Alonzo Trevor. Great
Nations of Today.
Knopper, Dan11—Knopper, Jan T.. Daniel

v

Light Bearers, UOD---Light Bearers Ministry, The Unsealing of Daniel, Malo, WA
99150.
Mansell, OSOA—Mansell, Donald Ernest.
Open Secrets of the Anti-Christ. Pacific
Press, Idaho, 2002.
Mason, KONAS—Mason, Moses. King of
the North and South. Apocalypse Ministries,
Pulaski, TN
Maxwell, 1GC—Maxwell, C. Merwyn. God
Cares, Vol. 1 and 2, Pacific Press Pub. Ass.,
Mt. View, CA, 1981
Mellor, Barry. The False Doctrine of the
Trinity, Manuscript, ch. “The History of
Trinitarianism.”
Menzel, Astronomy—Menzel, Donald H.,
Astronomy, Random House, NY, NY., 1974.
Miller, Evidence—Miller, William. Evidence From Scripture and History of the
Second Coming of Christ about the Year
1843. Leaves of Autumn Books, Inc. Box
440, Payson, AZ 85547, 2003.
Olsen, PSAD—Olsen, V. Norskov. Papal
Supremacy and American Democracy. Loma Linda University Press, Loma Linda/Riverside, California, 1987.
Paulien, Jon. Daniel and Revelation. Pacific
Press Pub. Ass.. Nampa, ID, 1998.
Pfandl, DTSOB—Pfandl, Gerhard. Daniel—
The Seer of Babylon. Review & Herald,
Hagerstown, MD. 2004.
Pfandl, Gerhard. Daniel’s “Time of the
End”. Journal of the Adventist Theological
Society, 7/1 (Spring 1996): 141-158.
Pfandl, TPID12—Pfandl, Gerhard. Time
Prophecies in Daniel 12. Biblical Research
Institute, May, 2005.
Pickle, WWSY—Pickle, Bob. When Were
the Sabbatical Years?
www.picklepublishing.com/papers/sabbatical-years
2007.
Pippenger, TOTE—Pippenger, Jeff.
of the End.

Time

Rafferty, PI—Rafferty, James. Prophetic
Insights. Light Bearers Resource Center,
1994.
Rafferty, TOAW—Rafferty, James. Tidings
of A Whirlwind. Pamphlet, Light Bearers

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Ministry, 1992.
Rosenvold, KONAGP—Rosenvold, Lloyd
and Leola. The King of the North and God’s
People. Rosenvold Publications, Inc. P.O.
Box 330, Hope ID, 83836, 1996.
Shea, DARG—Shea, William H.. Daniel, A
Reader’s Guide. Pacific Press Pub. Ass.,
Nampa, ID, 2005.
Shea, SSPI—Shea, William H.. Selected
Studies on Prophetic Interpretation, Review
& Herald Publ. Ass., Wash. D.C., 1982.
Smith, DR—Smith, Uriah. Thoughts on
Daniel and Revelation, SDA Publ. Ass.,
Battle Creek, MI, 1897.
Swearingen, TOOTN—Swearingen, Marc
Alden. Tidings Out of the Northeast. Remnant Publications, 2006.
Taylor, CSB—Taylor, Robert. The Censer
Still Burns. Self-Published. Sacramento,
CA,
TEACH, D&R—TEACH Services, Studies
on Daniel and Revelation, Brushton, NY
12916, 1988.
Thiele, OSID—Thiele, Edwin R.. Outline
Studies in Daniel. Pacific Union College,
Angwin, CA.
Waggoner, PL—Waggoner, Elliot J.. Prophetic Lights, Pacific Press Pub. Ass., Oakland, CA, 1889.
White, Ellen G. (Author of the Following
Books Used):
Acts of the Apostles, The
Adventist Home, The
Appeal to the Youth, An.
Battle Creek Letters
Bible Commentary, EGW

Comments, Vols. 1 to 7.
Bible Echo, The (Date).
Counsel on Diet and Foods
Child Guidance
Christian Temperance and Bible
Hygiene
Colporteur Ministry
Counsels on Health
Christ’s Object Lessons
Counsels on Stewardship
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and
Students
Counsels to Writers and Editors.
Desire of Ages, The
Education
Ellen White 1888 Materials, The
Evangelism
Early Writings
Faith and Works
Faith I Live By, The
Fundamentals of Christian
Education.
Great Controversy, The
Gospel Workers
Historical Sketches of the Foreign
Missions of the Seventh-day
Adventists (1886)
Practical Addresses.
Last Day Events
Letters, (Number, Date)
Life Sketches of Ellen G. White
Loma Linda Messages.
Manuscripts, (Number, Date)
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 1-21.
Medical Ministry
Ministry of Healing, The
My Life Today
Messages to Young People
Mount of Blessing, Thoughts From
The
My Life Today
Our High Calling
Pamphlet PH028
Pamphlet SpTB17a, “The Unwise
Use of Money and The Spirit of
Speculation, 1911.

vi

Patriarchs and Prophets
Prophets and Kings
Retirement Years, The.
SDA Bible Commentary, The
Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 2, 3.
Sermons and Talks, Vol. 1,2.
Sketches From the Life of Paul
Sons and Daughters of God
Southern Work, The
Spalding and Magan Collection
Special Testimonies for Ministers
and Workers, No. 7 (1897)
Special Testimonies for Ministers
and Workers, No. 10 (1897)
Spiritual Gifts, vol. 1 to 4.
Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 3, 4.
Steps to Christ
Temperance
Testimonies to Ministers and
Gospel Workers
Testimonies for the Church, vol. 1-9
Undated Manuscript 66.
Upward Look
Journals and Pamphlets
Day-Star, The, 3/14/1846.
General Conference Daily Bulletin,
The
Home Missionary, The
Lake Union Herald, 12/23/1908.
Review and Herald, R&H
Signs of the Times
Word to the Little Flock, A (pamphlet)
Youth Instructor
White, James, BA—White, James. Bible
Adventism, SDA Publishing Ass. (EGW
CD-rom Comprehensive Research Edition—
2008).
Zurcher, COR—Zurcher, J. R. Christ of the
Revelation. Nashville, Tennessee: Southern
Publishing Association, 1980.

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCTION
TO THE BOOK OF DANIEL
time of the end.... Go thou thy way till the end be: for
thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the
days.’” Daniel 12: 4,9,13.
“As we near the close of this world’s history,
the prophecies recorded by Daniel demand our special attention, as they relate to the very time in
which we are living. With them should be linked the
teachings of the last book of the New Testament Scriptures. Satan has led many to believe that the prophetic
portions of the writings of Daniel and of John the revelator cannot be understood. But the promise is plain
that special blessing will accompany the study of
these prophecies. ‘The wise shall understand’ (verse
10), was spoken of the visions of Daniel that were to
be unsealed in the latter days; and of the revelation
that Christ gave to His servant John for the guidance of
God’s people all through the centuries, the promise is,
‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words
of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein.’ Revelation 1:3.
“From the rise and fall of nations as made plain in
the books of Daniel and the Revelation, we need to
learn how worthless is mere outward and worldly
glory. Babylon, with all its power and magnificence,
the like of which our world has never since beheld—
power and magnificence which to the people of that
day seemed so stable and enduring—how completely
has it passed away! As ‘the flower of the grass,’ it has
perished. James 1:10. So perished the Medo-Persian
kingdom, and the kingdoms of Grecia and Rome. And
so perishes all that has not God for its foundation.
Only that which is bound up with His purpose, and
expresses His character, can endure. His principles
are the only steadfast things our world knows.
“A careful study of the working out of God’s purpose in the history of nations and in the revelation of
things to come, will help us to estimate at their true
value things seen and things unseen, and to learn
what is the true aim of life. Thus, viewing the things
of time in the light of eternity, we may, like Daniel and
his fellows, live for that which is true and noble and
enduring. And learning in this life the principles of the
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, that blessed kingdom which is to endure for ever and ever, we may be
prepared at His coming to enter with Him into its possession.” Prophets & Kings, 547,548.

Prophecy.—
“Remember the former things of old: for I am
God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is
none like me, Declaring the end from the beginning,
and from ancient times the things that are not yet
done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all
my pleasure.” Isaiah 46:9,10.
“God had a knowledge of the events of the future,
even before the creation of the world. He did not make
his purposes to fit circumstances, but he allowed matters to develop and work out. He did not work to
bring about a certain condition of things, but he
knew that such a condition would exist. The plan
that should be carried out upon the defection of any of
the high intelligences of heaven—this is the secret, the
mystery which has been hid from ages. And an offering was prepared in the eternal purposes to do the very
work which God has done for fallen humanity.” Signs,
3/25/1897.
Encouragement to Study the Book of Daniel.—
“The prophet Daniel was an illustrious character.
He was a bright example of what men may become
when united with the God of wisdom. A brief account
of the life of this holy man of God is left on record
for the encouragement of those who should afterward be called to endure trial and temptation.”
Sanctified Life, 18.
“Honored by men with the responsibilities of state
and with the secrets of kingdoms bearing universal
sway, Daniel was honored by God as His ambassador,
and was given many revelations of the mysteries of
ages to come. His wonderful prophecies, as recorded by him in chapters 7 to 12 of the book bearing
his name, were not fully understood even by the
prophet himself; but before his life labors closed, he
was given the blessed assurance that ‘at the end of
the days’—in the closing period of this world's history—he would again be permitted to stand in his
lot and place. It was not given him to understand all
that God had revealed of the divine purpose. ‘Shut up
the words, and seal the book,’ he was directed concerning his prophetic writings; these were to be sealed
‘even to the time of the end.’ ‘Go thy way, Daniel,’ the
angel once more directed the faithful messenger of
Jehovah; ‘for the words are closed up and sealed till the

“Although Daniel lived twenty-five hundred years

1

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ago, he is a latter-day prophet. His character should
be studied, for its development reveals the secret of
God’s preparation of those who will welcome Christ
at his appearing.
His prophecies should be
understood, for in them is the key which unlocks
history to the end of time. The Saviour himself bore
witness to this. When the disciples asked, ‘What shall
be the sign of thy coming and of the end of the world?’
he said, ‘When ye see the abomination of desolation
spoken of by Daniel the prophet ...whoso readeth,
let him understand.’ In this we have the divine
permission to read and understand the prophecies
of Daniel. These prophecies are intended, therefore, to
warn a people of the coming of Christ. True, it was
once a sealed book, for the prophet was told to shut up
the words, and seal the book ‘to the time of the end,’
‘for at the time of the end shall be the vision.’ And
again, ‘The words are closed up and sealed till the time
of the end.’ But the time of the end has come. It began
in 1798, and though ‘none of the wicked shall
understand,’ yet ‘the wise shall understand.’ …‘He
that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith.’” Haskell, SDP, 13,14.

him for the benefit of His church: ‘When ye therefore
shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place (whoso
readeth, let him understand)….’ Matthew 24:15,16.”
Smith, DR, 15.
Daniel, A Prophet From the Royal Line.—
“Though we have a more minute account of his
early life than is recorded of that of any other prophet,
yet his birth and lineage are left in complete obscurity,
except that he was of the royal line, probably of the
house of David, which had at this time become very
numerous. He first appears as one of the noble captives of Judah, in the first year of Nebuchadnezzar,
king of Babylon, at the beginning of the seventy years’
captivity, 606 BC. Jeremiah and Habakkuk were yet
uttering their prophecies. Ezekiel began soon after,
and a little later, Obadiah; but all these finished their
work years before the close of the long and brilliant
career of Daniel. Three prophets only succeeded him,
Haggai and Zechariah, who exercised the prophetic
office for a brief period contemporaneously, 520-518
BC, and Malachi, the last of the Old Testament prophets, who flourished a little season about 397 BC.
“…His prophecy is, in many respects, the most
remarkable of any in the sacred record. It is the most
comprehensive. It was the first prophecy giving a consecutive history of the world from that time to the end.
It located the most of its predictions within welldefined prophetic periods, though reaching many centuries into the future. It gave the first definite chronological prophecy of the coming of the Messiah. It
marked the time of this event so definitely that the
Jews forbid any attempt to interpret its numbers, since
that prophecy shows them to be without excuse in rejecting Christ; and so accurately had its minute and
literal predictions been fulfilled down to the time of
Porphyry, AD 250, that he declared (the only loophole
he could devise for his hard-pressed skepticism) that
the predictions were not written in the age of Babylon,
but after the events themselves had occurred. This
evasion, however, is not now available; for every succeeding century has borne additional evidence to the
truthfulness of the prophecy, and we are just now, in
our own day, approaching the climax of its fulfillment.
“The personal history of Daniel reaches to a date
a few years subsequent to the subversion of the Babylonian kingdom by the Medes and Persians. He is supposed to have died at Shushan, or Susa, in Persia, about
the 530 BC, aged nearly ninety-four years.” Smith, DR,
15-17.

“Increased light will shine upon all the grand
truths of prophecy, and they will be seen in freshness and brilliancy, because the bright beams of the
Sun of Righteousness will illuminate the whole....
“The Lord wants to impart to us increased light.
He desires that we shall have distinct revealings of His
glory, that ministers and people shall become strong in
His strength. When the angel was about to unfold to
Daniel the intensely interesting prophecies to be recorded for us who are to witness their fulfillment, the
angel said, ‘Be strong, yea, be strong.’ We are to receive the very same glory that was revealed to Daniel,
because it is for God’s people in these last days, that
they may give the trumpet a certain sound.” 1
Manuscript Releases, 40.
Daniel Was a Real Person.—
“That the book of Daniel was written by the person whose name it bears, there is no reason to doubt.
Ezekiel, who was contemporary with Daniel, bears
testimony, through the Spirit of prophecy, to his piety
and uprightness, ranking him in this respect with Noah
and Job: ‘If I send a pestilence into that land, and pour
out My fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and
beast; though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I
live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither son
nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own souls by
their righteousness.’ Ezekiel 14: 19,20. His wisdom,
also, even at that early day, had become proverbial,
as appears from the same writer. To the prince of
Tyrus he was directed by the Lord to say, ‘Behold,
thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they
can hide from thee.’ Ezekiel 23: 3. But above all, our
Lord recognized him as a prophet of God, and bade
His disciples understand the predictions given through

The City of Babylon, A Type of Spiritual Babylon.-“The history of the city of Babylon is put on record because it is God’s object lesson to the world today. The book of Revelation, which is the complement
of the book of Daniel, frequently uses the name, applying it to the modern churches. The relation of the
Jews to the Babylon of Nebuchadnezzar is the same

2

INTRODUCTION
namely Hebrew-Aramaic-Hebrew is like that of the
book of Ezra. This change is language was an embarrassment to the ancient rabbis who felt it inappropriate
for an inspired writer to use an unholy language—
Aramaic—for part of his book.” BRI, 2SOD, 141,142.

as that sustain by the remnant church, the true Israel, to the churches which, having known the truth,
have rejected it.” Haskell, SDP, 37.
The Language of the Book of Daniel.
“The fact that the book of Daniel is composed of
both Hebrew and Aramaic parts has been a curiosity
for some time. The first and last sections of the book
(1:1—2:4a and 8:1—12:13) are written in Hebrew,
whereas the middle section (2:4b—7:28) is written in
Aramaic. Aramaic is a sister language to Hebrew. The
situation in the book of Daniel with its two languages,

“It should be noticed that in the historical section
of Daniel, chapters 1 to 6, the third person is employed,
whereas in the prophetic section, chapters 7-12, the
first person is used. Chapter 4, however, comes from
Nebuchadnezzar in the first person.” Thiele, OSID, 29.

The Captivity of Judah 606-536 BC

The Route of Daniel and His Friends to Babylon, 606 BC; Retracing Abraham’s Steps

3

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER ONE

The Tower of Babel c.2150 BC—
A distant memory of Babylon’s ancient greatness at the time of Daniel.
1 In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah
came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and
besieged it.
2 And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand,
with part of the vessels of the house of God: which he carried
into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought
the vessels into the treasure house of his god.
3 And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and
of the king’s seed, and of the princes;
4 Children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and
skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king’s
palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue
of the Chaldeans.
5 And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king’s
meat, and of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three
years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king.
6 Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:
7 Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he
gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of
Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego.
8 But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile
himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the wine
which he drank: therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.
9 Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love
with the prince of the eunuchs.
10 And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my
lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for

why should he see your faces worse liking than the children
which are of your sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head
to the king.
11 Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
12 Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them
give us pulse to eat, and water to drink.
13 Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and
the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the
king’s meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.
14 So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them
ten days.
15 And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared
fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the
portion of the king’s meat.
16 Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the
wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse.
17 As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and
skill in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding
in all visions and dreams.
18 Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should
bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in
before Nebuchadnezzar.
19 And the king communed with them; and among them all
was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:
therefore stood they before the king.
20 And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the
king enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all
the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm.
21 And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.

4

DANIEL 1

DANIEL 1:1,2
In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.
And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of
Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God: which he carried
into the land of Shinar to the house of his
god; and he brought the vessels into the
treasure house of his god.

akim, who should have been a wise spiritual leader,
foremost in confession of sin and in reformation and
good works, was spending his time in selfish pleasure. ‘I will build me a wide house and large chambers,’
he proposed; and this house, ‘ceiled with cedar, and
painted with vermilion’ (Jer. 22:14), was built with
money and labor secured through fraud and oppression.
“The wrath of the prophet was aroused, and he
was inspired to pronounce judgment upon the faithless ruler. ‘Woe unto him that buildeth his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong,’ he declared; ‘that useth his neighbor’s service without wages, and giveth him not for his work. ...Shalt thou reign,
because thou closest thyself in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and
then it was well with him? He judged the cause of
the poor and needy; then it was well with him: was
not this to know Me? saith the Lord. But thine eyes
and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for
to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for
violence, to do it.
“ ‘Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not
lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister!
they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah
his glory! He shall be buried with the burial of an
ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.’ Verses 13-19.
“Within a few years this terrible judgment was to
be visited upon Jehoiakim; but first the Lord in mercy
informed the impenitent nation of His set purpose. In
the fourth year of Jehoiakim’s reign ‘Jeremiah the
prophet spake unto all the people of Judah, and to all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem,’ pointing out that for over
a score of years, ‘from the thirteenth year of Josiah,... even unto this day,’ he had borne witness of
God’s desire to save, but that his messages had been
despised. Jeremiah 25:2,3. And now the word of the
Lord to them was:
“ ‘Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Because ye have
not heard My words, behold, I will send and take all
the families of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, My servant, and
will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about,
and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations.
Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth, and
the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and
the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and
the light of the candle. And this whole land shall be a
desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations
shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.’ Verses 8-11.
“Although the sentence of doom had been clearly
pronounced, its awful import could scarcely be understood by the multitudes who heard. That deeper im-

Jehoiakim.—
“The first years of Jehoiakim’s reign were filled
with warnings of approaching doom. The word of the
Lord spoken by the prophets was about to be fulfilled.
The Assyrian power to the northward, long supreme,
was no longer to rule the nations. Egypt on the south,
in whose power the king of Judah was vainly placing
his trust, was soon to receive a decided check. All unexpectedly a new world power, the Babylonian Empire, was rising to the eastward and swiftly overshadowing all other nations.
“Within a few short years the king of Babylon
was to be used as the instrument of God’s wrath upon
impenitent Judah. Again and again Jerusalem was to
be invested and entered by the besieging armies of
Nebuchadnezzar. Company after company—at first a
few only, but later on thousands and tens of thousands—were to be taken captive to the land of Shinar,
there to dwell in enforced exile. Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, Zedekiah—all these Jewish kings were in turn to
become vassals of the Babylonian ruler, and all in turn
were to rebel. Severer and yet more severe chastisements were to be inflicted upon the rebellious nation,
until at last the entire land was to become a desolation,
Jerusalem was to be laid waste and burned with fire,
the temple that Solomon had built was to be destroyed,
and the kingdom of Judah was to fall, never again to
occupy its former position among the nations of earth.
“Those times of change, so fraught with peril to
the Israelitish nation, were marked with many messages from Heaven through Jeremiah. Thus the
Lord gave the children of Judah ample opportunity of
freeing themselves from entangling alliances with
Egypt, and of avoiding controversy with the rulers of
Babylon. As the threatened danger came closer, he
taught the people by means of a series of acted parables, hoping thus to arouse them to a sense of their
obligation to God, and also to encourage them to
maintain friendly relations with the Babylonian
government.” Prophets & Kings 422,423.
“At the very time messages of impending doom
were urged upon princes and people, their ruler, Jehoi-

5

GEMS FROM DANIEL
pressions might be made, the Lord sought to illustrate
the meaning of the words spoken. He bade Jeremiah
liken the fate of the nation to the draining of a cup
filled with the wine of divine wrath. Among the first
to drink of this cup of woe was to be ‘Jerusalem,
and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof.’ Others were to partake of the same cup—‘Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and all his
people,’ and many other nations of earth—until God’s
purpose should have been fulfilled. See Jeremiah 25.
“To illustrate further the nature of the swiftcoming judgments, the prophet was bidden to ‘take of
the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the
priests; and go forth unto the valley of the son of
Hinnom,’ and there, after reviewing the apostasy of
Judah, he was to dash to pieces ‘a potter’s earthen bottle,’ and declare in behalf of Jehovah, whose servant he
was, ‘Even so will I break this people and this city,
as one breaketh a potter’s vessel, that cannot be
made whole again.’ [As in the beginning, so at the
end.]
“The prophet did as he was commanded. Then,
returning to the city, he stood in the court of the temple
and declared in the hearing of all the people. ‘Thus
saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will
bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil
that I have pronounced against it, because they have
hardened their necks, that they might not hear My
words.’ See Jeremiah 19.
“The prophet’s words, instead of leading to confession and repentance, aroused the anger of those
high in authority, and as a consequence Jeremiah was
deprived of his liberty. Imprisoned, and placed in
the stocks, the prophet nevertheless continued to speak
the messages of Heaven to those who stood by. His
voice could not be silenced by persecution. The word
of truth, he declared, ‘was in mine heart as a burning
fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.’ Jeremiah 20:9.
“It was about this time that the Lord commanded
Jeremiah to commit to writing the messages he desired
to bear to those for whose salvation his heart of pity
was continually yearning. ‘Take thee a roll of a book,’
the Lord bade His servant, ‘and write therein all the
words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and
against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day
I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto
this day. It may be that the house of Judah will hear all
the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may
return every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.’ Jer. 36:2,3.
“In obedience to this command, Jeremiah called
to his aid a faithful friend, Baruch the scribe, and dictated ‘all the words of the Lord, which He had spoken
unto him.’ Verse 4. These were carefully written out
on a roll of parchment and constituted a solemn reproof for sin, a warning of the sure result of continual apostasy, and an earnest appeal for the renunciation of all evil.

“When the writing was completed, Jeremiah, who
was still a prisoner, sent Baruch to read the roll to the
multitudes who were assembling at the temple on the
occasion of a national fast day, ‘in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth
month.’ ‘It may be,’ the prophet said, ‘they will
present their supplication before the Lord, and will
return everyone from his evil way: for great is the
anger and the fury that the Lord hath pronounced
against this people.’ Verses 9, 7.
“Baruch obeyed, and the roll was read before all
the people of Judah. Afterward the scribe was summoned before the princes to read the words to them.
They listened with great interest and promised to inform the king concerning all they had heard, but counseled the scribe to hide himself, for they feared the
king would reject the testimony and seek to slay those
who had prepared and delivered the message.
“When King Jehoiakim was told by the princes
what Baruch had read, he immediately ordered the roll
brought before him and read in his hearing. One of the
royal attendants, Jehudi by name, fetched the roll and
began reading the words of reproof and warning. It
was the time of winter, and the king and his companions of state, the princes of Judah, were gathered about
an open fire. Only a small portion had been read, when
the king, far from trembling at the danger hanging over
himself and his people, seized the roll and in a frenzy
of rage ‘cut it with the penknife and cast it into the
fire that was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed.’ Verse 23.
“Neither the king nor his princes were afraid ‘nor
rent their garments.’ Certain of the princes, however,
‘had made intercession to the king that he would not
burn the roll: but he would not hear them.’ The writing
having been destroyed, the wrath of the wicked king
rose against Jeremiah and Baruch, and he forthwith
sent for them to be taken; ‘but the Lord hid them.’
Verses 24-26.
“In bringing to the attention of the temple worshipers, and of the princes and king, the written admonitions contained in the inspired roll, God was graciously seeking to warn the men of Judah for their
good. ‘It may be,’ He said, ‘the house of Judah will
hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them;
that they may return every man from his evil way;
that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.’
Verse 3. God pities men struggling in the blindness of
perversity; He seeks to enlighten the darkened understanding by sending reproofs and threatenings designed
to cause the most exalted to feel their ignorance and to
deplore their errors. He endeavors to help the selfcomplacent to become dissatisfied with their vain
attainments and to seek for spiritual blessing
through a close connection with heaven.
“God’s plan is not to send messengers who will
please and flatter sinners; He delivers no messages of
peace to lull the unsanctified into carnal security. Instead, He lays heavy burdens upon the conscience of

6

DANIEL 1
the wrongdoer and pierces his soul with sharp arrows
of conviction. Ministering angels present to him the
fearful judgments of God, to deepen the sense of
need and to prompt the agonizing cry, ‘What must I
do to be saved?’ Acts 16:30. But the Hand that
humbles to the dust, rebukes sin, and puts pride and
ambition to shame, is the Hand that lifts up the penitent, stricken one. With deepest sympathy He who
permits the chastisement to fall, inquires, ‘What
wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?’
“When man has sinned against a holy and merciful God, he can pursue no course so noble as to repent sincerely and confess his errors in tears and
bitterness of soul. This God requires of him; He accepts nothing less than a broken heart and a contrite
spirit. But King Jehoiakim and his lords, in their arrogance and pride, refused the invitation of God. They
would not heed the warning, and repent. The gracious
opportunity proffered them at the time of the burning of the sacred roll, was their last. God had declared that if at that time they refused to hear His voice,
He would inflict upon them fearful retribution. They
did refuse to hear, and He pronounced His final judgments upon Judah, and He would visit with special
wrath the man who had proudly lifted himself up
against the Almighty.
“‘Thus saith the Lord of Jehoiakim king of Judah;
He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David: and
his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat,
and in the night to the frost. And I will punish him and
his seed and his servants for their iniquity; and I will
bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have
pronounced against them.’ Jer. 36:30,31.
“The burning of the roll was not the end of the
matter. The written words were more easily disposed
of than the reproof and warning they contained and the
swift-coming punishment God had pronounced against
rebellious Israel. But even the written roll was reproduced. ‘Take thee again another roll,’ the Lord
commanded His servant, ‘and write in it all the former
words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the
king of Judah hath burned.’ The record of the prophecies concerning Judah and Jerusalem had been
reduced to ashes; but the words were still living in
the heart of Jeremiah, ‘as a burning fire,’ and the
prophet was permitted to reproduce that which the
wrath of man would fain have destroyed.
“Taking another roll, Jeremiah gave it to Baruch,
‘who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the
words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had
burned in the fire: and there were added besides unto
them many like words.’ Verses 28, 32. The wrath of
man had sought to prevent the labors of the prophet of
God; but the very means by which Jehoiakim had endeavored to limit the influence of the servant of Jehovah, gave further opportunity for making plain the divine requirements.
“The spirit of opposition to reproof, that led to the

persecution and imprisonment of Jeremiah, exists today. Many refuse to heed repeated warnings, preferring rather to listen to false teachers who flatter
their vanity and overlook their evil-doing. In the
day of trouble such will have no sure refuge, no help
from heaven. God’s chosen servants should meet with
courage and patience the trials and sufferings that befall them through reproach, neglect, and misrepresentation. They should continue to discharge faithfully the
work God has given them to do, ever remembering that
the prophets of old and the Saviour of mankind and His
apostles also endured abuse and persecution for the
Word’s sake.
“It was God’s purpose that Jehoiakim should heed
the counsels of Jeremiah and thus win favor in the eyes
of Nebuchadnezzar and save himself much sorrow.
The youthful king had sworn allegiance to the
Babylonian ruler, and had he remained true to his
promise he would have commanded the respect of
the heathen, and this would have led to precious
opportunities for the conversion of souls.
“Scorning the unusual privileges granted him, Judah’s king willfully followed a way of his own choosing. He violated his word of honor to the Babylonian
ruler, and rebelled. This brought him and his kingdom
into a very strait place. Against him were sent ‘bands
of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, and
bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of
Ammon,’ and he was powerless to prevent the land
from being overrun by these marauders. 2 Kings
24:2. Within a few years he closed his disastrous reign
in ignominy, rejected of Heaven, unloved by his
people, and despised by the rulers of Babylon whose
confidence he had betrayed—and all as the result of
his fatal mistake in turning from the purpose of
God as revealed through His appointed messenger.”
Prophets & Kings, 429-438.
“Under God’s direction Jeremiah rewrote his
messages to the rebellious king and people in another
scroll and added a prophecy of how King Jehoiakim
would die. He would be slain and his body cast out of
the city to be exposed to the heat by day and the frost
by night, and that he would receive ‘the burial of an
ass.’ (Jer. 36). This prophecy was literally fulfilled and
the king died like a dog and was buried like an ass.”
Bunch, BOD, 2.
In the Third Year of the Reign of Jehoiakim.—
“The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all
the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim
the son of Josiah king of Judah, that was the first year
of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; …8 Because ye
have not heard my words, 9 Behold, I will send and
take all the families of the north, saith the LORD,
and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against
the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations
round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make

7

GEMS FROM DANIEL
them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual
desolations. …11 And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall
serve the king of Babylon seventy years.” Jeremiah
25:1,8,9,11.

Egypt revolted against Assyria. Nabopolassar was sent
to subdue Babylon. He was so successful, that as a
reward he was made ruler of Babylon and given an
honorary title of ‘King of Babylon’.
“In 612 BC Nabopolassar led the same countries
in revolt against Assyria. In this revolt Nineveh was
destroyed. The result was Assyria divided into three
divisions. Media ruled the north and north-east. Babylon ruled Elam and all the plains of the Euphrates
and Tigris. Egypt ruled all the land west of the Euphrates and north Africa.
“Babylon and Media formed an alliance by the
Median King’s daughter’s marriage to Nebuchadnezzar.” Burnside, DPUF, 13.

“The overthrow of Jerusalem recorded here was
predicted by Jeremiah, and was accomplished in 606
BC (Jeremiah 25: 8-11.) Jeremiah places this captivity
in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, Daniel in the third.
This seemingly discrepancy is explained by the fact
that Nebuchadnezzar set out on his expedition near
the close of the third year of Jehoiakim, from which
point Daniel reckons. But the king did not accomplish the subjugation of Jerusalem until about the
ninth month of the year following, from which year
Jeremiah reckons. Jehoiakim, though bound for the
purpose of being taken to Babylon, humbled himself
and was permitted to remain as ruler in Jerusalem, tributary to the king of Babylon. This was the first time
Jerusalem was taken by Nebuchadnezzar.” Smith, DR,
19, 20.

“The alliance between Babylon and Media was
secured by the marriage of the Median king’s
daughter [Princess Amuhia] to Nebuchadnezzar. It
was during this revolution against the Assyrian rule
that Nabopolassar captured and destroyed Nineveh.
Nabopolassar reigned from 625 to 605 BC.
“In the division of the Assyrian Empire the
kingdom of Judah became a vassal of Egypt and the
same was true of the Hittites. The growing power of
Babylon and the growing ambition of its king and
crown prince soon led to a clash with Egypt. PharaohNecho, king of Egypt, led a large army against Babylon
and was joined by Jehoiakim and the Hittites. Nabopolassar sent his son, Nebuchadnezzar, with a large
army against them and a great battle was fought at
Carchemish, one of the Hittite capitals on the banks of
the Euphrates. This battle is described in Jer. 46:2-6.
“In this great battle the Babylonian army under
Nebuchadnezzar was victorious. Pursuing the Egyptians through Palestine toward Egypt, Nebuchadnezzar
conquered as he went. ‘Necho was overcome and put
to flight; one single battle stripped him of all his conquests, and compelled him to retire to Egypt.’—
Lenormant. The completeness of this victory is indicated in 2 Kings 24:7: ‘And the king of Egypt came
not again any more out of his land: for the king of
Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the
river Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt.’
It was during this campaign that Nebuchadnezzar
came to Jerusalem and Daniel 1:1,2 was fulfilled.
Pharaoh-Necho had placed Jehoiakim on the throne of
Judah and it was because he was a vassal of the king
of Egypt that he and his kingdom were punished. (2
Kings 23:34,35).” Bunch, BOD, 3.

Daniel and His 3 Friends Brought to Babylon
“The third year of the reign of Jehoiakim was 607
BC. In this year Nebopolassar associated Nebuchadnezzar with him as king and sent him on the expedition
here described. He left Babylon in the latter part of
that year but the distance he had to travel with his army
was near 1,000 miles, and he did not reach Jerusalem, therefore, until toward the latter part of 606
BC. It is for this reason that Daniel gives the date from
the campaign, and Jeremiah from that of the subjugation of Jerusalem, and there is therefore no discrepancy
in the two accounts.” Bunch, BOD, 6.

Nebuchadnezzar’s Name.—
“Nebuchadnezzar means ‘Nebo protects the
crown.’ ‘Nebu’ represents the god Nebo; ‘Chad’
means a vessel, and ‘Nezzar’ is the one who watches.
In other words the god Nebo cares for the vessel that
contains and protects the crown. Nebo, meaning ‘the
prophet,’ was the interpreter of the will of BelMerodach, and to him was erected a shrine in the temple of Bel. Nebo was a solar deity and was supposed to

“Jehoiakim became king at the end of the year.
Jeremiah counts that year. Daniel counts from the new
year.” Burnside, DPUF, 8.
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon.—
“Nabopolassar, the father of Nebuchadnezzar was
a general of Assyria. In 625 BC Media, Babylon, and

8

DANIEL 1
be the symbol of the planet Mercury and was the celestial scribe and interpreter of the gods. He was therefore
called ‘The god of writing and science.’ The dynastic
titles of all pagan kings were the names of their chief
gods. Pharaoh is the Hebrew for ‘Ph Ra,’ the sun, the
chief god of the Egyptians. The names of all the Babylonian kings show their relation to Nebo, Bel, or Baal,
and Merodach.” Bunch, BOD, 9.

king of Judah, 607 BC, Nebuchadnezzar, the king of
Babylon, came unto Jerusalem and besieged it; that in
the siege, Jehoiakim was given by the Lord into the
hands of Nebuchadnezzar, but allowed to remain on the
throne in Jerusalem, yet Nebuchadnezzar carried with
him to Babylon, as tribute, a part of the vessels of the
house of God, and, as hostages, some of the members
of the royal household.
“At the first siege of Jerusalem, 607 BC, Daniel
was not over eighteen years of age; about the age of the
prince Zedekiah, who afterward ruled in Jerusalem.”
Haskell, SDP, 14,19.

Babylon.—
“Babylon or Bab-El means ‘The gate of God.’ In
ancient times the gate was the place of authority and
judgment.” Bunch, BOD, 10.

“And Pharaohnechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room of Josiah his father, and turned
his name to Jehoiakim, and took Jehoahaz away: and
he came to Egypt, and died there. And Jehoiakim gave
the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land
to give the money according to the commandment of
Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation,
to give it unto Pharaohnechoh.
“Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when
he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Zebudah, the
daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. And he did that which
was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all
that his fathers had done.
“In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three
years: then he turned and rebelled against him. And
the LORD sent against him bands of the Chaldees, and
bands of the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and
bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them against
Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the
LORD, which he spake by his servants the prophets.
“Surely at the commandment of the LORD
came this upon Judah, to remove them out of his
sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that
he did; And also for the innocent blood that he
shed: for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood;
which the LORD would not pardon.” 2 Kings
23:34-24:4

Came Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon.—
“Dan. 1:1,2. This is the introduction of the book
of Daniel. The invasion of Judea by the Babylonians
under Nebuchadnezzar was a fulfillment of prophecy
and was permitted by the Lord as a punishment for
their disobedience. Jer. 25:11. For 23 years Jeremiah
entreated the Judeans to repent and warned them of the
coming judgments. They refused to hearken to God’s
prophet and as a last resort the Lord spoke to them
through judgments. The Babylonian captivity was to
last for 70 years.
“The events described in Daniel 1:1,2, took place
in 606 BC and marks the beginning of the 70 years
captivity, and of the history of Babylon as a universal
power. ‘Under Jehoiakim, and after the death of Josiah, BC 609, the cup of national iniquity was full. At
the close of his third, and the beginning of his fourth
year, Nebuchadnezzar was sent to execute the divine
judgments, March and April, BC 606; and with that
year the captivity of Judah and the prophetic empire of Babylon begin together.’—The Four Prophetic Empires and the Kingdom of Messiah, T.R. Birks, p.
26.
“The overthrow of Jerusalem and Judah by the
Babylonians also marked the end of the Jewish nation
as an independent kingdom, and it will never be
restored. Eze. 21:25-27. The throne and kingdom of
Judah ‘shall be no more’ till Christ comes the second
time to occupy the throne and rule the kingdom of David. See Luke 1:31-33; Matt. 25:31.” Bunch, BOD, 24.

The Lord Gave Jehoiakim into Nebuchadnezzar’s
Hand.—
“Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when
he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in the sight of
the LORD his God. 6 Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon….
“17 Therefore he brought upon them the king
of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the
sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him
that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.”
2 Chron. 36:5,6,17.

Predicted 107 Years Before.—
“One hundred and seven years before Jeremiah wrote his prophecy of the fall of the kingdom of
Judah, Hezekiah was warned of the coming of the
Babylonians to carry away the treasures of his kingdom because he had showed it to the ambassadors who
came to inquire of the miracle of the shadow on the sun
dial, and to congratulate him on his recovery. (2 Kings
20).” Bunch, BOD, 2.
606 BC, The First Siege of Jerusalem by Babylon.—
“Daniel begins the book with the simple statement that in the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim,

9

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“When Nebuchadnezzar claimed the kingdom of
Judah for His father’s empire, he undoubtedly credited
his success to his own vigor and intelligence. Nothing,
however, could have been further from reality. The
Bible says that ‘the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand.’ Daniel 1:2.” Maxwell, 1GC, 19.

spoiling of Jerusalem’s treasures by the Babylonian
forces was the fulfillment of Isaiah’s prophecy pronounced almost a century earlier (Isa. 39:6).”
4SDABC, 756,757.
“The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the
snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the
vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they
away. And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls,
and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons,
and the cups; that which was of gold in gold, and that
which was of silver in silver, took the captain of the
guard away.” Jeremiah 52:18,19.

“God had pleaded with Judah not to provoke Him
to anger, but they had hearkened not. Finally sentence
was pronounced against them. They were to be led
away captive to Babylon. The Chaldeans were to be
used as the instrument by which God would chastise
His disobedient people. The sufferings of the men of
Judah were to be in proportion to the light they had
had and to the warnings they had despised and rejected. Long had God delayed His judgments, but now
He would visit His displeasure upon them as a last effort to check them in their evil course.” Prophets &
Kings, 425.

“The Jews lost the sacred vessels out of their
temple because they had permitted the spiritual
treasure to leak out of the vessels of their soultemples. ‘When the spiritual treasure of true religion
is lost, the loss of its material treasure may follow as a
wholesome chastisement.’—Pulpit Commentary.”
Bunch, BOD, 7

“An idolater by birth and training, and at the head
of an idolatrous people, he had nevertheless an innate
sense of justice and right, and God was able to use
him as an instrument for the punishment of the rebellious and for the fulfillment of the divine purpose. ‘The terrible of the nations’ (Ezekiel 28:7), it
was given Nebuchadnezzar, after years of patient and
wearing labor, to conquer Tyre; Egypt also fell a prey
to his victorious armies; and as he added nation after
nation to the Babylonian realm, he added more and
more to his fame as the greatest ruler of the age.”
Prophets & Kings, 515.

“Jeremiah, in the presence of all the priests and
the people, said that it was the earnest wish of his heart
that God would so favor his people that the vessels of
the Lord’s house might be returned and the captives
brought back from Babylon. But this could only be
done on condition that the people repented and
turned from their evil way to the obedience of God’s
law.” Signs, 2/12/1880.
Which He Carried Into the Land of Shinar.—
“Shinar was one of the ancient names for Chaldea
or Babylonia. (Gen. 11:2). The ancient kings had no
banks in which to deposit treasure so they used the
temples of their gods for that purpose. They believed
that their gods would protect their wealth.” Bunch,
BOD, 6.

With Part of the Vessels of the House of God.—
“The book of Daniel (1: 1, 2) commences with
the spoliation of God’s temple by the Babylonians—
the remainder of Daniel deals fully with the temple,
and the people of God who are faithful to the teachings centered in that sanctuary, and their enemies who
oppose the Lord’s sanctuary and its services.
“…God’s adversaries made war upon His people
and the sanctuary—these two: the people of God and
His sanctuary are positively inseparable in the
Scriptures. This fact cannot be over emphasized.
Without this knowledge the books of Daniel and Revelation cannot be understood aright. Everything in the
two books, particularly, revolves around the truths of
the sanctuary: the sanctuary in heaven and the spiritual sanctuary on earth. God’s adversaries have always sought to ‘break them together.’” Were, KONAJ,
43.

Into the Treasure House of His God.—
“Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonians worshipped many gods ‘of gold, and of silver, of brass, of
iron, or wood, and of stone.’ (5:4) There were thirteen
great gods besides lesser gods without number. Why
then does not the record say ‘his gods’ rather than ‘his
god’? Because Nebuchadnezzar believed that he
was controlled by and under the protection of one
certain god who was his special friend and benefactor. This god was Marduk or Bel Merodach. After
this god he named his first born son who became king
after his death. ‘Evil-Merodach’ he was called. A
number of inscriptions written by Nebuchadnezzar
praise Marduk as the chief of his gods and the secret of
his success: ‘Merodach, the great lord, has appointed
me the empire of the world; has given into my care the
people of the earth. May he protect the king.’ Nebuchadnezzar described himself in another inscription as
the ‘King of Babylon, the exalted prince, the worshiper

“There were three occasions on which the Chaldeans carried away sacred vessels to Babylon: (1) in
the campaign recorded in this passage, (2) when Jerusalem was taken at the close of Jehoiachin’s reign in
597 BC (2 Kings 24:13), and (3) at the end of the reign
of Zedekiah, when, in 586 BC after a long siege, Jerusalem was taken and destroyed (2 Kings 28:9-15). The

10

DANIEL 1
of Marduk, the prince supreme, the beloved of the god
Nebo.’
“In honor of this god Nebuchadnezzar built a
great temple which together with its parks and gardens is estimated to have been not less than eight
miles in circumference. In one of the king’s inscriptions he calls it ‘the house of heaven and earth.’ He
declared that he stored up inside it silver and gold
and precious stones, and place there the treasurehouse of his kingdom.’ He said that this temple of his
god received ‘within itself the abundant tribute of the
kings of the nations, and of all people.’” Bunch, BOD,
6.

and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save
the poorest sort of the people of the land.
“And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and
the king’s mother, and the king’s wives, and his officers, and the mighty of the land, those carried he into
captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.” 2 Ki. 24:8-15.
“As I live, saith the LORD, though Coniah [Jehoiachin] the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the
signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee
thence; And I will give thee into the hand of them that
seek thy life, and into the hand of them whose face
thou fearest, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar
king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans.
And I will cast thee out, and thy mother that bare
thee, into another country, where ye were not born;
and there shall ye die. But to the land whereunto they
desire to return, thither shall they not return.
“Is this man Coniah [Jehoiachin] a despised broken idol? is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast
into a land which they know not?
“O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the
LORD. Thus saith the LORD, Write ye this man
childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days:
for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon
the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.”
Jeremiah 22:24-30.

“Babylonian cuneiform documents frequently
mention the treasures of Esagila, the great temple of
Marduk. …It is not impossible that many treasures
from Jerusalem, especially such as came from the royal
treasury, were housed …and were viewed by many
visitors.” 4SDABC, 757.
His god.—
“The chief god of the Babylonians was Marduk, who, since the time of the first Dynasty, more
than a thousand years earlier, had popularly been called
Bel, ‘lord.’ His main temple, called Esagila, in the
court of which stood the great temple tower, Eremenanki, was in the heart of Babylon.” 4SDABC, 757.

“The second invasion occurred in 598 BC, when a
much larger group was deported. Among them was a
young priest, Ezekiel, who later wrote the book that
bears his name.” Anderson, UDP, 14.

598 BC, The Second Siege of Jerusalem.—
“Twice subsequently the city revolted, but was
recaptured by the same king, and more severely
dealt with each succeeding time. The second overthrow was during the time of Jehoiachin, son of Jehoiakim, when all the sacred vessels were either taken or
destroyed, and the best of the inhabitants of were led
with the king into captivity.” Smith, DR, 20.

586 BC, The Third and Final Siege of Jerusalem.—
“The third was under Zedekiah, when the city
endured a formidable siege. During its continuance
for a year and a half, the inhabitants of the city suffered
all the horrors of extreme famine. At length the garrison and the king attempted to escape from the city, but
they were captured by the Chaldeans. The sons of the
king were slain before his face. His eyes were put out,
and he was taken to Babylon. Thus was fulfilled the
prediction of Ezekiel that he should be carried to Babylon, and die there, yet he should not see the place.
(Ezekiel 12: 13.) The city and temple were at this
time utterly destroyed, and the entire population of
the country, with the exception of a few husbandmen, were carried captive to Babylon, in 586 BC.”
Smith, DR, 20.

“Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem three
months. And his mother’s name was Nehushta, the
daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. And he did that
which was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to
all that his father had done.
“At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon came up against Jerusalem, and the
city was besieged. And Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon came against the city, and his servants did
besiege it. And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out
to the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his
servants, and his princes, and his officers: and the king
of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.
“And he carried out thence all the treasures of the
house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king’s
house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which
Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of
the LORD, as the LORD had said. And he carried
away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the
mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives,

“And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the
goodly vessels of the house of the LORD, and made
Zedekiah his [Jehoiachin’s] brother king over Judah
and Jerusalem.
“Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when
he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the

11

GEMS FROM DANIEL
LORD his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the
LORD. And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he
stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning
unto the LORD God of Israel. Moreover all the chief
of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much
after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted
the house of the LORD which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.
“And the LORD God of their fathers sent to them
by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place: But they mocked the messengers of
God, and despised his words, and misused his
prophets, until the wrath of the LORD arose against
his people, till there was no remedy.
“Therefore he brought upon them the king of
the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the
sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him
that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.
And all the vessels of the house of God, great and
small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and
the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all these he
brought to Babylon. And they burnt the house of
God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt
all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the
goodly vessels thereof.” 2Ch 36:11-19.

that after seventy years of Babylonian servitude He
would interpose for the deliverance of his people; and
He even called by name, Cyrus, the king of Persia, as
the one that should lay the foundation of that great
work, and set in motion that train of events which
should accomplish their complete restoration. Jer. 25;
29; Isa. 13; 44; 45.” Andrews, CRBJ, 13,14.
“The temple services in Judah were the light of
the world—they depicted the gospel, the plan of salvation. Now the temple was totally eradicated. Satan
plunged the world into a dark age of 70 years. But God
would work through individuals in Babylon, the capital of idolatrous darkness, to keep the light of truth
shining.” PJ
“They [Israel] were brought into subjection to
Babylon, and scattered through the lands of the heathen. In affliction many renewed their faithfulness to
His covenant. While they hung their harps upon the
willows, and mourned for the holy temple that was
laid waste, the light of truth shone out through
them, and a knowledge of God was spread among the
nations. The heathen systems of sacrifice were a perversion of the system that God had appointed; and
many a sincere observer of heathen rites learned from
the Hebrews the meaning of the service divinely ordained, and in faith grasped the promise of a Redeemer.
“Many of the exiles suffered persecution. Not a
few lost their lives because of their refusal to disregard
the Sabbath and to observe the heathen festivals. As
idolaters were roused to crush out the truth, the Lord
brought His servants face to face with kings and rulers,
that they and their people might receive the light. Time
after time the greatest monarchs were led to proclaim
the supremacy of the God whom their Hebrew captives
worshiped.” Desire of Ages, 28.

“This was the most terrible siege of the history of
the city except that by Titus in 70 AD. The siege lasted
two years and produced a terrible famine.” Bunch,
BOD, 4.
The Result of Third Siege—World in Darkness.—
“Then came up the king of Babylon, and after a
terrible siege from the ninth year of Zedekiah to the
eleventh, the city was taken in consequence of famine;
for it seems to have been otherwise almost impregnable. Then Nebuchadnezzar put to the sword without
distinction of age or sex, a large part of the people of
Jerusalem. He burned the house of God, and the
king’s house, and all the houses of the great men, and
all the houses of Jerusalem, and he broke down all the
walls of Jerusalem round about. Those that escaped
from the sword he led away captive to Babylon. 2
Chron. 36; Jer. 52. Thus Jerusalem was utterly blotted out of existence. Nor was this terrible destruction
of all that gave visible existence to the city the full
measure of the calamity that had come upon it. It had
not merely ceased to exist, but its right to exist
again, was, in the estimation of the kings of Babylon, forfeited by the treason and rebellion of its inhabitants, and all its peculiar privileges as the great
central point of the worship of God upon the earth,
forever extinguished.
“One only hope was left, and this was found in
the prophetic word. The Most High had promised

Nebuchadnezzar personally shows mercy to Jeremiah.-“Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave
charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying,
Take him, and look well to him, and do him no
harm; but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee.”
Jeremiah 39:11,12.
WHY Jerusalem Was Destroyed.—
“And the captain of the guard [NEBUZARADAN] took Jeremiah, and said unto him,
The LORD thy God hath pronounced this evil
upon this place. Now the LORD hath brought it, and
done according as he hath said: because ye have sinned
against the LORD, and have not obeyed his voice,
therefore this thing is come upon you.” Jeremiah
40:2,3.
“This [the destruction of Jerusalem] …was but

12

DANIEL 1
the culmination of events which began years before.
In order to appreciate this climax, it is essential that
we study the causes which led to it. Since the captivity of Judah is an object lesson to people of the
last generation, it is doubly necessary that we trace
the relationship between certain causes and results.
“God had an object in calling the Jewish nation to separate themselves from other nations of
the world. It was that his people might stand before
the world as light-bearers. As a beacon set on a hill,
Israel was to send beams of light to the world. The
plan of education made known to Israel through her
prophets was the means of keeping that light burning.
When this God-given plan was neglected, the light, as a
candle deprived of the life-giving oxygen, burned dim.
Then it was that the nation was pressed upon all sides
by the foe. There is a Hebrew maxim which says that
‘Jerusalem was destroyed because the education of
her children was neglected.’ The prophecies of Daniel and the connected history prove the truth of this
maxim. It may be added that the Jews were restored to Jerusalem as the result of the proper education of a few Hebrew boys.” Haskell, SDP, 14,15.

out of the land of Egypt: For they went and served
other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they
knew not, and whom he had not given unto them:
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against this
land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in
this book: And the LORD rooted them out of their
land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation,
and cast them into another land, as it is this day.
“The secret things belong unto the LORD our
God: but those things which are revealed belong
unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do
all the words of this law.” Deuteronomy 29:9, 18-29.
“But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will
not do all these commandments; …I will make your
cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet
odours. And I will bring the land into desolation: and
your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished
at it. And I will scatter you among the heathen, and
will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall
be desolate, and your cities waste. Then shall the
land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and
ye be in your enemies’ land; even then shall the land
rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.” Lev 26:14, 31-34.

Moses Warns: “Keep therefore the words of this
covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that
ye do.
“Lest there should be among you man, or woman,
or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day
from the LORD our God, to go and serve the gods of
these nations; lest there should be among you a root
that beareth gall and wormwood; And it come to pass,
when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst:
“The LORD will not spare him, but then the
anger of the LORD and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and all the curses that are written
in this book shall lie upon him, and the LORD shall
blot out his name from under heaven. And the
LORD shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes
of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant
that are written in this book of the law:
“So that the generation to come of your children
that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that shall
come from a far land, shall say, when they see the
plagues of that land, and the sicknesses which the
LORD hath laid upon it; And that the whole land
thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not
sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like
the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and
Zeboim, which the LORD overthrew in his anger, and
in his wrath: Even all nations shall say, Wherefore
hath the LORD done thus unto this land? what meaneth
the heat of this great anger?
“Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD God of their fathers,
which he made with them when he brought them forth

Warning to Solomon: “And if thou wilt walk
before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of
heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I
have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and
my judgments: Then I will establish the throne of thy
kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I promised to David
thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon
the throne of Israel.
“But if ye shall at all turn from following me,
ye or your children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set before
you, but go and serve other gods, and worship
them: Then will I cut off Israel out of the land
which I have given them; and this house, which I
have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of my
sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword
among all people:
“And at this house, which is high, every one that
passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and
they shall say, Why hath the LORD done thus unto this
land, and to this house? And they shall answer, Because they forsook the LORD their God, who brought
forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have
taken hold upon other gods, and have worshipped
them, and served them: therefore hath the LORD
brought upon them all this evil.” 1 Kings 9:4-9.
Experience of Hezekiah and Manasseh: “Just
about one hundred years before the days of Daniel,
Hezekiah was king of Judah. After a reign of thirteen
years, he was on his deathbed, but he pleaded with God
to lengthen his life. This was done, and fifteen years
were added. On the king’s recovery he was visited by

13

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ambassadors from Babylon, to whom he showed all his
treasures. They came to hear of the mighty God, that
could heal the sick; but he showed them only earthly
treasure. He lost the opportunity to give them of
the treasure of heaven. Then came a message from
God by the hand of the prophet Isaiah, saying, ‘Behold,
the days shall come, that all that is in thine house...
shall be carried into Babylon; nothing shall be left.’
He was also at the same time told that his descendants should be eunuchs in the palace of the king of
Babylon.
“Here was portrayed the future captivity of the
Hebrew race. The prophecy was placed on record, and
repeated again and again by Jewish mothers as they
taught their children. ‘Must my son be a captive in the
court of a heathen king? Then let me so train him
that he will be true to the God of his fathers.’ There
were other mothers who lightly let pass the thought,
and the history of their sons’ lives is recorded for our
instruction.
“Three years after his life had been saved, a son
was born to Hezekiah. Notwithstanding the recent
prophecy, Hezekiah and his wife, Hephzibah, failed to
teach the young Manasseh in the way of truth. He was
but twelve years of age when he came to the throne,
but if he had been trained in the fear of God, he would
not have chosen the worship of the heathen.
“The youthful Christ at the same age settled not
only his own destiny, but the destiny of the universe.
When twelve years of age, standing by the temple in
Jerusalem, his future work opened before him, and he
accepted his appointed mission. Why? Because Mary,
his mother, had taught him that heart service to God
was his highest pleasure. Manasseh decided in favor of
the heathen deities; did evil in the sight of God; and
‘for the sins of Manasseh’ came the captivity of Judah.
“At the age of twelve years, Christ made a decision which saved the world; at the same age Manasseh
chose a course which brought ruin to the nation. In the
training of your child, are you Hephzibah or Mary?”
Haskell, SDP, 15,16.

ger, since the day their fathers came forth out of Egypt,
even unto this day.
“Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very
much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; beside his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin,
in doing that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.”
2Kings 21:10-16.
Experience of Josiah: “The long reign of Manasseh passed, and the prophecy sent to Hezekiah
was not yet fulfilled. Men began to wonder if it ever
would come to pass. ‘Since the fathers fell asleep,’
said they, ‘all things continue as they were.’
“It was in the days of Josiah, the grandson of Manasseh, that Jeremiah prophesied. Through this prophet, God pleaded with Jerusalem to return to him. ‘Lo, I
will bring a nation upon you from afar, O house of
Israel, saith the Lord: it is a mighty nation, it is an
ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not.’ Thus was Babylon described, and Jerusalem’s impending doom portrayed.
“Josiah was spared the sight of the complete
destruction of Jerusalem because of the reforms
which he attempted. In his days there was kept by
Judah, and by Israel also, the greatest Passover
feast in the history of the nation. ‘Because thine
heart was tender and thou hast humbled thyself before
the Lord, ...behold I will gather thee unto thy fathers
...and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will
bring upon this place.’” Haskell, SDP, 16,17.
“Josiah came to the throne when but a boy of
eight years. At sixteen he was soundly converted, and
two years later he led one of the most far-reaching revivals in the history of the nation. He then gave orders
to repair the temple, which had then stood for four centuries. …Daniel was but a child at the time of this
national revival, the effect of which, under King
Josiah’s leadership, carried over for many years.
When this leader fell on the field of battle in 608 BC,
and his body was brought home for burial, Daniel was
a youth of fifteen years. It is not hard to imagine the
impression this tragedy had on his adolescent mind.”
Anderson, UDP, 15.

“And the LORD spake by his servants the prophets, saying, Because Manasseh king of Judah hath
done these abominations, and hath done wickedly
above all that the Amorites did, which were before
him, and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols:
“Therefore thus saith the LORD God of Israel,
Behold, I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and
Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall
tingle. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of
Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab: and I
will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it,
and turning it upside down.
“And I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies; and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all
their enemies; Because they have done that which
was evil in my sight, and have provoked me to an-

“And like unto him [Josiah] was there no king before him, that turned to the LORD with all his heart,
and with all his soul, and with all his might, according
to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose there
any like him.
“Notwithstanding [all that Josiah did] the LORD
turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasseh had
provoked him withal.
“And the LORD said, I will remove Judah also
out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will
cast off this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and
the house of which I said, My name shall be there.”

14

DANIEL 1
2 Kings 23:25-27.

Judah Taken Captive Due to Sabbath-breaking.—
“Had the Israelites been faithful to God, and
kept His Sabbath, Jerusalem would have stood forever. (Jeremiah 17: 24-27.) But they departed from
Him, and He abandoned them. They profaned the sacred vessels by bringing idols into the temple; therefore
God allowed these vessels to be further profaned by
letting them go as trophies to heathen shrines abroad.”
Smith, DR, 20.

Experience of Josiah’s Sons: “In a peculiar way
God gave Josiah an opportunity to avert the impending
calamity. It was not yet too late to change the course
of events. This opportunity was through the gifts of
his sons. Josiah had three sons and one grandson, who
were in turn seated on the throne at Jerusalem. Each,
because of wrong training in youth, refused to take
God at his word, and failing, hastened the final overthrow.
“The three sons were Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim,
and Zedekiah. The grandson was Jehoiachin, who
preceded his uncle, Zedekiah. The fate of each is a
solemn warning to people living at the end of time. He
who might have been the light of heathen nations was
swallowed up by Egyptian darkness. Jehoiakim, the
second, who, properly trained, would have been so
charged with the power of God that the heathen king
would either have united his forces with the king of
Judah, or, opposing, would have been smitten as by a
thunder-bolt, failing, paid tribute to Babylon. His capital was entered. Treasures from the house of God were
ruthlessly torn from their place and dedicated to heathen worship. Youth—bright, promising youth—were
taken from the royal family to serve the king of Babylon. Jehoiakim beheld this, but was powerless to interfere. His life was gone; he was not connected with the
throne of God. His mother and his father made a
fatal mistake, for they did not give him the training
which God had commanded them to give. Neither
did he profit by these mistakes, but educated his son in
courtly manners and in the philosophy of the world;
and, as a result, his son Jehoiachin languished nearly
thirty-seven years in a prison in Babylon. This was
another lamp without the oil; another soul without the
heavenly food; another son improperly trained to add
to the disgrace of Judah. ‘Jerusalem was destroyed,
because the education of her children was neglected.’
“Zedekiah, the third son of Josiah, had still an
opportunity to save Jerusalem. Part of the treasures
of this city were already in Babylon. Daniel and his
companions had been in the court seventeen or eighteen years when Jeremiah came to Zedekiah with the
words: ‘If thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the king of
Babylon’s princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city
shall not be burned with fire... Obey, I beseech thee,
the voice of the Lord which I speak unto thee: so it
shall be well unto thee, and thy soul shall live.’ In this
time of peril, how did Zedekiah act? Did he deliver
himself unto the Babylonians? God had commanded
it; the city would have been saved by it; his own soul
would have been saved. Zedekiah pleaded a most human excuse, saying, ‘I am afraid.’
“In these three sons is revealed the weakness, the
cowardice, the wickedness, and the final ruin of those
trained for the service of the world and not for the
service of God.” Haskell, SDP, 17-19.

How Many Were Taken Captive?—
“Three times Nebuchadnezzar captured Jerusalem
and three times he carried captives to Babylon. The
first time he took only a few young men mostly princes
as hostages [including Daniel]; the second time he took
10,000 of the best of the people, and the third time he
almost stripped the land of its inhabitants except some
of the poorest of Judea who were left to till the land.
Among the captives were ‘all the men of might, even
seven thousand, and craftsmen and smiths a thousand’
and ‘all the princes, and all the mighty men of valor.’
(2 Kings 24:14-16).” Bunch, BOD, 7.
“This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried
away captive: in the seventh year three thousand Jews
and three and twenty: 29 In the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons: 30 In the
three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the
Jews seven hundred forty and five persons: all the
persons were four thousand and six hundred.” Jeremiah 52:28-30.
Judah would Never Have an Earthly King Again.—
“And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel [Zedekiah], whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an
end, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Remove the diadem,
and take off the crown: this shall not be the same:
exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high. I will
overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no
more, until he come [Jesus Christ at Second Coming]
whose right it is; and I will give it him.” Ezekiel
21:25-27.
DANIEL 1:3,4

And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the
master of his eunuchs, that he should bring
certain of the children of Israel, and of the
king’s seed, and of the princes;
Children in whom was no blemish, but
well favored, and skilful in all wisdom, and
cunning in knowledge, and understanding
science, and such as had ability in them to
stand in the king’s palace, and whom they
might teach the learning and the tongue of
15

GEMS FROM DANIEL

the Chaldeans.

fast in their worship of Jehovah. In the homes of
the high and the lowly, where the counsels of a covenant-keeping God were still held in reverence, the
words of the prophet were repeated again and
again. Even the children were mightily stirred, and
upon their young and receptive minds lasting impressions were made.
“It was their conscientious observance of the
commands of Holy Scripture, that in the days of Jeremiah’s ministry brought to Daniel and his fellows opportunities to exalt the true God before the nations of
earth. The instruction these Hebrew children had received in the homes of their parents, made them strong
in faith and constant in their service of the living God,
the Creator of the heavens and the earth. When, early
in the reign of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzar for the
first time besieged and captured Jerusalem, and
carried away Daniel and his companions, with others specially chosen for service in the court of Babylon, the faith of the Hebrew captives was tried to the
utmost. But those who had learned to place their trust
in the promises of God found these all-sufficient in
every experience through which they were called to
pass during their sojourn in a strange land. The Scriptures proved to them a guide and a stay.” Prophets
& Kings, 426-428.

Master of the Eunuchs.—
“Many years earlier, the prophet Isaiah told King
Hezekiah that some of his descendants would become ‘eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon’
(Isa. 39:7). Rabbinic tradition, therefore, asserts that
Daniel and his three friends were descendants of king
Hezekiah who were made into eunuchs at the court of
Babylon. The word saris (eunuch), however, can
simply refer to a high officer of the court. For example, Genesis 39:1 calls Potiphar a saris even though he
was married.” Pfandl, DTSOB, 15.
Children of Israel, and of the King’s Seed, Princes.—
“The children of Judah were numbered among
those of whom God had declared, ‘Ye shall be unto Me
a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.’ Ex. 19:6.
Never did Jeremiah in his ministry lose sight of the
vital importance of heart holiness in the varied relationships of life, and especially in the service of the
most high God. Plainly he foresaw the downfall of the
kingdom and a scattering of the inhabitants of Judah
among the nations; but with the eye of faith he looked
beyond all this to the times of restoration. Ringing in
his ears was the divine promise: ‘I will gather the
remnant of My flock out of all countries whither I
have driven them, and will bring them again to
their folds.... Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,
that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a
King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In His days Judah shall
be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is
His name whereby He shall be called, THE LORD
OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.’ Jer. 23:3-6.
“Thus prophecies of oncoming judgment were
mingled with promises of final and glorious deliverance. Those who should choose to make their peace
with God and live holy lives amid the prevailing
apostasy, would receive strength for every trial and
be enabled to witness for Him with mighty power.
And in the ages to come the deliverance wrought in
their behalf would exceed in fame that wrought for the
children of Israel at the time of the Exodus. The days
were coming, the Lord declared through His prophet,
when ‘they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, which brought up and
which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the
north country, and from all countries whither I had
driven them; and they shall dwell in their own
land.’ Verses 7, 8. Such were the wonderful prophecies uttered by Jeremiah during the closing years of the
history of the kingdom of Judah, when the Babylonians
were coming unto universal rule, and were even then
bringing their besieging armies against the walls of
Zion.
“Like sweetest music these promises of deliverance fell upon the ears of those who were stead-

“Among the children of Israel who were carried
captive to Babylon at the beginning of the seventy
years’ captivity were Christian patriots, men who
were as true as steel to principle, who would not be
corrupted by selfishness, but who would honor God at
the loss of all things. In the land of their captivity
these men were to carry out God’s purpose by giving to heathen nations the blessings that come
through a knowledge of Jehovah. They were to be
His representatives. Never were they to compromise
with idolaters; their faith and their name as worshipers
of the living God they were to bear as a high honor.
And this they did. In prosperity and adversity they
honored God, and God honored them.
“The fact that these men, worshipers of Jehovah,
were captives in Babylon, and that the vessels of God’s
house had been placed in the Temple of the Babylonish
gods, was boastfully cited by the victors as evidence
that their religion and customs were superior to the
religion and customs of the Hebrews. Yet through
the very humiliations that Israel’s departure from Him
had invited, God gave Babylon evidence of His supremacy, of the holiness of His requirements, and of
the sure results of obedience. And this testimony He
gave, as alone it could be given, through those who
were loyal to Him.” Prophets & Kings, 479,480.
“Here is recorded the probable fulfillment of the
judgments predicted by the prophet Isaiah to King
Hezekiah more than a hundred years before. When this
king had vaingloriously shown to the messengers of the
king of Babylon all the treasures and holy things of his

16

DANIEL 1
palace and kingdom, Hezekiah was told that all these
good things would be carried as trophies to the city of
Babylon, and that even his own children, his descendants would be taken away and be eunuchs in
the palace of the king there. (2 Kings 20:14-18.)”
Smith, DR, 21.

reveal who have a part in the kingdom of heaven.”
Youth Instructor, 10/29/1907.
Why Daniel Was Taken Captive.—
“In the providence of God these chosen ones were
taken captive, it was to carry to heathen nations the
blessings that come to humanity through a knowledge of God. They were to be representatives of
Jehovah. They were never to compromise with idolaters; their religious faith and their name as worshipers
of the living God they were to bear as a special honor.
And this they did. In prosperity and adversity they
honored God, and God honored them.” 6 Testimonies,
219.

And of the Princes.—
“Heb. Partemim, a loan word from Old Persian
fratama, ‘nobles,’ basically meaning ‘foremost.’ …The
first chapter of Daniel was written in the 1st year of
Cyrus, when Persian influence had become strong.”
4SDABC, 758.
Why Nebuchadnezzar Took These Captive.—
“It was an old custom of conquerors to carry
away princely hostages to guarantee the loyalty of
the conquered foe. Such a practice is reported in the
annals of Thutmose III of Egypt, who, after defeating
an alliance of Syrian and Palestinian rulers at the battle
of Megiddo in the 15th century BC, allowed the defeated kings to retain their thrones, but carried to Egypt
one prince from each of his defeated enemies. In
Egypt they were educated in the Egyptian way of life,
and when one of the satellite kings of Palestine of Syria
died, one of the deceased’s sons, educated in Egypt and
friendly to the Pharaoh, was put on the vacant throne.”
4SDABC, 758.

“Through the Hebrew captives the Lord was
made known to the heathen in Babylon. This idolatrous nation was given a knowledge of the kingdom the
Lord was to establish, and through His power maintain
against all the power and craft of Satan. Daniel and his
fellow-companions, Ezra and Nehemiah, and many
others were witnesses for God in their captivity. The
Lord scattered them among the kingdoms of the
earth that their light might shine brightly amid the
black darkness of heathenism and idolatry.” 4BC
1169.
Other Captives Brought to Babylon.—
“There was another class of captives carried into
Babylon. These the Lord permitted to be torn from
their homes, and carried into a land of idolaters, because they were themselves continually going into
idolatry. The Lord let them have all they desired of
the idolatrous practices of Babylon. And the righteous with the unrighteous were taken away into a land
where the name of Jehovah would not come to their
ears; where songs of praise and thanksgiving to God
would not be heard; where prophets with messages
of warnings and reproof and counsel would be few
and far between.” Youth Instructor, 8/18/1898.

Children, Well-Favored, Skilful, Cunning.—
“The word ‘children’ as applied to these captives
is not to be confined to the sense to which it is limited
at the present time. It included youth also. We learn
from the record that these children were already ‘skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and ...had ability in them to stand
in the king’s palace.’ In other words, they had acquired a good degree of education, and their physical and mental powers were so far developed that a
skilful reader of human nature could form an accurate estimate of their capabilities. They are supposed
to have been about eighteen or twenty years of age.”
Smith, DR, 21.

Babylon, the Educational Center of the World.—
“Not only the power, but the wisdom also, of
Nebuchadnezzar was exceedingly great. The king favored education, and during his reign Babylon was the
education center of the world. Every art and science
was taught in the schools of Babylon. The wisdom of
the ancients was made known to the students who sat at
the feet of her magicians and wise men. They reveled
in the study of astronomy and the higher mathematics. There were linguists who could teach the language of every nation.
“The king himself was highly educated, for it was
he who examined the students on the completion of
their course, and granted their degrees. Babylon was
proud of her educational system; she trusted to it for
salvation, but it was the cause of her ruin. ‘Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath caused thee to turn
away.’ God Himself speaks, saying: ‘Hath not God

“There is also a lesson for us to learn in the demand the king of Babylon made for perfection in
the youth who should stand in his courts. They must
be without blemish, well favored, skilful in wisdom,
cunning in knowledge, and understanding science. If
an idolatrous king should demand such excellence in
those who were to stand before him, should not those
who have a knowledge of the true God reach perfection of character and capability in his service?
Those who expect one day to stand before the throne of
the God of gods and Lord of kings, should live each
day in such a way that the approval of God can rest
upon them. They should seek daily to remove the
blemishes in character that lead to sin, and bring into
their lives the perfection of character that all must

17

GEMS FROM DANIEL
made foolish the wisdom of this world”’ In Nebuchadnezzar and his counselors—the wise men, astrologers, and soothsayers—on one side, represented the
education of the world. Daniel, a youth not over twenty-one years of age, a Hebrew and a slave, was chosen
by God to confound the wisdom of the mighty.”
Haskell, SDP, 29,30.

all spoke to him, and the voices of the prophets,
heard throughout the land, met a response in his
heart.
“Such was the training of Moses in the lowly cabin home in Goshen; of Samuel, by the faithful Hannah;
of David, in the hill-dwelling at Bethlehem; of Daniel,
before the scenes of the captivity separated him
from the home of his fathers. Such, too, was the early life of Christ, in the humble home at Nazareth; such
the training by which the child Timothy learned from
the lips of his mother Eunice, and his grandmother
Lois, the truths of Holy Writ.” Fundamentals of Education, 95,96.

“The ancient Babylonians had discovered that
235 lunar months or 6940 days almost exactly equaled
19 solar years. If we divide 6940 by 19, we obtain the
quotient of 365 and 5/16 days, which exceeds the year
of 365 ¼ by only about 1/16 of a day.” Menzel, Astronomy, 29.

”It was their conscientious observance of the
commands of Holy Scripture, that in the days of Jeremiah’s ministry brought to Daniel and his fellows opportunities to exalt the true God before the nations of
earth. The instruction these Hebrew children had
received in the homes of their parents, made them
strong in faith and constant in their service of the
living God, the Creator of the heavens and the
earth. When, early in the reign of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzar for the first time besieged and captured
Jerusalem, and carried away Daniel and his companions, with others specially chosen for service in the
court of Babylon, the faith of the Hebrew captives was
tried to the utmost. But those who had learned to
place their trust in the promises of God found these
all-sufficient in every experience through which
they were called to pass during their sojourn in a
strange land. The Scriptures proved to them a guide
and a stay.” Prophets & Kings, 428.

Daniel and Three Companions Show Results of True
Education.—
“Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?
by taking heed thereto according to thy word. With
my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments. Thy word have I hid in
mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.”
Psalm 119:9-11
“And these words, which I command thee this
day, shall be in thine heart: And thou shalt teach
them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of
them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and
when thou risest up.” Deuteronomy 6:6,7.
“God commanded the Hebrews to teach their
children His requirements, and to make them acquainted with all His dealings with their people. The home
and the school were one. In the place of stranger lips,
the loving hearts of the father and mother were to give
instruction to their children. Thoughts of God were
associated with all the events of daily life in the home
dwelling. The mighty works of God in the deliverance
of His people were recounted with eloquence and reverential awe. The great truths of God's providence and
of the future life were impressed on the young mind. It
became acquainted with the true, the good, the beautiful.
“By the use of figures and symbols the lessons
given were illustrated, and thus more firmly fixed in
the memory. Through this animated imagery the child
was, almost from infancy, initiated into the mysteries,
the wisdom, and the hopes of his fathers, and guided in
a way of thinking and feeling and anticipating, that
reached beyond things seen and transitory, to the unseen and eternal.
“From this education many a youth of Israel came
forth vigorous in body and mind, quick to perceive and
strong to act, the heart prepared like good ground for
the growth of the precious seed, the mind trained to see
God in the words of revelation and the scenes of nature. The stars of heaven, the trees and flowers of
the field, the lofty mountains, the babbling brooks,

“Daniel’s parents had trained him in his childhood to habits of strict temperance. They had taught
him that he must conform to nature’s laws in all his
habits; that his eating and drinking had a direct influence upon his physical, mental, and moral nature, and that he was accountable to God for his
capabilities; for he held them all as a gift from God
and must not, by any course of action, dwarf or
cripple them. As the result of this teaching, the law of
God was exalted in his mind and reverenced in his
heart. During the early years of his captivity Daniel
was passing through an ordeal which was to familiarize
him with courtly grandeur, with hypocrisy, and with
paganism. A strange school indeed to fit him for a life
of sobriety, industry, and faithfulness! And yet he
lived uncorrupted by the atmosphere of evil with which
he was surrounded.
“Daniel and his companions enjoyed the benefits
of correct training and education in early life, but these
advantages alone would not have made them what they
were. The time came when they must act for themselves—when their future depended upon their own
course. Then they decided to be true to the lessons
given them in childhood. The fear of God, which is
the beginning of wisdom, was the foundation of their

18

DANIEL 1
greatness. His Spirit strengthened every true purpose,
every noble resolution.” Child Guidance, 166,167.

Learning and Tongue of the Chaldeans.—
“All known scientific writings of that time were
inscribed on clay tablets in cuneiform script in the
Babylonian language. It must therefore be concluded
that ‘the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans’
included a thorough training in the classical language
and script of the country—that is, in the Babylonian
language and in cuneiform writing—in addition to colloquial Aramaic. Since proficiency in the cuneiform
script, with its hundreds of characters, was not easy to
acquire, a good educational background, a natural ability to learn easily, and the gift of picking up a new language readily would be deemed desirable prerequisites
for acceptance into the royal school for future courtiers.” 4SDABC, 758.

“Living at the same time, …were others which
the Scripture mentions by name. These were Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, children of Judah,
of the royal family—relatives of Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, and Zedekiah.
“At the first siege of Jerusalem, 607 BC, Daniel
was not over eighteen years of age; about the age of the
prince Zedekiah, who afterward ruled in Jerusalem.
Daniel had a godly mother who knew of the prophecy concerning the destruction of their city. She repeated to her son the words of God, that some day
Hebrew children must stand in the heathen court at
Babylon. Carefully did this mother teach her son to
read the parchment scrolls of the prophets. The
history of Israel was studied; the story of Nadab and
Abihu was told and retold. The effect of strong drink
was impressed upon the mind. The laws of his own
being were studied. He knew that excess in eating and
drinking would so dull the mind that the voice of God
could not be heard.
“The songs which these Hebrew children sang
told the story of God’s dealings with his people. It was
in this manner that the image of God was engraven on
their hearts. This education was not gained in the
schools of the time, for they had departed from the plan
of God; but holy mothers, living close to the everlasting Father, led their children by precept and example,
by word and song, to form characters that would stand
the test.
“It was the age when most of the young men in
the capital of Judah were wild and reckless. They were
excusing themselves because of their youth. But God
chose from their midst certain ones whom he could
trust in a foreign land. Daniel and his three companions were snatched from the shelter of home, and
with others were placed under the charge of Ashpenaz, master of the eunuchs in Babylon.
“Now can be seen the results of the home training. Pure food, clean thoughts, and physical exercise
placed them on the list of ‘children in whom was no
blemish, but well-favored.’ But what of their intellectual ability? They had not been educated in the schools
of Jerusalem, much less in those of Babylon. Was
there not great danger that they lacked in the sciences
or the essential branches? On examination, these four
passed as ‘skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in
knowledge, and understanding science,’ and able to
learn a difficult, foreign language. God had fulfilled
his promise in these children of the home school.”
Haskell, SDP, 19,20.

DANIEL 1:5
And the king appointed them a daily
provision of the king’s meat, and of the
wine which he drank: so nourishing them
three years,- that at the end thereof they
might stand before the king.
The King Appointed Them Meat & Wine.—
“The youth in this school of training were not only to be admitted to the royal palace, but it was provided that they should eat of the meat and drink of the
wine which came from the king’s table. In all this the
king considered that he was not only bestowing
great honor upon them, but securing for them the
best physical and mental development that could be
attained.” Sanctified Life, 19.
“It was the custom of Eastern courts to feed the
officers of the palace with food from the king’s table. All of the king’s food was first offered to idols
which was supposed to give it special health-imparting
virtue. The beasts before being slaughtered were offered in a libation to the god of wine. The heathen
instead of asking a blessing upon the food when they
sat down to eat, held a ceremony of acknowledgment
and dedication of the meal to their gods. To be permitted to partake of these blessed and dedicated foods and
drinks from the table of the king was considered a great
honor, and therefore a refusal was an offense to the
royal host.” Bunch, BOD, 11.
“In the treatment which these Hebrew captives
received, we see an instance of the wise policy and the
liberality of the rising king, Nebuchadnezzar. Instead
of choosing means for the gratification of low and base
desires, as too many kings of later times have done, he
chose young men to be educated in all matters pertaining to the kingdom, that he might have efficient help in
administering its affairs. He appointed them daily
provision of his own food and drink. Instead of the

“Daniel and his three friends had learned to trust
and obey God amidst the apostasy and idolatry of
Israel, so that when they went to Babylon they could
be victors over temptation amidst the apostasy and
idolatry of Babylon.” PJ.

19

GEMS FROM DANIEL
coarse fare which some would have thought good
enough for captives, he offered them his own royal
viands. For the space of three years they had all the
advantages the kingdom afforded. Though captives,
they were royal children, and were treated as such by
the humane king of the Chaldeans.” Smith, DR, 21.

That They Might Stand Before the King.—
“God’s purpose for the children growing up beside our hearths is wider, deeper, higher, than our restricted vision has comprehended. From the humblest
lot those whom He has seen faithful have in time past
been called to witness for Him in the world’s highest
places. And many a lad of today, growing up as did
Daniel in his Judean home, studying God’s word and
His works, and learning the lessons of faithful service, will yet stand in legislative assemblies, in halls of
justice, or in royal courts, as a witness for the King of
kings.” Education, 262.

“By the example of Daniel and his fellows in
Babylon, we see that it is impossible to reach the
standard which the Lord would have his children reach,
and practice an easy, accommodating kind of religion
that leaves principle out, and is controlled by circumstances. Youth who would serve the God of heaven,
cannot engage in worldly merriment, eat of enervating luxuries, or drink strong drink because it is set
before them by the honored or wealthy men of the
world, whom they fear to offend by refusing their
favors. They may think that they have been especially
honored, and that courtesy demands the acceptance of
the favors proffered them; but loyalty to God must take
the precedence, and fear to offend the Lord of heaven
must control the Christian. The king of Babylon
thought that he was bestowing great favors upon Daniel and his fellows; but they had respect unto God’s
commandments more than unto the favor of the king.”
Youth Instructor, 10/25/1894.

DANIEL 1:6,7
Now among these were of the children
of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah:
Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs
gave names: for he gave unto Daniel the
name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of
Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach;
and to Azariah, of Abednego.

Wine in The Bible.—
“The Bible nowhere sanctions the use of intoxicating wine. The wine that Christ made from water
at the marriage feast of Cana was the pure juice of
the grape. This is the ‘new wine... found in the cluster,’ of which the Scripture says, ‘Destroy it not; for
a blessing is in it.’ Isaiah 65:8.
“It was Christ who, in the Old Testament,
gave the warning to Israel, ‘Wine is a mocker, strong
drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is
not wise.’ Proverbs 20:1. He Himself provided no such
beverage. Satan tempts men to indulgence that will
becloud reason and benumb the spiritual perceptions,
but Christ teaches us to bring the lower nature into subjection. He never places before men that which would
be a temptation. His whole life was an example of
self-denial. It was to break the power of appetite that
in the forty days’ fast in the wilderness He suffered in
our behalf the severest test that humanity could endure.
It was Christ who directed that John the Baptist
should drink neither wine nor strong drink. It was
He who enjoined similar abstinence upon the wife of
Manoah. Christ did not contradict His own teaching.
The unfermented wine that He provided for the wedding guests was a wholesome and refreshing drink.
This is the wine that was used by our Saviour and His
disciples in the first Communion. It is the wine that
should always be used on the Communion table as a
symbol of the Saviour’s blood. The sacramental service is designed to be soul-refreshing and life-giving.
There is to be connected with it nothing that could minister to evil.” The Ministry of Healing, 333,334.

Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.—
“Among those who maintained their allegiance to
God were Daniel and his three companions—illustrious
examples of what men may become who unite with the
God of wisdom and power. From the comparative
simplicity of their Jewish home, these youth of royal
line were taken to the most magnificent of cities and
into the court of the world’s greatest monarch.
“Seeing in these youth the promise of remarkable ability, Nebuchadnezzar determined that they
should be trained to fill important positions in his
kingdom. That they might be fully qualified for their
lifework, he arranged for them to learn the language of
the Chaldeans and for three years to be granted the
unusual educational advantages afforded princes of the
realm.” Prophets & Kings, 480.
“When the people of Israel, their king, nobles,
and priests were carried into captivity, four of their
number were selected to serve in the court of the
king of Babylon. One of these was Daniel, who early
gave promise of the remarkable ability developed in
later years. These youth were all of princely birth, and
are described as ‘(Daniel 1:4 quoted)’.” Sanctified
Life, 18.
“Daniel and his friends knew that they must keep
the eye single to the glory of God, seek wisdom and
strength and grace from on high, and not allow themselves to be led, by smiles or frowns, to yield to the

20

DANIEL 1
sophistry of Satan. They knew that no human power
could be to them wisdom and righteousness and sanctification. Satan was trying to compass their destruction.
Nothing but the wisdom and strength and firmness
and heroism that God could give would enable them
to maintain their position in the way of holiness.
They knew that they were not yet fully acquainted with
the character of Satan’s enmity. They would have to
watch unto prayer; for they were ignorant of the
obstacles they would have to surmount. They knew
that barriers would rise in their way, that embarrassment would surround them on every side.” Youth Instructor, 9/6/1900.

Babylonians believed that a change of name changed a
person’s future life and gave him a new start in life.”
Bunch, BOD, 9.
“A good name is rather to be chosen than great
riches.” Proverbs 22:1.
“The names of Daniel and his companions were
changed to names representing Chaldean deities. Great
significance was attached to the names given by Hebrew parents to their children. Often these stood for
traits of character that the parent desired to see
developed in the child. The prince in whose charge
the captive youth were placed, ‘gave unto Daniel the
name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach;
and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego.’
“The king did not compel the Hebrew youth to
renounce their faith in favor of idolatry, but he
hoped to bring this about gradually. By giving them
names significant of idolatry, by bringing them daily
into close association with idolatrous customs, and
under the influence of the seductive rites of heathen
worship, he hoped to induce them to renounce the
religion of their nation and to unite with the worship of the Babylonians.” Prophets & Kings, 481.

Daniel and His Companions Renamed.—
“This change of names was probably made on account of the signification of the words. In the Hebrew,
Daniel signified, ‘judge for God;’ Hananiah, ‘gift of
the Lord;’ Mishael, ‘who is what God is;’ and Azariah,
‘whom Jehovah helps.’ Since these names had some
reference to the true God and signified some connection with His worship, they were changed to names
which had definitions linking them to the heathen divinities and worship of the Chaldeans.
Thus
Belteshazzar, the name given to Daniel, signified
‘prince of Bel;’ Shadrach, ‘servant of Sin’ (the
moon god); Meshach, ‘who is what Aku is’ (Aku
being the Sumerian equivalent of Sin, the name of
the moon god); and Abednego, ‘servant of Nebo.’”
Smith, DR,23

“Among those chosen from the captives of Judah
were Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, ‘unto
whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he
gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to
Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach;
and to Azariah, of Abednego.’ The Babylonian officer had an object in thus changing the names of
the Hebrew youth. Anciently the name of a child
stood for his character, and the names given to these children were characteristic of what it was expected they would become. They were young in
years, and this change in their names it was believed
would make an impression on their minds. In a little
while, it was hoped, their former religion would be
forgotten, and they would become in character and
purpose like the Chaldean youth about them.”
Youth Instructor, 10/29/1907.

“In the case of Daniel and his companions the
change was doubtless made also for the purpose of
hiding their identity so as to obliterate all national distinctions among the courtiers of the palace. They were
all given Babylonian names. Another reason for the
change was to win them away from their own religion
to that of the Chaldeans.
“Dan-i-El is made up of two words, meaning
‘judge’ and ‘God.’ It therefore means ‘God’s judge,’
or ‘God is my judge.’ Nebuchadnezzar changed Daniel’s name to Belteshazzar which he said was ‘according to the name of my god.’ (Dan. 4:8). It means
‘Beltis, or Baal, protects the king,’ or ‘Keeper of the
hid treasure of Bel.’
“The name Hananiah means ‘The Lord is gracious to me,’ or ‘He to whom the Lord is gracious.’
This was changed to Shadrach which means ‘The inspiration of the sun,’ or ‘The command of Aku,’ that is,
the moon-god.
“Mishael means ‘He who comes from God,’ or,
‘He who is like God.’ His name was changed to Meshach, meaning ‘Who is as Aku,’ or ‘He who belongs
to the goddess of Shebah’ (Venus) or ‘Who is a Merodach.’
“Azariah means ‘The Lord is a helper. This was
changed to Abednego which means, ‘The servant of
Nebo,’ or ‘Servant of shining fire,’ which was a Babylonian deity meaning the sun or morning star. The

“Daniel’s name (‘God is my judge’) is a constant reminder of human accountability. There will
be a day when the books will be opened and sentence
passed; those found written in the book of life will be
delivered.” BRI, 2SOD, 51.
“When they had arrived in Babylon, the king
changed their names, but he could not change their
devotion to the living God. They were members of a
conquered race; and , when they appeared before Nebuchadnezzar, they realized that they were standing before the conqueror. Yet they were unconquerable.”
Anderson, UDP, 67.

21

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Other Kingdoms Did the Same.—
“And Pharaoh called Joseph’s name
Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath
the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. And Joseph
went out over all the land of Egypt.” Genesis 41:45.

“The whole book of Daniel is pervaded with tension which inexorably involves two camps in a merciless war. From chapter 1, we immediately enter into
the conflict. Babylon is opposed to Jerusalem (Daniel
1:1), and the words which are used there point beyond
the mere local conflict which brought Israel into exile.
Through the rare word ‘Sin ar’ (Dan. 1:2, which is the
antique name of Babel, as preserved in Gen. 11:2), the
author alludes to another conflict of a spiritual order.
“Indeed, the story continues with the setting up of
the two camps. On one side is Babel, attempting to
usurp the authority of the God of Israel. The King of
Babel intends to make Daniel and his companions
worship him according to the Babylonian religion,
and wants to change their names accordingly. On
the other side stand Daniel and his companions, who
resist Babylonian alienation and adhere to their God.
Against the king who ‘appointed’ food from pagan
worship, Daniel ‘purposed’ in his heart not to defile
himself. The same Hebrew verb wayyasem is used
for ‘purposed’ (1:8) and the ‘giving’ of their new
names (1:7). Thus the text suggests that their decision not to eat had to do with their faithfulness to
God and their identity. Moreover, the verb ‘appointed’ (in its form wayeman, 1:5) has only God the Creator as its subject (Jonah 2:1; 4:6,7,8). Therefore, Daniel responded to the king’s order by asking for the food
appointed by the Creator (Daniel 1:12).” Doukhan,
DVE, 73,74.

“And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther,
his uncle’s daughter: for she had neither father nor
mother, and the maid was fair and beautiful; whom
Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took
for his own daughter.” Esther 2:7.
God’s 5th Kingdom Will Give New Names.—
“…To him that overcometh will I give to eat of
the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and
in the stone a new name written, which no man
knoweth saving he that receiveth it.” Rev. 2:17.

DANIEL 1:8
But Daniel purposed in his heart that
he would not defile himself with the portion
of the king’s meat, nor with the wine which
he drank: therefore he requested of the
prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.

Daniel Would Not Defile Himself.—
“Daniel and his companions in Babylon were, in
their youth, apparently more favored of fortune than
was Joseph in the earlier years of his life in Egypt; yet
they were subjected to tests of character scarcely
less severe. From the comparative simplicity of their
Judean home these youth of royal line were transported
to the most magnificent of cities, to the court of its
greatest monarch, and were singled out to be trained
for the king’s special service. Strong were the temptations surrounding them in that corrupt and luxurious
court. The fact that they, the worshipers of Jehovah,
were captives to Babylon; that the vessels of God’s
house had been placed in the temple of the gods of
Babylon; that the king of Israel was himself a prisoner
in the hands of the Babylonians, was boastfully cited
by the victors as evidence that their religion and customs were superior to the religion and customs of the
Hebrews. Under such circumstances, through the very
humiliations that Israel’s departure from His commandments had invited, God gave to Babylon evidence
of His supremacy, of the holiness of His requirements,
and of the sure result of obedience. And this testimony He gave, as alone it could be given, through those
who still held fast their loyalty.” Education, 54.

Daniel Purposed—The Battle of the Mind.—
“He prayed three times a day, and God answered his prayers. Daniel’s purpose [Dan.1:8] was
known to the heavenly Watcher, and as Daniel placed
himself on the side of God, to keep his ways, the Lord
placed himself on Daniel’s side, to keep him.” Christian Temperance and Bible Hygiene, 23.

“Daniel and his companions determined to banish from their diet everything that would defile, and

22

DANIEL 1
because he knew them to be scientifically true, but because they were God-given, and, in his case, had been
put into practice. His education had a Biblical foundation, and he knew that it was in harmony with true science. It was a life and death question; but the principles were divine, and he would obey, walk by faith,
and leave the results with his Maker. ‘Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself
with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the
wine which he drank.’” Haskell, SDP, 20,21.

a power from above worked in harmony with their
efforts. As a result they had the privilege of following
their own course in the obtaining of their education.
And the education they gained was better than that
gained by any of the magicians, astrologers, or wise
men in all the king’s realm.” Upward Look, 253.
“The body is a most important medium
through which the mind and the soul are developed for
the upbuilding of character. Hence it is that the adversary of souls directs his temptations to the enfeebling
and degrading of the physical powers. His success
here often means the surrender of the whole being to
evil. The tendencies of the physical nature, unless under the dominion of a higher power, will surely work
ruin and death. The body is to be brought into subjection to the higher powers of the being. The passions are to be controlled by the will, which is itself to
be under the control of God. The kingly power of reason, sanctified by divine grace, is to bear sway in the
life. Intellectual power, physical stamina, and the
length of life depend upon immutable laws. Through
obedience to these laws, man may stand conqueror of
himself, conqueror of his own inclinations, conqueror
of principalities and powers, of ‘the rulers of the darkness of this world,’ and of ‘spiritual wickedness in high
places.’ Eph. 6:12.
“In that ancient ritual which is the gospel in symbol, no blemished offering could be brought to God’s
altar. The sacrifice that was to represent Christ must be
spotless. The word of God points to this as an illustration of what His children are to be—‘a living
sacrifice,’ ‘holy and without blemish.’ Romans 12:1;
Ephesians 5:27.” Prophets & Kings, 488,489.

“The king always asked a blessing before his
meals, and addressed his idols as Deity. He set apart
a portion of his food to be presented to the idol gods
whom he worshiped, and also a portion of the wine.
This act, according to their religious instruction,
consecrated the whole to the heathen god. To sit at
the table where such idolatry was practiced, Daniel and
his three brethren deemed, would be a dishonor to the
God of heaven. These four children decided that they
could not sit at the king’s table to eat of the food placed
there, or to partake of the wine, all of which had been
dedicated to an idol god. This would indeed implicate them with heathenism, and dishonor the principles of their national religion and their God.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol.4, 126, 127.
“[Daniel 1:8 quoted.] Daniel had other reasons
for this course than simply the effect of such a diet
upon his physical system, though he would derive great
advantage in this respect from the fare he proposed to
adopt. It was frequently the case that food used by
the kings and princes of heathen nations, who were
often the high priests of their religion, was first offered in sacrifice to idols, and the wine they used,
poured out as a libation before their gods. Again,
some of the flesh food used by the Chaldeans was pronounced unclean by the Jewish law. On either of these
grounds Daniel could not, consistently with his religion, partake of these articles. Hence he respectfully
requested the proper officer that from conscientious
scruples he might not be obliged to defile himself.”
Smith, DR, 24.

Daniel Tested in Diet.—
“Among the viands placed before the king were
swine’s flesh and other meats which were declared
unclean by the law of Moses, and which the Hebrews
had been expressly forbidden to eat. Here Daniel was
brought to a severe test. Should he adhere to the
teachings of his fathers concerning meats and
drinks, and offend the king, and probably lose not
only his position but his life? or should he disregard the commandment of the Lord, and retain the
favor of the king, thus securing great intellectual
advantages and the most flattering worldly prospects?
“Daniel did not long hesitate. He decided to
stand firm in his integrity, let the result be what it
might. He ‘purposed in his heart that he would not
defile himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor
with the wine which he drank’ (Daniel 1:8).” Sanctified Life, 19.

“Daniel had five Scriptural reasons for his decision. (1) Many of the flesh foods used on the king’s
table were divinely forbidden. Lev. 11; Deut. 14. The
Babylonians made no distinction between the ‘clean
and the unclean’ just as many do not today. Eze.
22:26. (2) None of the beasts was killed according to
the instruction given in the Mosaic law. Acts 15:29;
Lev. 17:10-14. (3) They had been first offered to idols
and for that reason were prohibited. Acts 15:29. (4)
Strong and intoxicating wine was strictly forbidden.
Lev. 10:9-11; Prov. 20:1; 23:29-32. (5) For health reasons God’s people were counseled not to partake of
delicacies or rich pastries when dining with a prince or
ruler. Prov. 23:1-3.” Bunch, BOD, 11,12.

“The crucial moment came when ‘the king appointed them a daily provision of the king’s meat and
of the wine which he drank.’ Daniel had unbounded
confidence in the principles of temperance, not alone

23

GEMS FROM DANIEL
authority over him; but he had so high a sense of the
claims of God that the requirements of earthly rulers
were held subordinate. He would not be induced by
any selfish consideration to swerve from his duty.
“The character of Daniel is presented to the
world as a striking example of what God’s grace
can make of men fallen by nature and corrupted by
sin. The record of his noble, self-denying life is an
encouragement to our common humanity. From it
we may gather strength to nobly resist temptation,
and firmly, and in the grace of meekness, stand for
the right under the severest trial.
“Daniel might have found a plausible excuse to
depart from his strictly temperate habits; but the approval of God was dearer to him than the favor of
the most powerful earthly potentate—dearer even
than life itself.” Sanctified Life, 20,21.

Not a Minor Matter.—
“There are many among professed Christians today who would decide that Daniel was too particular,
and would pronounce him narrow and bigoted. They
consider the matter of eating and drinking as of too
little consequence to require such a decided stand—
one involving the probable sacrifice of every earthly
advantage. But those who reason thus will find in
the day of judgment that they turned from God’s
express requirements and set up their own opinion
as a standard of right and wrong. They will find that
what seemed to them unimportant was not so regarded
of God. His requirements should be sacredly obeyed.
Those who accept and obey one of His precepts because it is convenient to do so, while they reject another because its observance would require a sacrifice,
lower the standard of right and by their example lead
others to lightly regard the holy law of God. ‘Thus
saith the Lord’ is to be our rule in all things.” Sanctified Life, 19,20.

“The followers of Jesus will never be ashamed to
practice temperance in all things. Then why should
any young man blush with shame to refuse the wine
cup or the foaming mug of beer? A refusal to indulge
perverted appetite is an honorable act. To sin is
unmanly; to indulge in injurious habits of eating and
drinking is weak, cowardly, debased; but to deny perverted appetite is strong, brave, noble. In the Babylonian court, Daniel was surrounded by allurements to
sin, but by the help of Christ he maintained his integrity. He who cannot resist temptation, when every
facility for overcoming has been placed within his
reach, is not registered in the books of heaven as a
man.
“ ‘Dare to be a Daniel, dare to stand alone!’ Have
courage to do the right. A cowardly and silent reserve
before evil associates, while you listen to their devices,
makes you one with them. ‘Come out from among
them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not
the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be My sons and daughters.’” Temperance, 189,190.

“The brain nerves which communicate with
the entire system are the only medium through
which Heaven can communicate to man and affect
his inmost life. Whatever disturbs the circulation of
the electric currents in the nervous system lessens the
strength of the vital powers, and the result is a deadening of the sensibilities of the mind.
“Intemperance of any kind benumbs the perceptive organs and so weakens the brain-nerve
power that eternal things are not appreciated, but
placed upon a level with the common. The higher
powers of the mind, designed for elevated purposes,
are brought into slavery to the baser passions. If our
physical habits are not right, our mental and moral
powers cannot be strong; for great sympathy exists
between the physical and the moral.” Counsels to
the Church, 101.
“He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful
also in much.” Luke 16:10.

“Temptations to the indulgence of appetite possess a power which can be overcome only by the help
that God can impart. But with every temptation we
have the promise of God that there shall be a way of
escape. Why, then, are so many overcome? It is because they do not put their trust in God. They do not
avail themselves of the means provided for their
safety. The excuses offered for the gratification of
perverted appetite, are therefore of no weight with
God.
“Daniel valued his human capabilities, but he did
not trust in them. His trust was in that strength
which God has promised to all who will come to
Him in humble dependence, relying wholly upon
His power.
“He purposed in his heart that he would not defile
himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with
the wine which he drank; for he knew that such a diet

Daniel, An Example in Overcoming Sin.—
“Daniel was subjected to the severest temptations that can assail the youth of today; yet he was
true to the religious instruction received in early
life. He was surrounded with influences calculated to
subvert those who would vacillate between principle
and inclination; yet the Word of God presents him as a
faultless character. Daniel dared not trust to his own
moral power. Prayer was to him a necessity. He made
God his strength, and the fear of God was continually
before him in all the transactions of his life.
“Daniel possessed the grace of genuine meekness.
He was true, firm, and noble. He sought to live in
peace with all, while he was unbending as the lofty
cedar wherever principle was involved. In everything
that did not come in collision with his allegiance to
God, he was respectful and obedient to those who had

24

DANIEL 1
would not strengthen his physical powers or increase
his mental capability. He would not use wine, nor any
other unnatural stimulant; he would do nothing to
becloud his mind; and God gave him ‘knowledge and
skill in all learning and wisdom,’ and also ‘understanding in all visions and dreams.’...
“…The experience of Daniel and his youthful
companions illustrates the benefits that may result from
an abstemious diet, and shows what God will do for
those who will cooperate with Him in the purifying
and uplifting of the soul. They were an honor to God,
and a bright and shining light in the court of Babylon.
“In this history we hear the voice of God addressing us individually, bidding us gather up all the precious rays of light upon this subject of Christian temperance, and place ourselves in right relation to the
laws of health.” Counsels on Diet & Foods, 154,155.

dom of Babylon. Through the reign of successive
monarchs, the downfall of the nation, and the establishment of another world empire, such were his wisdom and statesmanship, so perfect his tact, his courtesy, his genuine goodness of heart, his fidelity to
principle, that even his enemies were forced to the
confession that ‘they could find none occasion nor
fault; forasmuch as he was faithful.’” Prophets &
Kings, 546.

DANIEL 1:10
And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath
appointed your meat and your drink: for
why should he see your faces worse liking
than the children which are of your sort?
then shall ye make me endanger my head
to the king.

“If the students who attend our colleges would
be firm, and maintain integrity, if they would not
associate with those who walk in the paths of sin,
nor be charmed by their society, like Daniel they
would enjoy the favor of God. If they would discard
unprofitable amusements and indulgence of appetite,
their minds would be clear for the pursuit of
knowledge. They would thus gain a moral power that
would enable them to remain unmoved when assailed
by temptation. It is a continual struggle to be always
on the alert to resist evil; but it pays to obtain one victory after another over self and the powers of darkness.
And if the youth are proved and tested, as was Daniel,
what honor can they reflect to God by their firm adherence to the right.” Fundamentals of Christian Education, 87.

I Fear My Lord the King.—
“Daniel might have found a plausible excuse to
depart from his strictly temperate habits; but the approval of God was dearer to him than the favor of the
most powerful earthly potentate—dearer even than life
itself. Having by his courteous conduct obtained favor
with Melzar, the officer in charge of the Hebrew youth,
Daniel made a request that they might not eat of the
king’s meat or drink of his wine. Melzar feared that
should he comply with this request, he might incur the
displeasure of the king, and thus endanger his own life.
Like many at the present day, he thought that an
abstemious diet would render these youth pale and
sickly in appearance and deficient in muscular
strength, while the luxurious food from the king’s
table would make them ruddy and beautiful and would
promote physical and mental activity.” Sanctified Life,
21,22.

DANIEL 1:9
Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the prince of the
eunuchs.

“The prince of the eunuchs feared to grant Daniel’s request, since the king himself had appointed the
food for Daniel and his companions. This shows the
great personal interest the king took in these captives.
It appears that his sincere object was to secure in
them the best mental and physical development that
could be attained. How different is this from the bigotry and tyranny which usually hold supreme control
over the hearts of those who are clothed with absolute
power. In the character of Nebuchadnezzar we shall
find many things worthy of our highest admiration.”
Smith, DR, 24.

“This officer saw in Daniel good traits of character. He saw that he was striving to be kind and
helpful, that his words were respectful and courteous, and his manner possessed the grace of modesty
and meekness. It was the good behavior of the youth
that gained for him the favor and love of the prince.”
Youth Instructor, 11/12/1907.
“Strict compliance with the requirements of
Heaven brings temporal as well as spiritual blessings.
Unwavering in his allegiance to God, unyielding in
his mastery of self, Daniel, by his noble dignity and
unswerving integrity, while yet a young man, won
the ‘favor and tender love’ of the heathen officer in
whose charge he had been placed. Daniel 1:9. The
same characteristics marked his afterlife. He rose
speedily to the position of prime minister of the king-

The Children Which Are of Your Sort.—
“The language of the prince of the eunuchs shows
that there were other Hebrew youth who were selected, who did not make this request; ‘For,’ said the
prince of the eunuchs, ‘why should he [the king] see

25

GEMS FROM DANIEL
your faces worse liking than the children which are of
your sort?’” Haskell, SDP, 14.

It was no experiment with them; for they foresaw the
result.
“The officer hesitated. He feared that the rigid
abstinence they proposed would have an unfavorable
effect upon their personal appearance, and that, in consequence, they would lose favor with the king. The
Hebrew children explained to the officer the effect of
food upon the body; that overeating and the use of
rich foods benumbed the sensibilities, unfitting
mind and body for hard, stern labor. They urged
most earnestly that they be allowed the simple diet, and
begged that they be given a ten-days’ trial, that they
might demonstrate by their own physical appearance at
the end of that time the advantages of plain, nutritious
food. The request was granted; for they had obtained favor with God and with men. It was an act
of faith; there was no feeling of envy toward those
who were eating of the king’s meat. The minds of the
four were filled with thoughts of love and peace, and
they actually grew during those ten days.” Haskell,
SDP, 21,22.

DANIEL 1:11-14
Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the
prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten
days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and
water to drink.
Then let our countenances be looked
upon before thee, and the countenance of
the children that eat of the portion of the
king’s meat: and as thou seest, deal with
thy servants.
So he consented to them in this matter,
and proved them ten days.
Then Said Daniel to Melzar, Prove Thy Servants.—
“Daniel requested that the matter be decided by a
ten days’ trial—the Hebrew youth during this brief
period being permitted to eat of simple food, while
their companions partook of the king’s dainties. The
request was finally granted, and then Daniel felt
assured that he had gained his case. Although but a
youth, he had seen the injurious effects of wine and
luxurious living upon physical and mental health.”
Sanctified Life, 21,22.

“In taking this step, Daniel did not act rashly. He
knew that by the time he was called to appear before the king, the advantage of healthful living
would be apparent. Cause would be followed by effect. Daniel said to Melzar, who had been given
charge of him and his companions: ‘Prove thy servants,
I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to
eat and water to drink.’ Daniel knew that ten days
would be time enough to prove the benefit of abstemiousness....
“Having done this, Daniel and his companions
did still more. They did not choose as companions
those who were agents of the prince of darkness.
They did not go with a multitude to do evil. They secured Melzar as their friend, and there was no friction
between him and them. They went to him for advice,
and at the same time enlightened him by the wisdom of
their deportment.” Youth Instructor, 9/6/1900.

“Daniel and his companions, after considering
their dangerous and difficult position, took this matter
to the Lord in prayer, and decided to be true to principle. Much was involved in this decision. If they sat at
the king’s table, they would partake of food which had
been consecrated to idols; and the Hebrew children
would thus dishonor God, and ruin their own characters by removing the safeguard of temperance,
and allowing themselves to be influenced by corrupt
associations. Even at the cost of appearing singular,
they decided not to sit at the table of the king. They
might have reasoned that at the king’s command they
were compelled to partake of the food at the royal table
which had been dedicated to an idol. But they determined not to implicate themselves with heathenism,
and not to dishonor the principles of their national religion and their God. Surrounded by perils, after having made a most determined effort to resist temptation, they must trust the results with God.
“With true courage and Christian courtesy, Daniel
said to the officers who had charge over them: ‘Prove
thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them
give us pulse to eat, and water to drink. Then let our
countenances be looked upon before thee, and the
countenances of the children that eat the portion of the
king’s meat; and, as thou seest, deal with thy servants.’

Pulse To Eat.—
“It is interesting to note what was included in
Daniel’s request for his diet. The Hebrew word, zeroim, here translated ‘pulse,’ is built on the same root as
the word ‘seed’ in the record of creation, where it mentions ‘every herb seeding seed,’ and again, the ‘fruit of
a tree seeding seed.’ Genesis 1: 29. This makes it clear
enough that Daniel’s request included grains legumes,
and fruits. Then, too, if we understand Genesis 9: 3
correctly, the ‘green herb’ itself must have been included in the diet requests. In other words, the menu
for which Daniel asked and which he received was
made up of cereals, legumes, fruits, nuts, and vegetables—a vegetarian diet of good variety, together
with the universal drink for man and beast, clear
water.
“The Cambridge Bible, has this note on zeroim:
‘vegetable food in general; there is no reason for re-

26

DANIEL 1
stricting the Hebrew word used to leguminous fruits,
such as beans and peas, which is what the term 'pulse'
properly denotes.’
“Gesenius gives this definition: ‘Seed-herbs,
greens, vegetables, i.e., vegetable food, such as was
eaten in a half fast, opposed to meats and the more delicate kinds of food.’ Smith, DR, 24, 25.

ing in all visions and dreams.
God Gave Knowledge, Skill, and Wisdom.—
“For three years the Hebrew youth studied to acquire ‘the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.’
During this time they held fast their allegiance to God
and depended constantly upon His power. With their
habits of self-denial they united earnestness of purpose, diligence, and steadfastness. It was not pride or
ambition that had brought them into the king’s court,
into companionship with those who neither knew nor
feared God; they were captives in a strange land,
placed there by Infinite Wisdom. Separated from home
influences and sacred associations, they sought to acquit themselves creditably, for the honor of their
down-trodden people, and for the glory of Him
whose servants they were.
“The Lord regarded with approval the
firmness and self-denial of the Hebrew youth, and
their purity of motive; and His blessing attended
them. He ‘gave them knowledge and skill in all
learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.’ The promise was fulfilled, ‘Them that honor Me I will honor.’ 1 Samuel
2:30. As Daniel clung to God with unwavering trust,
the spirit of prophetic power came upon him. While
receiving instruction from man in the duties of court
life, he was being taught by God to read the mysteries
of the future and to record for coming generations,
through figures and symbols, events covering the history of this world till the close of time.” Prophet &
Kings, 484,485.

“For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as
the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to
spring forth; so the Lord GOD will cause righteousness
and praise to spring forth before all the nations.” Isa
61:11. [Note: The same word for ‘pulse’ reads ‘things
that are sown’ in Isaiah 61:11.]
Water to Drink.—
“In health and in sickness, pure water is one of
heaven’s choicest blessings. Its proper use promotes
health. It is the beverage which God provided to
quench the thirst of animals and man. Drunk freely, it
helps to supply the necessities of the system and assists
nature to resist disease.” Ministry of Healing, 237.
“If anything is needed to quench thirst, pure water
drunk some little time before or after the meal is all
that nature requires. Never take tea, coffee, beer, wine,
or any spirituous liquors. Water is the best liquid possible to cleanse the tissues.” R&H, 7/29/1884.

DANIEL 1:15,16
And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh
than all the children which did eat the portion of the king’s meat.
Thus Melzar took away the portion of
their meat, and the wine that they should
drink; and gave them pulse.

“God gave Daniel ‘knowledge and skill in all
learning and wisdom.’ Daniel 1:17. His blessing attended the man who put forth human effort in accordance with the divine will. The same help will
still be given to all who pursue a similar course, and
with the glory of God in view practice abstinence
and self-restraint. The same difference will be seen
between them and the self-indulgent that there was
between Daniel and his fellows and the other youth in
the king’s court. There will be the clear eye and complexion, the firm tread, the strength and vigor of intellect, the keen perception of spiritual truth.” Our High
Calling, 244.

At the End of Ten Days.—
“At the end of the ten days the result was found to
be quite the opposite of Melzar’s expectations. Not
only in personal appearance, but in physical activity
and mental vigor, those who had been temperate in
their habits exhibited a marked superiority over
their companions who had indulged appetite. As a
result of this trial, Daniel and his associates were permitted to continue their simple diet during the whole
course of their training for the duties of the kingdom.”
Sanctified Life, 22.

“The powers of the youth are mostly dormant, because they do not make the fear of God the beginning
of wisdom. The Lord gave Daniel wisdom and
knowledge, because he would not be influenced by
any power that would interfere with his religious
principles. The reason why we have so few men of
mind, of stability and solid worth, is that they think to
find greatness while disconnecting from Heaven.”
Messages to Young People, 256.

DANIEL 1:17
As for these four children, God gave
them knowledge and skill in all learning
and wisdom: and Daniel had understand-

“As in the case of Daniel, in exact proportion as
the spiritual character is developed, the intellectual

27

GEMS FROM DANIEL
capabilities are increased.” R&H, March 22, 1898.

and will bless them with a clear mind.” Medical Ministry, 276.

How Daniel Studied.—
“Dear young friends, are you prepared to behold
the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the
world? to say, as did Nathaniel, ‘Thou art the Son of
God; thou art the King of Israel’? You would do well
to contemplate this sacred and eternal truth most earnestly and prayerfully, until your whole being becomes
imbued with its greatness. We are too apt to view
truths as a whole, and see only the surface, when, if we
would ponder them, pray over them, and put to the
stretch every mental power, we might understand;
for God would give us wisdom, as he did to Daniel.
Our spiritual senses would be quickened to understand
the deep things of God.” Youth Instructor, 2/11/1897

“They should be temperate in eating; rich and
luxurious food should find no place upon their tables;
and when the brain is constantly taxed and there is a
lack of physical exercise, they should eat sparingly,
even of plain food. Daniel’s clearness of mind and
firmness of purpose, his strength of intellect in acquiring knowledge, were due in a great degree to
the plainness of his diet in connection with his life of
prayer.” 4 Testimonies, 515,516.
“Of all the positions of importance in that college, the first is that of the one who is employed to
direct in the preparation of the dishes to be placed
before the hungry students; for if this work is neglected, the mind will not be prepared to do its work,
because the stomach has been treated unwisely and
cannot do its work properly. Strong minds are needed.
The human intellect must gain expansion and vigor and
acuteness and activity. It must be taxed to do hard
work, or it will become weak and inefficient. Brain
power is required to think most earnestly; it must be
put to the stretch to solve hard problems and master
them, else the mind decreases in power and aptitude to
think. The mind must invent, work, and wrestle, in
order to give hardness and vigor to the intellect; and if
the physical organs are not in the most healthful condition by substantial, nourishing food, the brain does not
receive its portion of nutrition to work. Daniel understood this, and he brought himself to a plain, simple,
nutritious diet, and refused the luxuries of the king’s
table.” Fundamentals of Christian Education, 226,227.

“Take the Bible as a study book, and see if you
are not filled with the love of God. Your heart may
be barren, your intellect feeble; but if you will
prayerfully study the word of God, light will flash
into your mind. God works with every diligent student. Teachers who will learn from the Great Teacher
will realize the help of God as did Daniel and his fellows, of whom the record states, [Daniel 1:17 quoted].”
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, & Students, 455,456.
Diet, a Factor in Wisdom.-“ ‘Give us this day our daily bread.’ ‘Man shall
not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.’ Mt. 6:11;4:4. Daniel and his three friends made their choice to daily
eat the Word of God—to hide it in their heart. As a
result of that choice they had power in the area of
appetite to choose the best physical diet—a simple
plant-based diet with water. As a result, God gave
wisdom to Daniel and his three companions.
“Daniel 12:3,10 tells us that God’s people in the
last days will also be wise. ‘None of the wicked shall
understand; but the wise shall understand.’ Dan. 12:10.
They, like Daniel, will have power to overcome in the
area of appetite. They will choose a vegan diet like
Daniel’s in preparation for translation to heaven, where
there will be no meat-eating. God will give His lastday people wisdom as He did Daniel, for their choice
of spiritual and physical food.” PJ

“The youth are surrounded by allurements addressed to the appetite. . . . Those who, like Daniel,
refuse to defile themselves, will reap the reward of
their temperate habits. With their greater physical
stamina and increased power of endurance, they have a
bank of deposit upon which to draw in case of emergency.
“Right physical habits promote mental superiority. Intellectual power, physical strength, and longevity, depend upon immutable laws. There is no happen-so, no chance, about this matter. The higher powers will not interfere to preserve men from the consequences of the violation of nature’s laws.
“The question with every youth ... should be,
Shall I consult my inclination, and indulge my appetite,
or shall I follow the dictates of conscience, and keep
my head clear and preserve my physical powers by
abstaining from every practice that would bring weakness upon them? Shall I fall a prey to the customs of
the world,... or shall I separate myself from every custom that is debasing in its results? Shall I not honor
God, rather than please the world?...
“Daniel and his fellows realized that principle
was at stake, and that they could afford to make no

“Why did Daniel and his companions refuse to
eat at the king’s table? Why did they refuse his meats
and wines? Because they had been taught that this
class of food would not keep the mind and the physical structure in the very best condition of health to
do God’s service....
“In the light of this Scripture history, all the testimony of man as to the advantages of a meat diet, or
of a great variety of food, should not have the least
weight with any human being. When the children of
faith shall with earnest prayer dedicate themselves to
God without reserve, the Lord will honor their faith

28

DANIEL 1
compromise with the tempter. The light and truth reflected from the throne of God were dearer to them
than any honor that men could bestow. It is the privilege of the young people of today to be as firm and
true, as modest and successful, as were the Jewish
youths in the kingdom of Babylon.... God honored
Daniel, and He will honor every youth who takes the
course that Daniel took in honoring God.” Our High
Calling, 269.

graduated and stood ‘before the king,’ and the year
in which he interpreted the dream.
“By applying the commonly used ancient method
of inclusive reckoning, which is attested in numerous
cases as the usual way of counting time, there is no
need to assert, as modern commentators have done,
that ch. 1 stands chronologically in contradiction to ch.
2….” 4SDABC, 761,762.
“Another biblical example of this can be found in
2 Kings 18:9-11 where the siege of Samaria began in
the fourth year of Hezekiah and ended in his sixth year,
which was ‘at the end of three years’ (2 Kings 18:10).
Thus Daniel’s three years of schooling may not have
been three full years of twelve months each.” Shea,
DARG, 43,44.

DANIEL 1:18-20
Now at the end of the days that the
king had said he should bring them in, then
the prince of the eunuchs brought them in
before Nebuchadnezzar.
And the king communed with them;
and among them all was found none like
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:
therefore stood they before the king.
And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king enquired of
them, he found them ten times better than
all the magicians and astrologers that were
in all his realm.

They Stood Before the King.—
“God brought Daniel and his associates into connection with the great men of Babylon, that in the
midst of a nation of idolaters they might represent His
character. How did they become fitted for a position
of so great trust and honor? It was faithfulness in
little things that gave complexion to their whole life.
They honored God in the smallest duties, as well as in
the larger responsibilities.
“As God called Daniel to witness for Him in
Babylon, so He calls us to be His witnesses in the
world today. In the smallest as well as the largest
affairs of life, He desires us to reveal to men the principles of His kingdom. Many are waiting for some
great work to be brought to them, while daily they lose
opportunities for revealing faithfulness to God. Daily
they fail of discharging with wholeheartedness the
little duties of life. While they wait for some large
work in which they may exercise supposedly great talents, and thus satisfy their ambitious longings, their
days pass away.
“In the life of the true Christian there are no nonessentials; in the sight of Omnipotence every duty is
important. The Lord measures with exactness every
possibility for service. The unused capabilities are just
as much brought into account as those that are used.
We shall be judged by what we ought to have done, but
did not accomplish because we did not use our powers
to glorify God.” Prophets & Kings, 487,488.

At the End of the Days They Stood before the King.—
“The young apprentices were to be trained three
years in order to ‘stand before the king’ (ch. 1:5); and
it was ‘at the end of the days specified that they were
brought before the king for examination. Then ‘stood
they before the king.’ This statement indicates that the
three-year training period ended before the king examined them and ‘found’ that Daniel and his three friends
were better than all the other candidates. This could
hardly have taken place after one of them, Daniel, had
already received high honors and had been promoted to
the rule of the province and supervision over all the
wise men, and after the other three had been given high
office (ch.2:46-49). The logical sequence, as well as
the narrative order, requires that Daniel’s threeyear course end before Nebuchadnezzar’s dream in
his 2nd year.
“All this leads to the conclusion that this was not
a period of 36 months; that these years must be
counted inclusively; they represent (1) Nebuchadnezzar’s accession year, in which the Hebrew captives
arrived in Babylon and entered their training; (2) Nebuchadnezzar’s year 1, which was the calendar year beginning at the next New Year’s Day after his accession;
and (3) Nebuchadnezzar’s year 2, in which Daniel

The King Communed With Them.—
“To Daniel alone seems to have been committed
an understanding in visions and dreams. But the
Lord’s dealing with Daniel in this respect does not
prove his companions any less accepted in His sight.
By their preservation in the midst of the fiery furnace
they had equally good evidence of the divine favor.
Daniel probably had some natural qualifications that
peculiarly fitted him for this special work.
“The same personal interest in these individuals
heretofore manifested by the king, he still continued to
maintain. At the end of the three years, he called them

29

GEMS FROM DANIEL
to a personal interview. He must know for himself
how they had fared, and to what proficiency they had
attained. This interview also shows the king to have
been a man well versed in all the arts and sciences
of the Chaldeans, else he would not have been qualified to examine others in them. Recognizing merit
where he saw it without respect to religion or nationality, he acknowledged them to be ten times superior to
any in his own land.” Smith, DR, 25,27.

Ten Times Better.—
“O how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the
day. Thou through thy commandments hast made
me wiser than mine enemies: for they are ever with
me. I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy
precepts. I have refrained my feet from every evil
way, that I might keep thy word. I have not departed
from thy judgments: for thou hast taught me. How
sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than
honey to my mouth! Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way.” Psalm
119: 97-104.

In All Matters of Wisdom.—
“Read the Old and New Testaments with a contrite heart. Read them prayerfully and faithfully, pleading that the Holy Spirit will give you understanding.
Daniel searched the portion of the Old Testament
which he had at his command, and made the word
of God his highest instructor. At the same time he
improved the opportunities that were given him to
become intelligent in all lines of learning. His companions did the same, and we read: ‘In all matters of
wisdom and understanding, that the king inquired of
them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm.’” Fundamentals of Christian Education, 357,358.

“The number ten is often used in the Bible to
indicate a general rather than a specific number. It
may be used to indicate much or many. See Gen. 31:7;
Numb. 14:22; Neh. 4:12. In Job 19:3 it is definitely
used as a round number, as a count of the speeches
reveals. In Christ’s parables the number ten is often
employed, with ten virgins (Mt. 25:1); ten pieces of
silver (Luke. 15:8); ten servants who were entrusted
with ten pounds (Luke. 19:13). For the sake of ten
righteous persons God would have spared Sodom (Gen
18:32).” Thiele, OSID, 28.

“The manner of examination is not indicated.
From a later description of Daniel’s abilities given by
Belshazzar’s mother, who was probably a daughter of
Nebuchadnezzar, we learn that Daniel was known to
her as a man able to ‘explain riddles, and solve problems’ (Dan.5:12, RSV). The questions asked may have
required the explanation of riddles, which has always
been a favored sport in the court life of Oriental countries. The examination also may have included the
solving of mathematical and astronomical problems, in which the Babylonians were masters, as
their documents reveal, or a demonstration of ability to read and write the difficult cuneiform script.”
“The superior wisdom of Daniel and his youthful
companions was not the result of chance or destiny, or
even of a miracle, as that word is usually understood.
The young men applied themselves diligently and conscientiously to their studies, and God blessed their endeavors. True success in any undertaking is assured
when divine and human effort are combined. Human
effort alone avails nothing; likewise divine power
does not render human cooperation unnecessary.”
4SDABC, 762.

Ten Times Better Than All.—
“At the court of Babylon were gathered representatives from all lands, men of the choicest talents,
men the most richly endowed with natural gifts and
possessed of the highest culture this world could bestow; yet amid them all the Hebrew captives were
without a peer. In physical strength and beauty, in
mental vigor and literary attainments, and in spiritual power and insight they stood unrivaled. [Dan.
1:20 quoted.]” 6 Testimonies, 220.
“Their keen comprehension, their wide
knowledge, their choice and exact language, testified
to the unimpaired strength and vigor of their mental
powers. ‘In all matters of wisdom and understanding,
that the king inquired of them, he found them ten times
better than all the magicians and astrologers that were
in all his realm;’ ‘therefore stood they before the king.’
“At the court of Babylon were gathered representatives from all lands, men of the highest talent,
men the most richly endowed with natural gifts, and
possessed of the broadest culture that the world could
bestow; yet among them all, the Hebrew youth were
without a peer. In physical strength and beauty, in
mental vigor and literary attainment, they stood unrivaled. The erect form, the firm, elastic step, the fair
countenance, the undimmed senses, the untainted
breath—all were so many certificates of good habits, insignia of the nobility with which nature honors
those who are obedient to her laws.
“In acquiring the wisdom of the Babylonians,
Daniel and his companions were far more successful

“If they [students] were like Daniel, hearers and
doers of the word of God, they would advance as he
did in all branches of learning they entered upon. Being pure minded, they would become strong minded.
Every intellectual faculty would be sharpened. Let the
Bible be received as the only food for the soul, as it
is the very best and most effectual for the purifying
and strengthening of the intellect.” Fundamentals of
Christian Education, 379,380.

30

DANIEL 1
than their fellow students; but their learning did not
come by chance. They obtained their knowledge by
the faithful use of their powers, under the guidance of
the Holy Spirit. They placed themselves in connection
with the Source of all wisdom, making the knowledge
of God the foundation of their education. In faith they
prayed for wisdom, and they lived their prayers. They
placed themselves where God could bless them. They
avoided that which would weaken their powers, and
improved every opportunity to become intelligent in
all lines of learning. They followed the rules of life
that could not fail to give them strength of intellect.
They sought to acquire knowledge for one purpose—
that they might honor God. They realized that in order
to stand as representatives of true religion amid the
false religions of heathenism they must have clearness
of intellect and must perfect a Christian character. And
God Himself was their teacher. Constantly praying,
conscientiously studying, keeping in touch with the
Unseen, they walked with God as did Enoch.
“True success in any line of work is not the result
of chance or accident or destiny. It is the outworking
of God’s providences, the reward of faith and discretion, of virtue and perseverance. Fine mental qualities
and a high moral tone are not the result of accident.
God gives opportunities; success depends upon the use
made of them.
“While God was working in Daniel and his companions ‘to will and to do of His good pleasure,’ they
were working out their own salvation. Philippians 2:13.
Herein is revealed the outworking of the divine
principle of co-operation, without which no true
success can be attained. Human effort avails nothing without divine power; and without human endeavor, divine effort is with many of no avail. To
make God’s grace our own, we must act our part. His
grace is given to work in us to will and to do, but never
as a substitute for our effort.” Prophets & Kings, 485487.

work out our own salvation. This is the practical lesson the Holy Spirit is striving to teach us.” Youth Instructor, 8/20/1903.
Daniel’s Experience For Those in the Last Days.—
“The character of Daniel is referred to by Ezekiel, who was a contemporaneous prophet, as representing those who will live just before the second
coming of Christ. People will be called to pass
through experiences which require the keenest spiritual
eyesight; therefore God asks them to give up all things
which will in any way check the flow of the Holy Spirit
through the mind. Herein lies the reason for strict
adherence to the principles of health reform. Daniel
and his companions gained the victory on the point of
appetite. This was the avenue, and the only one,
through which Satan was permitted to tempt Adam;
and, had Adam proved true in the garden of Eden, and
not eaten of the forbidden fruit, sin and suffering would
never have been known. Appetite was the open door
through which came all the results of sin, which, for six
thousand years, have been so manifest in the human
family.
“As Christ entered upon the work of his ministry,
he began where Adam fell. The first temptation in the
wilderness was on the point of appetite. Here the Saviour bridged the gulf which sin had made. He redeemed the whole family of Adam, and wrought out a
victory for the benefit of all who are thus tempted. In
the last days God will prove his people as he proved
Daniel. A voluntary self-control of appetite lies at the
foundation of every reform.
“It means much to be true to God. It embraces
health reform. It means that the diet must be simple; it calls for the exercise of temperance in all
things.
“Too great a variety of food taken at the same
meal is highly injurious; and yet, how often this is forgotten. Mind and body are to be preserved in the best
condition of health. Only those who have been trained
in the fear and knowledge of God, and who are true to
principle, are fitted to bear responsibilities in the closing work of the gospel.” Haskell, SDP, 23,24.

“When the four Hebrew youth were receiving an
education for the king’s court in Babylon, they did not
feel that the blessing of the Lord was a substitute
for the taxing effort required of them. They were
diligent in study; for they discerned that through
the grace of God their destiny depended upon their
own will and action. They were to bring all their
ability to the work; and by close, severe taxation of
their powers, they were to make the most of their
opportunities for study and labor.
“While these youth were working out their own
salvation, God was working in them to will and to do
of His good pleasure. Here are revealed the conditions
of success. To make God’s grace our own, we must
act our part. The Lord does not propose to perform
for us either the willing or the doing. His grace is
given to work in us to will and to do, but never as a
substitute for our effort. Our souls are to be aroused
to cooperate. The Holy Spirit works in us, that we may

“God wants men to cultivate force of character.
Those who are merely timeservers are not the ones who
will receive a rich reward by and by. He wants those
who labor in His cause to be men of keen feeling and
quick perception. They should be temperate in eating;
rich and luxurious food should find no place upon their
tables; and when the brain is constantly taxed, and
there is a lack of physical exercise, they should eat
sparingly, even of plain food. Daniel’s clearness of
mind and firmness of purpose, his strength of intellect in acquiring knowledge, were due in a great
degree to the plainness of his diet, in connection
with his life of prayer.” 4 Testimonies, 515,516.
“What a privilege it is to labor for the conversion

31

GEMS FROM DANIEL
of souls! Our calling is high.... To fit us to do this
work, He will strengthen our mental faculties as
verily as He did the mind of Daniel. As we teach
those in darkness to understand the truths that have
enlightened us, God will teach us to understand these
truths still better ourselves. He will give us apt words
to speak, communicating to us through the angel
standing by our side.” Manuscript 126, 1902. Evangelism, 172.

erect form, the firm, elastic step, the fair countenance,
the undimmed senses, the untainted breath—all were
so many certificates of good habits—insignia of the
nobility with which nature honors those who are obedient to her laws.
“The history of Daniel and his companions has
been recorded on the pages of the Inspired Word for
the benefit of the youth of all succeeding ages. What
men have done, men may do. Did those youthful
Hebrews stand firm amid great temptations, and bear a
noble testimony in favor of true temperance? The
youth of today may bear a similar testimony.
“The lesson here presented is one which we
would do well to ponder. Our danger is not from
scarcity, but from abundance. We are constantly
tempted to excess. Those who would preserve their
powers unimpaired for the service of God, must observe strict temperance in the use of His bounties, as
well as total abstinence from every injurious or debasing indulgence.
“The rising generation are surrounded with allurements calculated to tempt the appetite. Especially
in our large cities, every form of indulgence is made
easy and inviting. Those who, like Daniel, refuse to
defile themselves, will reap the reward of their temperate habits. With their greater physical stamina
and increased power of endurance, they have a
bank of deposit upon which to draw in case of
emergency.
“Right physical habits promote mental superiority. Intellectual power, physical strength, and longevity depend upon immutable laws. There is no happen-so, no chance, about this matter. Nature’s God
will not interfere to preserve men from the consequences of violating nature’s laws. There is much sterling truth in the adage, ‘Every man is the architect of
his own fortune.’ While parents are responsible for the
stamp of character, as well as for the education and
training, of their sons and daughters, it is still true that
our position and usefulness in the world depend, to a
great degree, upon our own course of action. Daniel
and his companions enjoyed the benefits of correct
training and education in early life, but these advantages alone would not have made them what they
were. The time came when they must act for themselves—when their future depended upon their own
course. Then they decided to be true to the lessons
given them in childhood. The fear of God, which is
the beginning of wisdom, was the foundation of
their greatness. His Spirit strengthened every true
purpose, every noble resolution.” Counsels on Diet
and Food, 28, 29.

Strict Temperance a Necessity.—
“The life of Daniel is an inspired illustration of
what constitutes a sanctified character. It presents a
lesson for all, and especially for the young. A strict
compliance with the requirements of God is beneficial
to the health of body and mind. In order to reach the
highest standard of moral and intellectual attainments,
it is necessary to seek wisdom and strength from
God and to observe strict temperance in all the habits of life. In the experience of Daniel and his companions we have an instance of the triumph of principle
over temptation to indulge the appetite. It shows us
that through religious principle young men may triumph over the lusts of the flesh and remain true to
God’s requirements, even though it cost them a great
sacrifice.
“What if Daniel and his companions had made a
compromise with those heathen officers and had yielded to the pressure of the occasion by eating and drinking as was customary with the Babylonians? That
single instance of departure from principle would
have weakened their sense of right and their abhorrence of wrong. Indulgence of appetite would have
involved the sacrifice of physical vigor, clearness of
intellect, and spiritual power. One wrong step would
probably have led to others, until, their connection
with Heaven being severed, they would have been
swept away by temptation.
“God has said, ‘Them that honour me I will honour’ (1 Samuel 2:30). While Daniel clung to his God
with unwavering trust, the Spirit of prophetic power
came upon him. While he was instructed of man in the
duties of court life, he was taught of God to read the
mysteries of future ages and to present to coming generations, through figures and similitudes, the wonderful
things that would come to pass in the last days.” Sanctified Life, 23,24.
“In order rightly to understand the subject of temperance, we must consider it from a Bible standpoint;
and nowhere can we find a more comprehensive and
forcible illustration of true temperance and its attendant
blessings, than is afforded by the history of the prophet
Daniel and his Hebrew associates in the court of Babylon....
“God always honors the right. The most promising youth from all the lands subdued by the great conqueror had been gathered at Babylon, yet amid them
all, the Hebrew captives were without a rival. The

“The efforts of our temperance workers are not
sufficiently far-reaching to banish the curse of intemperance from our land. Habits once formed are hard to
overcome. The reform should begin with the mother
before the birth of her children; and if God’s instructions were faithfully obeyed, intemperance would

32

DANIEL 1
servant of God, outlasted the kingdom of Babylon.
There is a lesson here. Israel was no more a kingdom,
and would never again be one. God’s kingdom for the
rest of human history was now spiritual and composed
of righteous individuals. This is shown by the following words of Daniel’s contemporary, Ezekiel:
“Son of man, when the land sinneth against me by
trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out mine
hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off
man and beast from it: Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver
but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the
Lord GOD.’ Ezekiel 14:13,14.
“Jesus said the same thing: ‘Neither shall they
say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of
God is within you.’ Luke 17:21.” PJ

not exist.
“It should be the constant effort of every mother
to conform her habits to God’s will, that she may work
in harmony with Him to preserve her children from the
health and life destroying vices of the present day. Let
mothers place themselves without delay in right relations to their Creator, that they may by His assisting
grace build around their children a bulwark against
dissipation and intemperance. If mothers would but
follow such a course, they might see their children, like
the youthful Daniel, reach a high standard in moral and
intellectual attainments, becoming a blessing to society
and an honor to their Creator.” Counsels of Diet &
Foods, 225,226.
“These youth had the Lord as their educator. The
golden links of the chain of heaven connected the finite
with the infinite. They were partakers of the divine
nature. They were very careful to keep themselves in
touch with God. They prayed and studied and brought
into their practical life strictly conscientious, humble
minds.... The word of the Lord was their meat and
their drink. ‘And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them
ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers....’
“When the children of faith shall with earnest
prayer dedicate themselves to God without reserve, the
Lord will honor their faith, and will bless them with a
clear mind....
“The very flesh in which the soul tabernacles, and
through which it works, is the Lord’s. We have no
right to neglect any part of the living machinery. Every
portion of the living organism is the Lord’s. The
knowledge of our own physical organism should teach
us that every member is to do God’s service, as an instrument of righteousness.-- Special Testimonies, Series A, No. 9, pp. 60-62.” Reflecting Christ, 143.

The First Year of King Cyrus.—
“Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he
began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.
12 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the
LORD his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the
LORD. 13 And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he
stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning
unto the LORD God of Israel. 14 Moreover all the
chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed
very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the LORD which he
had hallowed in Jerusalem. 15 And the LORD God
of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising
up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion
on his people, and on his dwelling place: 16 But they
mocked the messengers of God, and despised his
words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of
the LORD arose against his people, till there was no
remedy. 17 Therefore he brought upon them the king
of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the
sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him
that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.
18 And all the vessels of the house of God, great and
small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and
the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all these he
brought to Babylon. 19 And they burnt the house of
God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt
all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the
goodly vessels thereof. 20 And them that had escaped
from the sword carried he away to Babylon; where they
were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the
kingdom of Persia: 21 To fulfill the word of the
LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had
enjoyed her sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate
she kept sabbath, to fulfill threescore and ten years.
“22 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD spoken by the
mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the

DANIEL 1:21
And Daniel continued even unto the
first year of king Cyrus.
Daniel Continued to First Year of King Cyrus.—
“ ‘Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in
the reign of Cyrus the Persian.’ [Dan.6:28.] And
through association with him, these heathen monarchs
were constrained to acknowledge his God as ‘the living
God, and steadfast forever, and His kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed.’” Prophets & Kings,
545.
“From the time he was taken captive to the time
of Cyrus’s first year, would be 606 to 534 BC, a period
of 72 years.
“While the kingdom of Babylon lasted a mere
seventy years, the lifetime of a man, Daniel, a humble

33

GEMS FROM DANIEL
LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that
he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom,
and put it also in writing, saying,
“23 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD God of heaven given
me; and he hath charged me to build him an house
in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there
among you of all his people? The LORD his God be
with him, and let him go up.” 2 Chron. 36:11-23.

vocabulary some of the Persian words he used in the
composition of his book.” 4SDABC, 763,764.
Cyrus, a Type of Christ.—
“28 That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd,
and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy
foundation shall be laid.
1 Thus saith the LORD to his anointed [same
word as ‘Messiah’], to Cyrus, whose right hand I have
holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose
the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved
gates; and the gates shall not be shut;
2 I will go before thee, and make the crooked
places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass,
and cut in sunder the bars of iron:
3 And I will give thee the treasures of darkness,
and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest
know that I, the LORD, which call thee by thy
name, am the God of Israel.
4 For Jacob my servant’s sake, and Israel mine
elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me.
5 I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is
no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast
not known me:
6 That they may know from the rising of the sun,
and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am
the LORD, and there is none else.” Isaiah 44:28-45:6.

“ ‘Cyrus, he is my shepherd,’ the Lord declared,
‘and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy
foundation shall be laid.’ ‘I have raised him up in
righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall
build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not
for price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts.’
“The year that Cyrus succeeded Darius the
Mede to the throne of Medo-Persia marked the
completion of seventy years since the first company
of Hebrews had been carried captive to Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar. Daniel, who was familiar with the
prophecies of Jeremiah and Isaiah regarding the duration of the captivity, and with the prophecies of Isaiah
regarding the restoration by decree of Cyrus, was still
living, and was occupying a position of leading responsibility in the Medo-Persian court. His faith in these
prophecies led him to plead with God in behalf of his
people. And now, when the time came for the temple
in Jerusalem to be rebuilt, God moved upon Cyrus as
his agent to discern the prophecies concerning himself, and to grant the Jewish people their liberty. And
furthermore, Cyrus furnished them the necessary
facilities for rebuilding the temple of the Lord.”
R&H, 3/28,1907.

“Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia,
that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit
of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation
throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing,
saying,
Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The LORD God
of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth;
and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
Who is there among you of all his people? his
God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem,
which is in Judah, and build the house of the LORD
God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem.
And whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver,
and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, beside
the freewill offering for the house of God that is in
Jerusalem.” Ezra 1:1-4.

“Daniel lived all the days of the Babylonish captivity—over seventy years—and had the pleasure of
knowing that Cyrus, whose name the prophet Isaiah
had mentioned nearly two hundred years before he
had issued his wonderful decree for the deliverance of
God’s people.” Haskell, SDP, 27.
No Contradiction.—
“There is an apparent contradiction between this
verse and the statement of ch.10:1 that Daniel received
a vision in the 3rd year of Cyrus. But the text does not
necessarily imply that Daniel’s life did not extend
beyond the 1st year of Cyrus. …Daniel may have
desired to inform his readers that though he had been
carried away in the first captivity, he was still alive at
the time the Exile ended about 70 years later. Also, the
conclusion seems warranted that ch.1 and perhaps
also some of the other chapters were not written
until the 1st year of Cyrus. Such a date explains the
use of loan words from the Persian. Daniel again occupied an official position, under the Persian rule,
shortly after the fall of Babylon (Dan. 6:1,2), and from
his contact with Persian officials doubtless added to his

“Cyrus is a type of Christ, the ‘Shepherd’, the
‘Anointed.’ Daniel not only would continue to the
first year of king Cyrus, but would also stand in his lot
at the end of the days. ‘But go thou thy way till the end
be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of
the days.’ Dan 12:13. Like Cyrus, Jesus will cause the
symbolic Euphrates River to dry up to prepare the way
for the coming of the kings of the east. God’s people
are commanded to eat the book of Daniel to prepare for

34

DANIEL 1
this time. Revelation 10:8,9. Thus Daniel will continue even unto the first year of the anti-typical king Cyrus—the king Jesus.” PJ

35

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER TWO
1 And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep brake from him.
2 Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the
king his dreams. So they came and stood before the king.
3 And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and
my spirit was troubled to know the dream.
4 Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live
for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation.
5 The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is
gone from me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream,
with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your
houses shall be made a dunghill.
6 But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye
shall receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore
shew me the dream, and the interpretation thereof.
7 They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants
the dream, and we will shew the interpretation of it.
8 The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye
would gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.
9 But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is
but one decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt
words to speak before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell
me the dream, and I shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.
10 The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is
not a man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at
any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean.
11 And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is
none other that can shew it before the king, except the gods,
whose dwelling is not with flesh. [Babylonian religion believed
that gods would not dwell in sinful flesh.]
12 For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and
commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
13 And the decree went forth that the wise men should be
slain; and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.
14 Then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch
the captain of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the
wise men of Babylon:
15 He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, Why is
the decree so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing
known to Daniel.
16 Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would
give him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.
17 Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known
to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:
18 That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret; that Daniel and his fellows should not perish
with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
19 Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision.
Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
20 Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for
ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his:
21 And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth
kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding:
22 He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is
in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.
23 I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers,
who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known
unto me now what we desired of thee: for thou hast now made
known unto us the king’s matter.

24 Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had
ordained to destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and said
thus unto him; Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in
before the king, and I will shew unto the king the interpretation.
25 Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and
said thus unto him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah,
that will make known unto the king the interpretation.
26 The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was
Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known unto me the dream
which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?
27 Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The
secret which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men, the
astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king;
28 But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and
maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the
latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed,
are these;
29 As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon
thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.
30 But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that
shall make known the interpretation to the king, and that thou
mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.
31 Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great
image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the
form thereof was terrible.
32 This image’s head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms
of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,
33 His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.
34 Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands [no
human devising, and not by the will of the flesh], which smote the
image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to
pieces.
35 Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the
gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the
summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that
no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image
became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.
36 This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof
before the king.
37 Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven
hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.
38 And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of
the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine
hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head
of gold. [Babylon 608-538 BC]
39 And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee
[Medo-Persia 538-330 BC], and another third kingdom of brass
[Greece 330-168 BC], which shall bear rule over all the earth.
40 And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron [Pagan
Rome 168 BC-476 AD]: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and
subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it
break in pieces and bruise.
41 And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters’
clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided [390-476
AD]; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay.
42 And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of
clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.
43 And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they
shall mingle themselves with the seed of men [men’s religious
traditions, statecraft and church—a union of church and states]:
but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed
with clay.
44 And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set

36

DANIEL 2
up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom
shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and
consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.
45 Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the
brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made
known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the
dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.
46 Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him.

47 The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is,
that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.
48 Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him
many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of
Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise men of
Babylon.
49 Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel sat in the gate of the king.

INTRODUCTION

der that one descends the steps on the other side, A:
B: C: C: B: A. The technical name for this order of
writing is a chiasm. This word comes from the name
of the Greek letter chi which looks something like an
X. …It is organization based on inversion or a mirror
image. What we have here in Daniel is a relatively
simple chiasm based upon thematic links between two
stories of a similar nature.
“…Daniel is not the small, insignificant work of
an unimportant editor; this is the work, under God, of a
literary artist, and we need to recognize his skill.
“…Chapter 7 belongs with chapter 2, the two are
a pair. And that pair forms a frame around the other
four chapters that have been paired together. Thus the
historical chapters are all a unit, a package, and the fact
that they were also all written in the same Aramaic
language emphasizes that point.” Shea, DARG, 28-31.

“The chapters written in Aramaic—chapters 2
through 7—exhibit a specific literary order. These
six chapters stand apart from the rest of the book on the
basis of the language used. They also stand apart in
terms of literary structure—the way they are ordered
within their own section. These chapters are clearly
related to each other in pairs based on content. Chapters 2 and 7 form one pair; both chapters are outline
prophecies that deal with the rise and fall of kingdoms
over great portions of human history.
“Likewise, chapters 3 and 6 are also similar in
content. Chapter 3 describes the persecution of Daniel’s three friends in the fiery furnace; chapter 6 describes Daniel’s own persecution in the lions’ den. In
both cases God’s servants suffer trials of their faith,
and in both cases they are supernaturally delivered
from these trials.
“This leaves chapters 4 and 5 standing together as
a pair within the Aramaic and historical portion of the
book. These chapters also deal with the same subject—an individual Babylonian king. In chapter 4, it is
Nebuchadnezzar who is in view. In chapter 5, it is
Belshazzar. Both of these narratives begin with a local
setting—Nebuchadnezzar in his palace, and Belshazzar
in that same palace. Both of these kings had become
cases of vaunted ego, and both were judged by the true
God. In both instances, their judgments came in the
form of prophecies which were subsequently fulfilled.
Daniel was present to interpret both of these prophecies….
“Thus the narratives of the Aramaic and historical
section of the book of Daniel line up according to thematic pairs along the following kind of outline:
A.
Daniel 2—prophecy about the rise and fall of
kingdoms.
B.
Daniel 3—narrative about the persecution of
Daniel’s friends.
C.
Daniel 4—prophecy about fall and rise of
King Nebuchadnezzar.
C.
Daniel 5—prophecy about the fall of King
Belshazzar.
B.
Daniel 6—narrative about the persecution of
Daniel.
A.
Daniel 7—prophecy about the rise and fall of
kingdoms.
“Such an outline is like a step ladder with steps
on both sides in which one ascends in the same or-

DANIEL 2:1
And in the second year of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar
Nebuchadnezzar
dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was
troubled, and his sleep brake from him.
The Second Year of the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar.—
“Daniel was carried into captivity in the first year
of Nebuchadnezzar. For three years he was placed under instructors, during which time he would not of
course be reckoned among the wise men of the kingdom, nor take part in public affairs. Yet in the second
year of Nebuchadnezzar, the transactions recorded in
this chapter took place. How, then, could Daniel be
brought in to interpret the king’s dream in his second
year? The explanation lies in the fact that Nebuchadnezzar reigned for two years conjointly with his father,
Nabopolassar. From this point the Jews reckoned,
while the Chaldeans reckoned from the time he began
to reign alone on the death of his father. Hence, the
year here mentioned was the second year of his reign
according to the Chaldean reckoning, but the fourth
according to the Jewish. It thus appears that the next
year after Daniel had completed his preparation to participate in the affairs of the Chaldean empire, the providence of God brought him into sudden and remarkable
prominence throughout the kingdom. [See Adam Clarke,
Commentary on the Old Testament, Vol. IV, pp. 564, 567,

37

GEMS FROM DANIEL
notes on Daniel 1: 1; 2: 1; Thomas Newton, Dissertations on
the Prophecies, Vol. I, p. 231; Albert Barnes, Notes on Daniel, pp. 111,112, comment on Daniel 2:1.]” Smith, DR, 29.

The King’s Wise Men [Religious Leaders] Called.—
“In Daniel 4:7 and 5:11, this list includes the
soothsayers, but does not mention the sorcerers. All
these classes were basically religious groups—men
who were attached to the occult activities of Babylonian religion. The reason why Daniel and his companions were not now brought before the king was because they did not belong to such groups as magicians, exorcists, astrologers, soothsayers, wizards, enchanters or diviners who were deeply engrossed in the
occult activities which played so prominent a part in
the religion of Babylon. The Hebrews did not engage
in the spiritualistic activities which brought these idolaters closely in touch with the evil one, but they did
keep themselves in close contact with the only true
God.” Thiele, OSID, 30.

“He [Nebuchadnezzar] had ruled two years conjointly with his father, Nabopolassar, and two years
alone; so Daniel and his fellows were serving their first
year as wise men in the court of Babylon, having finished their three-years’ course in the schools.”
Haskell, SDP, 31.
“For another explanation of how the three years
of Daniel’s training (ch. 1:15,18) were completed before the end of the king’s 2nd year, see on ch. 1:18.” PJ
Nebuchadnezzar Dreamed Dreams.—
“In the same year that Daniel and his companions entered the service of the king of Babylon
events occurred that severely tested the integrity of
these youthful Hebrews and proved before an idolatrous nation the power and faithfulness of the God of
Israel. While King Nebuchadnezzar was looking
forward with anxious forebodings to the future, he
had a remarkable dream, by which he was greatly
troubled, ‘and his sleep brake from him’ (Daniel 2:1).
But although this vision of the night made a deep impression on his mind, he found it impossible to recall
the particulars.” Sanctified Life, 34.

“All these sects or professions abounded in Babylon. The result desired by each was the same—the
explaining of mysteries and foretelling of events—
the principal difference between them being the means
by which they sought to accomplish their object.
The king’s difficulty lay equally within the province of
each to explain; hence he summoned them all. With
the king it was an important matter. He was greatly
troubled, and therefore concentrated upon the solution
of his perplexity the wisdom of his realm.” Smith, DR,
30.

“The Babylonians attached great importance to
dreams, especially when given to a king. He was Pontifex Maximus—the leading priest of the gods of Babylon. A test of religions would ensue. The Babylonians had boasted that their gods were superior. Their
victory over Israel had proved this. God had sent Israel
to Babylon as a witness for Him.” Burnside, DPUF,
37.

The Religion of Babylon.—
“The religion of the Babylonians was the outgrowth of the counterfeit system of worship introduced by Satan through Cain before the Deluge,
and revived by Nimrod after the Flood. Babylon
with its religion was founded by Nimrod. Gen. 10:810. …‘Nimrod is said to have been the first that gathered mankind into communities, the first of mortals
that reigned, and the first that offered idolatrous sacrifices… All tradition from the earliest times bears record to the apostasy of Nimrod, and to his success in
leading men away from the patriarchal faith.’—The
Two Babylons, pp.51,52.” Bunch, BOD, 18.

Dreams.—
“The multitude of dreams arise from the common
things of life, with which the Spirit of God has nothing
to do. There are also false dreams, as well as false visions, which are inspired by the spirit of Satan. But
dreams from the Lord are classed in the word of
God with visions and are as truly the fruits of the
spirit of prophecy as visions. Such dreams, taking
into the account the persons who have them and the
circumstances under which they are given, contain
their own proofs of their genuineness.” 1 Testimonies,
569,570.

“Satan’s false religion is called ‘Babylon the
Great’ and is represented by a corrupt woman, doubtless Ishtar or Semiramis. The religion of ancient
Babylon now exists in the papacy with practically
no change whatever. Mary takes the place of Ishtar,
and is worshiped even above the ‘divine son.’ The 40
days weeping for Tammuz has been perpetuated in
Lent. The feast of Ishtar, the ‘goddess of spring,’ is
now Easter [from Ish-tar]. The celebration of the birth
of Nimrod on the 25th of December, is now Christmas.
The celibacy of the priests, confession, holy water, the
rosary, the wafer used in mass, images, candles, the
college of cardinals, the supreme pontiff, conducting
the services in a foreign tongue, etc., all show the Babylonian origin of Catholic usages and ceremonies, etc.,

DANIEL 2:2
Then the king commanded to call the
magicians, and the astrologers, and the
sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew
the king his dreams. So they came and
stood before the king.
38

DANIEL 2
all represented by many statues and figures, one of
which was a figure of Venus in the form of a beautiful
woman holding a baby in her arms, the origin of the
Madonna. The woman had golden hair and blue eyes
and the babe had a halo around his head representing
the sun.” Bunch, BOD, 19.

DANIEL 2:3,4
And the king said unto them, I have
dreamed a dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the dream.
Then spake the Chaldeans to the king
in Syriack, O king, live for ever: tell thy
servants the dream, and we will shew the
interpretation.

The Magicians.—
“The magicians practiced magic, using the term
in its bad sense; that is, they employed all the superstitious rites and ceremonies of fortunetellers, and casters
of nativities, and the like.” Smith, DR, 29.

Tell Thy Servants the Dream.—
“In whatever else the ancient magicians and astrologers may have been efficient, they seem to have
been thoroughly schooled in the art of drawing out
sufficient information to form a basis for some
shrewd calculation, or of framing their answers in
such an ambiguous manner that they would be applicable whichever way the events turned. In the present
case, true to their cunning instincts, they called upon
the king to make known to them his dream. If they
could get full information respecting this, they could
easily agree on some interpretation which would not
endanger their reputation. They addressed themselves to the king in Syriac, a dialect of the Chaldean
language which was used by the educated and cultured
classes. From this point to the end of Daniel 7, the
record continues in Chaldaic, the language spoken
by the king.” Smith, DR, 30.

The Astrologers.—
“Astrologers were men who pretended to foretell
events by the study of the stars. The science, or the
superstition, of astrology was extensively cultivated by
the Eastern nations of antiquity.” Smith, DR, 30.
“Astrologers did not claim to worship the heavenly bodies as gods, but only as the representatives of the
gods who revealed their will and secrets. They built up
an elaborate system of superstitions regarding the
meaning of lunar eclipses according to the months in
which they occurred.” Bunch, BOD, 16.
The Sorcerers.—
“Sorcerers were such as pretended to hold communication with the dead. In this sense, we believe,
the word ‘sorcerer’ is always used in the Scriptures.”
Smith, DR, 30.
“Spiritism had its origin in Babylon.”
BOD, 16.

“He applied to his astrologers and magicians, and
with promises of great wealth and honor commanded
them to tell him his dream and its interpretation. But
they said, ‘Tell thy servants the dream, and we will
shew the interpretation’ (verse 4).
“The king knew that if they could really tell the
interpretation, they could tell the dream as well.
The Lord had in His providence given Nebuchadnezzar
this dream, and had caused the particulars to be forgotten, while the fearful impression was left upon his
mind, in order to expose the pretensions of the wise
men of Babylon.” Sanctified Life, 34.

Bunch,

“The [sorcerers] professed to be able to produce
magic spells. The Mosaic law pronounced the death
penalty upon those who practiced this black magic.”
4SDABC, 767.
“A man also or woman that hath a familiar
spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to
death: they shall stone them with stones: their blood
shall be upon them.” Leviticus 20:27.

“From Daniel 2:4 to the end of chapter 7, Daniel
wrote his book in Aramaic, [or Syriack] instead of Hebrew in which the remainder was originally written.
Daniel wrote [this portion] in Aramaic, that he
might give the prophecy regarding the world-power
in the language of the world-power…. The Jews also
understood this language. (See 2 Kings 18:26). Daniel
doubtless wanted the Babylonians to read this part of
his book.” Bunch, BOD, 17.

The Chaldeans.—
“The Chaldeans here mentioned were a sect of
philosophers similar to the magicians and astrologers,
who made natural science and divinations their study.”
Smith, DR, 30.
“The Chaldeans were the great philosophers and
wise men of the Babylonians. They were the leaders of
all the groups. They were the professors who had
taught Daniel and his fellows the sciences and languages of their order.” Bunch, BOD, 16.

DANIEL 2:5,6
The king answered and said to the
Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if ye
will not make known unto me the dream,
39

GEMS FROM DANIEL

with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be
cut in pieces, and your houses shall be
made a dunghill.
But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall receive of me
gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the dream, and the interpretation thereof.

I Know of Certainty.—
“Nebuchadnezzar began to see that the men
whom he trusted to reveal mysteries through their
boasted wisdom, failed him in his great perplexity, and
he said, [Verses 8-12 quoted.].” Fundamentals of
Christian Education, 410.
That Ye Would Gain the Time.—
“Their hesitancy to comply immediately with his
request may at first have aroused his suspicion that
they had conspired together to take advantage of him
If the dream contained a communication concerning
action to be taken at an auspicious moment, delay
would result in tragic loss. Certain communications
through divinations demanded that action be undertaken at a precise moment, such as a particular
conjunction of the planets. The expressions, ‘gain the
time,’ and ‘till the time be changed’ (vs.9), may have
reference to such a supposed opportune moment.”
4SDABC, 768.

The Thing Is Gone From Me.—
“But their eyes were holden that they should not
know him.” Luke 24:16.
“And their eyes were opened, and they knew
him.” Luke 24:31.
“God reveals or hides.
“But the natural man receiveth not the things of
the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him:
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” 1 Corinthians 2:14.
If… But if….—
“Dissatisfied with their evasive answer, and suspicious because, despite their pretentious claims to
reveal the secrets of men, they nevertheless seemed
unwilling to grant him help, the king commanded his
wise men, with promises of wealth and honor on the
one hand, and threats of death on the other, to tell
him not only the interpretation of the dream, but the
dream itself.” Prophets & Kings, 492.

DANIEL 2:10,11
The Chaldeans answered before the
king, and said, There is not a man upon the
earth that can shew the king’s matter:
therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler,
that asked such things at any magician, or
astrologer, or Chaldean.
And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none other that can
shew it before the king, except the gods,
whose dwelling is not with flesh.

Cut in Pieces.—
“Literally, ‘dismembered.’ They were to be cut
limb from limb. Such cruelty as is here depicted was
common in the ancient world. The Assyrians and Babylonians were notorious for the severity and barbarity
of their treatment of offenders. Ashurbanipal reports
that he cut in pieces rebel rulers.” 4SDABC, 768.

Babylonian Religious Leaders Powerless.—
“These verses contain the record of the desperate
struggle between the wise men and the king. The former sought some avenue of escape, since they were
caught on their own ground. The king was determined
that they should make known his dream, which was no
more than should be expected from their profession.
“Some have severely censured Nebuchadnezzar
in this matter, as acting the part of a heartless, unreasonable tyrant. But what did these magicians profess
to be able to do?—To reveal hidden things, to foretell
events, to make known mysteries entirely beyond human foresight and penetration, and to do this by the aid
of supernatural agencies. There was therefore nothing
unjust in Nebuchadnezzar’s demand that they should
make known his dream. When they declared that none
but the gods whose dwelling was not with flesh could
make known the king’s matter, it was a tacit acknowledgment that they had no communication with these
gods, and knew nothing beyond what human wis-

DANIEL 2:7-9
They answered again and said, Let the
king tell his servants the dream, and we
will shew the interpretation of it.
The king answered and said, I know of
certainty that ye would gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.
But if ye will not make known unto me
the dream, there is but one decree for you:
for ye have prepared lying and corrupt
words to speak before me, till the time be
changed: therefore tell me the dream, and I
shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.
40

DANIEL 2
dom and discernment could reveal. ‘For this cause
the king was angry and very furious.’
“He saw that he and all his people were being
made the victims of deception. While we cannot
justify the extreme measures to which he resorted,
dooming them to death, and their houses to destruction, we cannot but feel a hearty sympathy with him
in his condemnation of a class of miserable imposters. The king would be no party to dishonesty or
deception.” Smith, DR, 31,32.

flesh of Adam before the Fall. This doctrine teaches
that such gods are unable to be touched by the feeling
of our infirmities, unable to help us to overcome sin.
Thus humanity is unable to receive help from Babylonian gods, which are dominant in our world today.
‘But the Bible plainly points to a Messiah who
would come in the likeness of sinful flesh. Moses
predicted: ‘The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like
unto me.’ Deut. 18:15. This Messiah, says Paul,
‘Took not on him the nature of angels; but he took
on him the seed of Abraham. Wherefore in all
things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren,’ [Heb. 2:16,17.] The Messiah was called
‘Emmanuel, God with us,’ and was symbolized by
the uplifted serpent of brass. The God of the Old Testament is ‘a very present help in trouble.’ Ps. 46:1.
Daniel believed in a God who could dwell in his
flesh through the Holy Spirit. The rulers of Babylon
later acknowledged this: ‘There is a man in thy
kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods.’
Dan. 5:11.
“The religious leaders of Babylon believed that
their gods could never dwell in human flesh. This prohibited them from ever being able to tell the king the
interpretation. This doctrine today is still the mark of
antichrist. See 1 John 4:1-4. The word ‘flesh’ is sarx
in Greek, and means our fallen sinful flesh.” PJ.

There is Not a Man Upon the Earth That Can Shew
the King’s Matter.—
“The historic events related in the king’s dream
were of consequence to him; but the dream was taken
from him, that the wise men by their claimed understanding of mysteries, should not place upon it a false
interpretation. The lessons taught in it were given by
God for those who live in our day. The inability of the
wise men to tell the dream, is a representation of the
wise men of the present day, who have not discernment
and learning and knowledge from the Most High, and
therefore are unable to understand the prophecies. The
most learned in the world’s lore, who are not watching to hear what God says in His word, and opening
their hearts to receive that word and give it to others, are not representatives of His. It is not the great
and learned men of the earth, kings and nobles, who
will receive the truth unto eternal life, though it will be
brought to them.
“So we see that the highest line of earthly education may be obtained, and yet the men possessing
it may be ignorant of the first principles which
would make them subjects of the kingdom of God.
Human learning cannot qualify for that kingdom. The
subjects of Christ’s kingdom are not made thus by
forms and ceremonies, by a large study of books. ‘This
is life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou has sent.’ The
members of Christ’s kingdom are members of His
body, of which He himself is the head. They are the
elect sons of God, ‘a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people,’ that they should show forth
the praises of Him who has called them out of darkness into His marvelous light.” Fundamentals of
Christian Education, 412.

DANIEL 2:12,13
For this cause the king was angry and
very furious, and commanded to destroy all
the wise men of Babylon.
And the decree went forth that the
wise men should be slain; and they sought
Daniel and his fellows to be slain.
The King Was Angry and Very Furious.—
“The magicians were full of
fear and trembling. They declared that the
request of the
king was something unreasonable, and the test
beyond
that
which had ever been required of any man. The king
became furious, and acted like all men who have great
power and uncontrollable passions. He decided that
every one of them should be put to death, and as Daniel
and his fellows were numbered with the wise men, they
also were to share this fate. This manner of action is
what we may expect from men who are in high authority, and are controlled by unholy passion.”
Youth Instructor, 11/22/1894.

The gods Whose Dwelling Is Not With Flesh.—
“The religious leaders… thus frankly confessed to
a great gap between themselves and God.” Thiele,
OSID, 29.
“The mark of Babylonian religion is that the gods
are too holy and pure to dwell in our fallen humanity.
This same doctrine is the hallmark of Babylonian
religion today—being seen in the doctrine of the
Immaculate Conception (of Mary) fostered by the
Roman Catholic church system. Fallen Protestantism
believes the same thing—that Jesus came in the sinless

41

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Daniel and his companions were to perish with
the false prophets; but, taking his life in his hand,
Daniel ventures to enter the presence of the king, begging that time may be granted that he may show the
dream and the interpretation. To this request the monarch accedes.” Sanctified Life. 34.

DANIEL 2:14-16
Then Daniel answered with counsel
and wisdom to Arioch the captain of the
king’s guard, which was gone forth to slay
the wise men of Babylon:
He answered and said to Arioch the
king’s captain, Why is the decree so hasty
from the king? Then Arioch made the
thing known to Daniel.
Then Daniel went in, and desired of the
king that he would give him time, and that
he would shew the king the interpretation.

“One of the things that infuriated the king was
that the wise men were seeking to postpone their answer. Obviously the king was still troubled over the
dream, and may have been happy over the new prospect of finding a solution to the mystery that was harassing his spirit. Since Daniel had not been consulted previously, the king may have thought it only
fair to give him an opportunity. In his previous contact with this young Judean captive, Nebuchadnezzar
had evidently been favorably impressed with Daniel’s
sincerity and ability. Daniel’s previous faithfulness in
lesser things now opened the door to greater things.”
4SDABC, 769.

Why is the Decree So Hasty From the King?
“In this narrative we see the providence of God
working in several remarkable particulars. It was providential that the dream of the king should leave such a
powerful impression upon his mind as to raise him to
the greatest height of anxiety, and yet the thing itself be
held from his recollection. This led to the complete
exposure of the false system of the magicians and
other pagan teachers. When put to the test to make
known the dream, they were unable to do what they
professed was entirely within their power.
“It was remarkable that Daniel and his companions, so lately pronounced by the king ten times better
than all his magicians and astrologers, should not have
been consulted in this matter. But there was a providence in this. Just as the dream was held from the king,
so he was unaccountably restrained from appealing to
Daniel for a solution of the mystery. Had he called
Daniel at the first to make known the matter, the magicians would not have been brought to the test. But God
would give the heathen systems of the Chaldeans the
first chance. He would let them try and ignominiously
fail, and then confess their utter incompetency, ever
under the penalty of death, that they might be the better
prepared to acknowledge His intervention when He
should finally manifest His power in behalf of His captive servants, and for the honor of His name.
“It appears that the first intimation Daniel had
of the matter was the presence of the executioners,
come for his arrest. His own life being thus at stake,
he was led to seek the Lord with all his heart until He
should work for the deliverance of His servants. Daniel gained his request of the king for time to consider
the matter—a privilege which probably none of the
magicians could have obtained, as the king had already
accused them of preparing false and corrupt words, and
of seeking to gain time for this very purpose.” Smith,
DR, 32,33.

The King Grants Daniel Time.—
“If these several kingdoms had kept the fear of
the Lord always before them, they would have been
given wisdom and power, which would have bound
them together and kept them strong. But the rulers of
the kingdoms of the world made God their strength
only when harassed and perplexed. Failing to obtain help from their great men, they sought it from
men like Daniel, men who they knew honored the
living God and were honored by him. To these men
they appealed to unravel for them the mysteries of
Providence; for they had separated themselves so far
from God by transgression that they could not understand his warnings. They were forced to appeal to
those whose minds were illuminated by heavenly light,
for an explanation of the mysteries they could not
comprehend.” Youth Instructor, 9/29/1903.

DANIEL 2:17,18
Then Daniel went to his house, and
made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:
That they would desire mercies of the
God of heaven concerning this secret; that
Daniel and his fellows should not perish
with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
Strength in United Prayer.—
“When Daniel returned home from his visit to the
king’s palace, where he had received a temporary reprieve, he invited his friends to join him in prayer.
Many hands are better, not only when work needs to be
done, but also in prayer. ‘If two of you agree on
earth concerning anything that they ask,’ Jesus
says, ‘it will be done for them by My Father in

Daniel Goes in Before the King, Begs for Time.—

42

DANIEL 2
heaven’ (Matt. 18:19). ‘Christ here shows that there
must be union with others, even in our desires for a
given object. Great importance is attached to the
united prayer, the union of purpose.’ [Testimonies to
the Church, Vol. 3, p. 429.] Throughout Scripture we
discover the truth of these words. Esther asked her
servants and all the Jews in Shushan to fast and pray
with her before she went in to see the king (Esther
4:16). Jesus requested His disciples to watch and
pray with Him in the Garden of Gethsemane (Matt.
26:41). Prior to the outpouring of the Holy Spirit the
disciples were united in prayer (Acts 1:14), and Peter’s
deliverance from prison took place in answer to the
united prayer of the early church (Acts 12:5).” Pfandl,
DTSOB, 30.

was fully considered, and on their bended knees they
pleaded that God would give them the power and
wisdom that would alone avail them in their great
necessity. They asked God that he would so arrange
matters that they need not perish with the rest of the
wise men of Babylon.” Youth Instructor, 11/22/1894.

“While the execution of Peter was being delayed,
upon various pretexts, until after the Passover, the
church of Christ had time for deep searching of heart,
and earnest prayer. Strong petitions, tears, and fasting were mingled together. They prayed without
ceasing for Peter; they felt that he could not be spared
from the Christian work; and they felt that they had
arrived at a point, where, without the special help of
God, the church of Christ would become extinct.” Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 3, 336.

“The same compassionate Saviour lives today,
and He is as willing to listen to the prayer of faith as
when He walked visibly among men. The natural cooperates with the supernatural. It is a part of God’s
plan to grant us, in answer to the prayer of faith,
that which He would not bestow did we not thus
ask.” Great Controversy, 525.

“The case of Daniel reveals to us the fact that the
Lord is always ready to hear the prayers of the contrite
soul, and when we seek the Lord with all our hearts,
He will answer our petitions. Here is revealed where
Daniel obtained his skill and understanding; and if we
will only ask of God wisdom, we may be blessed
with increased ability and with power from heaven.” My Life Today, 110.

They Would Desire Mercies of the God of Heaven.—
“I would impress upon the youth that Daniel’s
God is their God, and whatever difficulty may arise,
let them do as did Daniel, ‘desire mercies of the God
of heaven.’ God will not fail His church in the hour of
her greatest peril. He has promised deliverance.” Sons
& Daughters, 216.

“Daniel at once went to his three companions, and
asked them to unite with him in desiring mercy of the
God of heaven concerning this secret. He could have
prayed alone, and doubtless would have been heard.
But then, as now, in the union of God’s people there
is prevailing power. The promise of the accomplishment of that which is asked, is to the two or
three who shall agree concerning it. (Mt. 18:19,20.)”
Smith, DR, 33.

“Daniel and his companions could approach God
with strong faith and implicit confidence because to the
best of their knowledge and ability, they were living
up to His revealed will (see 1 John 3:22). They had
the consciousness that they were in the place where
God wanted them to be, and were doing the work that
Heaven designed. If in their earlier experience they
had compromised principle and had yielded to the
temptations that constantly surrounded them in the
royal court, they could not have expected such marked
divine intervention in this crisis.” 4SDABC, 769

“ ‘Then Daniel went to his house, and made the
thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his
companions.’ Together they sought for wisdom from
the Source of light and knowledge. Their faith was
strong in the consciousness that God had placed
them where they were, that they were doing His
work and meeting the demands of duty. In times of
perplexity and danger they had always turned to
Him for guidance and protection, and He had
proved an ever-present help. Now with contrition
of heart they submitted themselves anew to the
Judge of the earth, pleading that He would grant
them deliverance in this their time of special need.
And they did not plead in vain. The God whom they
had honored, now honored them. The Spirit of the
Lord rested upon them, and to Daniel, ‘in a night vision,’ was revealed the king’s dream and its meaning.”
Prophets & Kings, 493,494.

That Daniel, and His Friends, Might Not Perish.—
“The prayer of the four young Hebrews saved not
only their own lives, but also those of the magicians,
astrologers, sorcerers, and Chaldeans in Babylon. And
it brought peace of mind to the troubled king. The
prayers and the presence of godly people have often
brought great blessings to others, even unbelievers.
For example, the Lord blessed Potiphar’s household
because of the presence of Joseph in its midst (Gen.
39:5), and when a fierce storm shipwrecked a Roman
vessel on the coast of Malta, not a person perished,
because the apostle Paul was on board (Acts 27:24).”
Pfandl, DTSOB, 30.

“When his request was granted, Daniel laid the
whole matter before his companions, who were united
with him in worshiping the true God. The matter

43

GEMS FROM DANIEL
if what had been revealed to him was indeed the king’s
dream, but he immediately praised God for having answered his prayer.
“Although the matter was revealed to Daniel, he
did not take honor to himself as though it were by his
prayers alone that the answer had been obtained; but
he immediately associated his companions with him,
and acknowledged it to be as much an answer to
their prayers as it was to his own. It was, said he,
‘what we desired of Thee,’ and Thou hast made it
‘known unto us.’ Smith, DR, 33,35.

DANIEL 2:19-23
Then was the secret revealed unto
Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel
blessed the God of heaven.
Daniel answered and said, Blessed be
the name of God for ever and ever: for
wisdom and might are his:
And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up
kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding:
He revealeth the deep and secret
things: he knoweth what is in the darkness,
and the light dwelleth with him.
I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou
God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto
me now what we desired of thee: for thou
hast now made known unto us the king’s
matter.

Then Daniel Blessed the God of Heaven.—
“[Verse 19 quoted.] They had not sought the
mercies of God in vain. Then Daniel called together
his companions, and thanked God that their prayers had
been heard and answered, and they presented to God an
offering of praise and thanksgiving, that was wholly
acceptable to the Ruler of the universe. [Verses 20-23
quoted.] Daniel and his fellows had a praise meeting,
and all the universe of heaven united with them in
thanksgiving.” Youth Instructor, 11/22/1894.
“Daniel did not forget to say ‘thank you.’ Here is
recorded the most wonderful prayer of thanksgiving in
Scripture.” Bunch, BOD, 20.
Wisdom and Might are His.—
“The poem opens with a statement that wisdom
and power belong to God (vs. 20); it ends with God
providing wisdom and power to Daniel and his friends,
revealing the king’s dream to them (vs. 23).” Shea,
DARG, 98.

Then Was the Secret Revealed.—
“The truth of God was not the result of ‘scholars’
and ‘theologians’, but revealed to sanctified people.”
Burnside, DPUF, 22.
Unto Daniel in a Night Vision.—
“The secret was revealed to Daniel because he
had been given the prophetic gift. Amos 3:7. The king
was given a dream and Daniel a vision. A vision is a
higher order of revelation than a dream. It required the
vision of God’s prophet to interpret the dream of a heathen king, just as the revelations of the book of nature
require the further and fuller explanations of the Scriptures.” Bunch, BOD, 20.

He Removeth Kings, and Setteth Up Kings.—
“In the light of eternity it will be seen that God
deals with men in accordance with the momentous
question of obedience or disobedience.
“Hundreds of years before certain nations came
upon the stage of action, the Omniscient One looked
down the ages, and predicted through his servants the
prophets the rise and fall of the universal kingdoms.
The prophet Daniel, when interpreting to the king of
Babylon the dream of the great image—an image symbolic of the kingdoms of the world—declared to Nebuchadnezzar that his kingdom should be superseded.
His greatness and power in God’s world would have
their day, and a second kingdom would arise, which
also would have its period of trial as to whether it
would exalt the one Ruler, the only true God. Not doing this, its glory would fade away, and a third kingdom would occupy its place. Proved by obedience or
disobedience, this also would pass away; and a fourth,
strong as iron, would subdue the nations of the world.
These predictions of the Infinite One, recorded on the
prophetic page and traced on the pages of history, were
given to demonstrate that God is the ruling power in
the affairs of this world. He changes the times and

God Answers Prayer.—
“Daniel immediately offered up praise to God
for His gracious dealing with them, and while his
prayer is not preserved, his responsive thanksgiving is
fully recorded. God is honored by our praise to Him
for the things He has done for us, as well as by our
petitions to Him for help. Let Daniel’s course be
our example in this respect. Let no mercy from the
hand of God fail of its due return of thanksgiving and
praise. In the days of Christ’s ministry on earth, did He
not cleanse ten lepers, and only one returned to give
Him thanks? ‘But where,’ asks Christ sorrowfully,
‘are the nine?’ Luke 17: 17.
“Daniel had the utmost confidence in what had
been shown him. He did not first go to the king to see

44

DANIEL 2
the seasons, he removes kings and sets up kings, to
fulfill his own purpose.” Youth Instructor, 9/29/1903.

of Daniel because he found favor with kings and
nobles, and was honored as the greatest man in
Babylon.” 2 Manuscript Releases, 319.

“For the kingdom is the LORD’s: and he is the
governor among the nations.” Psalm 22:28

“At the time when Nebuchadnezzar saw the vision of the great image, he had purposed to destroy the
wise men, because he discerned their deceptions, and
was convinced that they did not have the learning and
power that they claimed to possess. Only by the intercession of Daniel had they been saved from a
cruel and ignominious death.” Youth Instructor,
2/6/1904.

He Knoweth What is In the Darkness.—
“Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the
night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light
are both alike to thee.” Psalm 139:12.
“This then is the message which we have heard of
him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in
him is no darkness at all.” 1John 1:5.

The Righteous, the Salt of the Earth.-“Daniel’s first plea was for the wise men of Babylon. Destroy them not, for the king’s secret is revealed,
he implored. True, it was through no merit of theirs or
their heathen systems of divination that this revelation
was made. They were worthy of as much condemnation as before. But their own confession of utter impotence in the matter was humiliation enough for them,
and Daniel was anxious that they should so far partake
of the benefits shown him as to have their lives spared.
They were saved because there was a man of God
among them. Thus it ever is. For the sake of Paul
and Silas, all the prisoners with them were loosed.
(Acts 16: 26.) For the sake of Paul, the lives of all
that sailed with him were saved. (Acts 27: 24.) How
often the wicked are benefited by the presence of
the righteous! Well would be if they would remember
the obligations under which they are thus placed.
“What saves the world today? For whose sake is
it still spared?—For the sake of the few righteous
persons who are yet left. Remove these, and how
long would the wicked be suffered to run their guilty
career?—No longer than the antediluvians were suffered after Noah had entered the ark, or the Sodomites
after Lot had departed from their polluted and polluting
presence. If only ten righteous persons could have
been found in Sodom, the multitude of its wicked
inhabitants would for their sakes have been spared.
Yet the wicked will despise, ridicule, and oppress the
very ones on whose account it is that they are still permitted the enjoyment of life and all its blessings.”
Smith, DR, 35,36.

What We Desired of Thee.—
“Although the dream has been revealed to Daniel,
he does not take all the credit to himself, but includes
his companions who prayed with him.” 4SDABC, 770.

DANIEL 2:24
Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch,
whom the king had ordained to destroy the
wise men of Babylon: he went and said
thus unto him; Destroy not the wise men of
Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I
will shew unto the king the interpretation.
Arioch.—
“Arioch means, ‘Servant of the moon-god.’”
Bunch, BOD, 20.
Destroy Not The Wise Men.—
“Daniel was imbued with the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, and he pleaded that the wise men of Babylon
should not be destroyed. The followers of Christ do
not possess the attributes of Satan, which make it a
pleasure to grieve and afflict the creatures of God.
They have the Spirit of their Master who said, ‘I am
come to seek and to save that which was lost. I
came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.’ Had Daniel possessed the same quality of religious zeal which is so quickly inflamed today in the
churches, and men are led by it to afflict and oppress
and destroy those who do not serve God after their prescribed plan, he would have said to Arioch, ‘These men
who claim to be wise men are deceiving the king.
They have not the knowledge they claim to have and
should be destroyed. They dishonor the God of heaven, they serve idols, and their lives in no way do honor
to God; let them die; but bring me in before the king
and I will show unto the king the interpretation.’ The
transforming grace of God was made manifest in His
servant, and he pleaded most earnestly for the lives of
the very men who afterwards in a secret, underhanded
manner, made plans by which they thought to put an
end to the life of Daniel. These men became jealous

DANIEL 2:25
Then Arioch brought in Daniel before
the king in haste, and said thus unto him, I
have found a man of the captives of Judah,
that will make known unto the king the interpretation.
Then Arioch Brought in Daniel Before the King.—
“In God’s providence, Daniel and his fellows
were connected with the great men of Babylon, that
these men might become acquainted with the religion

45

GEMS FROM DANIEL
of the Hebrews and know that God rules over all kingdoms. Daniel in Babylon was placed in a most trying position; but while faithfully performing his
duties as a statesman, he steadfastly refused to engage in any work that would militate against God.
This course provoked discussion, and thus the Lord
brought the faith of Daniel to the attention of the
king of Babylon. God had light for Nebuchadnezzar,
and through Daniel were presented to the king things
foretold in the prophecies concerning Babylon and
other kingdoms. By the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, Jehovah was exalted as more powerful
than earthly rulers. Thus, through the faithfulness of
Daniel, God was honored.” 7 Testimonies, 161.

glory, but the youthful exile is peaceful and happy in
his God. Now, if ever, is the time for Daniel to exalt
himself, to make prominent his own goodness and superior wisdom. But his first effort is to disclaim all
honor for himself and to exalt God as the source of
wisdom.” Sanctified Life, 35,36.
“ ‘Art thou able to make known unto me the
dream?’ was the king’s salutation to Daniel as he came
into the royal presence. Notwithstanding his previous
acquaintance with this Hebrew, the king seemed to
question the ability of one so young and inexperienced,
to make known a matter in which aged and venerable
magicians and soothsayers had utterly failed. Daniel
declared plainly that the wise men, the astrologers, the
soothsayers, and the magicians could not make known
this secret. It was beyond their power. Therefore the
king should not be angry with them, nor put confidence
in their vain superstitions. The prophet proceeded to
make known the true God, who rules in heaven, and
is the only revealer of secrets. He it is, said Daniel,
who ‘maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar
what shall be in the latter days.’” Smith, DR, 36,37.

I Have Found a Man.—
“It is ever a characteristic of ministers and courtiers to ingratiate themselves with their sovereign. So
here Arioch represented that he had found a man who
could make known the desired interpretation, as if with
great disinterestedness in behalf of the king he had
been searching for someone to solve his difficulty,
and had at last found him. In order to see through
this deception of his chief executioner, the king had but
to remember, as he probably did, his interview with
Daniel, and Daniel’s promise, if time could be granted,
to show the interpretation of the dream. (Verse 16.)”
Smith, DR, 36.

Cannot the Wise Men Shew Unto the King.—
“The very first exhibition of God’s power to
the Hebrew captives was in showing the defective
wisdom of the great ones of the earth. The wisdom
of men is foolishness with God. The magicians revealed their ignorance of the light before the Lord revealed His wisdom as supreme. The wisdom of human
agents who had misappropriated their God-given talents, God showed to be foolishness.” Counsels to
Writers, 101.

“What Nebuchadnezzar needed was ‘an interpreter, one among a thousand’ (Job 33:23), and Daniel
proved to be such an interpreter.” Anderson, UDP, 46.

DANIEL 2:26-28
The king answered and said to Daniel,
whose name was Belteshazzar, Art thou
able to make known unto me the dream
which I have seen, and the interpretation
thereof?
Daniel answered in the presence of the
king, and said, The secret which the king
hath demanded cannot the wise men, the
astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers,
shew unto the king;
But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the
king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the
latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of
thy head upon thy bed, are these;

“Before Daniel was the king in his glory; around
him stood the very teachers with whom he had studied
three years. At this time were exemplified the words of
the psalmist: ‘I have more understanding than all
my teachers; for thy testimonies are my meditation.
I understand more than the ancients, because I keep
thy precepts.’ [Psalm 119:99,100].” Haskell, SDP,
33.
“Thus saith the LORD, Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory
in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches:
“But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he
understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the
LORD which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and
righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I delight,
saith the LORD.” Jeremiah 9:23,24.
There is a God in Heaven.—
“When called to stand before King Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel did not hesitate to acknowledge the source
of his wisdom. Did that faithful recognition of God
detract from Daniel’s influence in the king’s court?
By no means; it was the secret of his power; it se-

Art Thou Able to Tell Me the Dream?—
“The Jewish captive stands before the monarch of
the most powerful empire the sun has ever shone upon.
The king is in great distress amid all his riches and

46

DANIEL 2
iel’s God had revealed his waking thoughts He could
also reveal the dream. The Hebrew captive had already told him more than the Chaldeans.” Bunch,
BOD, 22.

cured for him favor in the eyes of the ruler of Babylon. In God’s name Daniel made known to the king
the heaven-sent messages of instruction, warning, and
rebuke, and he was not repulsed. Let God’s workers of
today read the firm, bold testimony of Daniel and follow his example.
“Never does man show greater folly than when he
seeks to secure acceptance and recognition in the world
by sacrificing in any degree the allegiance and honor
due to God. When we place ourselves where God cannot co-operate with us, our strength will be found
weakness. All that is ever done toward restoring the
image of God in man is done because God is the efficiency of the worker.” 7T 151

He That Revealeth Secrets Maketh Known to Thee.—
“Here is brought out another of the commendable traits of Nebuchadnezzar’s character. Unlike
some rulers, who fill up the present with folly and debauchery without regard to the future, the king thought
forward upon the days to come, with an anxious desire
to know with what events they should be filled. It was
partly for this reason that God gave him this dream,
which we must regard as a token of divine favor to the
king. Yet God would not work for the king independently of His own people. Though He gave the
dream to the king, He sent the interpretation
through one of His acknowledged servants.” Smith,
DR, 37.

“The Babylonians worshipped the hosts of heaven
as the representatives of their gods, but Daniel reminded the king that the God of the Hebrews was
the Creator and Ruler of the heavenly bodies. This
was the God that had revealed to him the forgotten
dream and its interpretation.” Bunch, BOD, 21.

For Their Sakes That Shall Make Known the Interpretation.—
“Daniel first disclaimed all credit for the interpretation, and then he sought to modify the king’s natural
feelings of pride in being thus noticed by the God of
heaven. He informed him that although the dream had
been given to him, it was not for his sake alone that the
interpretation was sent, but also for their sakes
through whom it should be given. Ah! God had
some servants there, and it was for them that He was
working. They were of more value in His sight than
the mightiest kings and potentates of earth.
“How comprehensive was the work of God in this
instance! By this one act of revealing the king’s dream
to Daniel, He made known to the king the things he
desired, He saved His servants who trusted in Him, He
brought conspicuously before the Chaldean nation the
knowledge of Him who knows the end from the beginning, He poured contempt on the false systems of the
soothsayers and magicians, and He honored His own
name and exalted His servants in their eyes.” Smith,
DR, 37,38.

There is a God That Revealeth Secrets.—
“The secret of the Lord is with them that fear
Him: and He will show them His covenant.” Psalm
25:14.
“Surely the Lord GOD will do nothing, but he
revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.”
Amos 3:7.
Maketh Known What Shall Be in the Latter Days.—
“This dream was given to the king of Babylon,
the events of the future, reaching down to the end of
time, were opened before him, that he might have
light on this important subject. It was also given for
the benefit of all future generations. The record was
traced by the prophetic pen that the light might be
shared by those kingdoms which should succeed the
kingdom of Babylon.” Signs, 4/29/1897.

DANIEL 2:29,30
As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came
into thy mind upon thy bed, what should
come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what
shall come to pass.
But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have
more than any living, but for their sakes
that shall make known the interpretation
to the king, and that thou mightest know
the thoughts of thy heart.

“Daniel reminds the king that the secret was revealed by the God of heaven chiefly for the sake of
those who serve Him, and not for the king and his
wise men. It was for the sake of Paul and his companions that all on board the stranded ship were saved. It
was for the sake of Joseph and his people that provision was divinely made to meet the famine in Egypt.
The wicked enjoy all their privileges and their very
continued existence for the sake of the righteous in
the earth. God’s people are ‘the salt of the earth,’
the preservers of mankind. God said He would not
destroy Sodom if it contained only ten righteous persons.” Bunch, BOD, 22.

Thy Thoughts: What Will Come to Pass Hereafter.—
“The king remembered that this was true and
his confidence was strengthened to believe that if Dan-

“And God sent me before you to preserve you
a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a

47

GEMS FROM DANIEL
was body composed of inferior metals descending in
value until they reached their basest form in the feet
and toes of iron mingled with miry clay. The whole
was then dashed to pieces, and made like the empty
chaff. It was finally blown away where no place could
be found for it, after which something durable and of
heavenly worth occupied its place. So would God
show to the children of men that earthly kingdoms
are to pass away, and earthly greatness and glory,
like a gaudy bubble, will break and vanish. In the
place so long usurped by these, the kingdom of God
shall be set up and have no end, while all who have an
interest in that kingdom shall rest under the shadow of
its peaceful wings forever and ever. But this is anticipating.” Smith, DR, 38,39.

great deliverance.” Genesis 45:7.
Daniel Relates the Dream.—
“After making it clear to the king that the purpose
of the ‘God in heaven’ in giving him the dream, was to
reveal ‘what shall be in the latter days,’ Daniel related the dream itself.” Smith, DR, 38.

DANIEL 2:31-34
Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a
great image. This great image, whose
brightness was excellent, stood before thee;
and the form thereof was terrible.
This image’s head was of fine gold, his
breast and his arms of silver, his belly and
his thighs of brass,
His legs of iron, his feet part of iron
and part of clay.
Thou sawest till that a stone was cut
out without hands, which smote the image
upon his feet that were of iron and clay,
and brake them to pieces.

“The image was a
comprehensive outline
of the world’s history.
The ‘glory of kingdoms’ formed the head
of gold, all following
kingdoms deteriorated
from Babylon as shown
by the grade of metals
forming the image.
First gold, then silver,
brass, and iron. In the
latter part of the world’s
history, a marked change was ‘revealed by the iron
being mixed with miry clay. …The clay mixed with
iron also denoted the union of church and state.
This combination is peculiar [to a false Christianity in]
the latter part of the world’s history, to the feet and toes
of the image. [It was always true in Paganism.]”
Haskell, SDP, 35.

Thou, O king, Sawest.—
“As he related the facts, the dream came fresh
to the king’s mind, and the interpretation was given,
showing the remarkable events that were to transpire in
prophetic history.
“The Lord was working in the Babylonian kingdom, communicating light to the four Hebrew captives,
that He might represent His work before the people.
He would reveal that He had power over the kingdoms
of the world, to set up kings and to throw down kings.
The King over all kings was communicating great truth
to the king of Babylon, awakening in his mind a sense
of his responsibility to God. He saw the contrast between the wisdom of God and the wisdom of the
most learned men in his kingdom.” Fundamentals of
Christian Education, 411.

“This mighty colossus in the form of a man was
actually a forecast of man’s attempt to govern himself apart from God.” Anderson, UDP, 46.
The Image Symbol Easy to Understand.—
“The second commandment prohibits image worship; but God himself employed pictures and symbols to represent to His prophets lessons which He
would have them give to the people, and which
could thus be better understood than if given in any
other way. He appealed to the understanding through
the sense of sight. Prophetic history was presented to
Daniel and John in symbols, and these were to be represented plainly upon tables, that he who read might
understand.” 1BC 1106.

Behold a Great Image.—
“Nebuchadnezzar, a worshiper of the gods of the
Chaldean religion, was an idolater. An image was an
object which would at once command his attention
and respect. Moreover, earthly kingdoms, which, as
we shall hereafter see, were represented by this image,
were objects of esteem and value in his eyes.
“But how admirably adapted was this representation to convey a great and needful truth to the mind of
Nebuchadnezzar. Besides delineating the progress of
events through the whole course of time for the benefit
of His people, God would show Nebuchadnezzar the
utter emptiness and worthlessness of earthly pomp and
glory. How could this be more impressively done than
by an image whose head was of gold? Below this head

Whose Brightness Was Excellent.—
“Or, as in the LXX [the Septuagint], ‘whose appearance was extraordinary.’” 4SDABC, 771.
Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Iron and Clay.—
“The four metals represent four world empires.

48

DANIEL 2
The fourth kingdom of iron would have two phases—
iron, then clay mixed into the iron. These metals represent Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Pagan
and Papal Rome respectively. Here Daniel is just
telling the king what he saw in his dream. See vs. 3843 for a fuller explanation of these elemental symbols.”
PJ.

DANIEL 2:35
Then was the iron, the clay, the brass,
the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces
together, and became like the chaff of the
summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found
for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth.

Brass.—
“Rather, ‘bronze,’ or ‘copper.’” 4SDABC, 771.
Clay.—
“Aramaic chasaph. …An earthen vessel or a potsherd rather than the clay itself from which these objects are formed. The word for ‘clay,’ Aramaic tin,
occurs in vs. 41, 43, in connection with chasaph, and is
there translated ‘miry.’ It seems better, therefore, in vs.
33 to translate chasaph ‘molded clay,’ or ‘earthenware,’ rather than simply ‘clay.’” 4SDABC, 771.

(Here Daniel is just telling the king what he saw
in his dream. See also vs. 44-45 where Daniel explains these symbols and events for more details.)
The Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Clay—Deterioration.—
“The image shown to Nebuchadnezzar in the visions of the night represents the kingdoms of the world.
The metals in the image, symbolizing the different
kingdoms, became less and less pure and valuable,
from the head down. The head of the image was of
gold, the breast and arms of silver, the sides of brass,
and the feet and toes iron mingled with clay. So the
kingdoms represented by them deteriorated in value.
“…The kingdom of Babylon passed away because, in their prosperity, her rulers forgot God, and
ascribed her honor and glory to human achievement. So today, when men forget God and refuse to
obey his law, they are humiliated. God tests them, and
if they do not humble their hearts and confess their
sins, they receive the penalty of transgression.
“The Medo-Persian kingdom was visited by the
wrath of God because in it his law was trampled underfoot. The fear of God possessed no power among the
people. Wickedness, blasphemy, and corruption were
the prevailing influences in this kingdom; and the
kingdoms that followed were even more base and corrupt. They deteriorated because they cast off God.
Forgetting him, they sank lower and lower in the
scale. The vast empire of Rome crumbled into pieces.
The church of Rome boasts of her infallibility, and of
the power of her hereditary religion. But this religion
is a horror to all who are acquainted with the secrets of
the mystery of iniquity. The priests of this church
maintain their ascendency by keeping the people in
ignorance of the will of God.
“While representing the kingdoms of this earth,
the image that was revealed to Nebuchadnezzar also
fitly represented deterioration of religion. We grow
weak morally and spiritually, just in proportion as
we forget God. Those who claim to be Protestants are
not today what Luther was. They have left the old
landmarks, and have depended on forms, ceremonies,
and outward display to make up for the lack of purity

Thou Sawest Till.—
“This was at the end of the king’s dream, the end
of the history of the world.” PJ.
A Stone.—
“Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay
in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation.” Isaiah 28:16.
“Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the
scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner: this is the
Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
“And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be
broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder.’ Matthew 21:42, 44.
Cut Out.—
“The word ‘cut out’ is the Chaldean word g’zar
that corresponds to the Hebrew word, gazar, which
means to ‘cut down’ or ‘cut off.’ See more on Dan.
2:45.” PJ.
Without Hands.—
“Not by might, not by power, but by My Spirit,
saith the Lord of hosts.” Zechariah 4:6.
(See vs. 45 for more comments.)
Smote the Image and Brake in Pieces.—
“Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the
scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner… And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.” Matthew 21:42, 44.

49

GEMS FROM DANIEL
and piety, meekness and lowliness, found in obedience
to God. Sin is ruining nations today just as it has done
in time past. Even leaders in the religious world
have not a good conscience toward God.” R&H,
2/6/1900.

The Wind Carried Them—the Chaff—Away.—
“They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff
that the storm carrieth away.” Job 21:18.
“Then did I beat them small as the dust before
the wind: I did cast them out as the dirt in the streets.”
Psalms 18:42.

The Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Clay Broken.—
“For, behold, the LORD will come with fire, and
with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger
with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.
“For by fire and by his sword will the LORD
plead with all flesh: and the slain of the LORD shall
be many.” Isaiah 66:15,16.

“Let them be as chaff before the wind: and let
the angel of the LORD chase them.” Psalms 35:5.
“As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no
more: but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.”
Proverbs 10:25.
“The nations shall rush like the rushing of many
waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee
far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before
the whirlwind.” Isaiah 17:13.
“Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry
them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them:
and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, and shalt glory in
the Holy One of Israel.” Isaiah 41:16.

“Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.” Hab.
3:12.
Became Like the Chaff.—
“The ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff
which the wind driveth away.” Psalms 1:4.
“Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and
the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the LORD of
hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.” Isaiah 5:24.

“For, behold, the LORD will come with fire, and
with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger
with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.” Isaiah
66:15.
“Behold, a whirlwind of the LORD is gone forth
in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked. The anger of the
LORD shall not return, until he have executed, and till
he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly.” Jer. 23:20,21.

“Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud
and as the early dew that passeth away, as the chaff
that is driven with the whirlwind out of the floor, and
as the smoke out of the chimney.” Hosea 13:3.
“Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly
purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.”
Luke 3:17. [See also Mt. 3:12].

No Place Was Found for Them.—
“This depicts the state of the wicked after the fires
of the second death have consumed them at the end of
the millennium. See Scriptures below.
“For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not
be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and
it shall not be….
“But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of
the LORD shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away.
“I have seen the wicked in great power, and
spreading himself like a green bay tree.
“Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I
sought him, but he could not be found. Psalm 37:10,
20, 35, 36.” PJ.

The Wind.—
“The wind represents a part of the Second Coming of Christ. See Scriptures below.” PJ.
“Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, evil shall
go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind
shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth. And the
slain of the LORD shall be at that day from one end of
the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall
not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they
shall be dung upon the ground.” Jer. 25:33.
“Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence:
a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very
tempestuous round about him.” Psalm 50:3.

“And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat
on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled
away; and there was found no place for them.” Rev.
20:11.

“Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even
rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall
be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great
hailstones in my fury to consume it.” Ezekiel 13:13.

The Stone.—
“Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay
in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a pre-

50

DANIEL 2
cious corner stone, a sure foundation.”
28:16.

Isaiah

“He that dwelleth in the secret place of the
most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the LORD, He is my refuge
and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust. Surely
he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with
his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his
truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt not be
afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that
flieth by day; Nor for the pestilence that walketh in
darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand
at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only
with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of
the wicked.
“Because thou hast made the LORD, which is
my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation;
There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any
plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his
angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash
thy foot against a stone.
Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the
young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under
feet. Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore
will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he
hath known my name.
He shall call upon me, and I
will answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will
deliver him, and honour him. With long life will I
satisfy him, and show him my salvation.” Psalm 91.

“Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the
scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner: this is the
Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
“And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be
broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder.’ Matthew 21:42, 44.
The Stone Smites the Image.—
“In the great image many kingdoms are represented. The silver kingdom battled the golden kingdom of Babylon. Greece battled with Medo-Persia.
The Roman empire, the fourth kingdom, battled
Greece, the third kingdom. Now the fifth kingdom—
represented by the stone—battles the second phase of
the Roman empire.
“I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.”
Daniel 7:11.
“And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not,
stand still, and see the salvation of the LORD, which
he will show to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye
have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for
ever. The LORD shall fight for you, and ye shall
hold your peace.” Exodus 14:13,14.
“But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.” PJ.
“And to you who are troubled rest with us, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, In flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power;
“When he shall come to be glorified in his saints,
and to be admired in all them that believe (because our
testimony among you was believed) in that day.” 2
Thessalonians 1:7-10.

Became a Great Mountain.—
“When Jesus comes all dead in Christ and all the
living in Christ—all the redeemed from all ages (the
great multitude)—are given glorified bodies and become part of the stone kingdom. Thus, the stone becomes a great mountain!
“God’s people do not become part of the kingdom
of glory until after Christ’s 2nd Coming.
“When the Son of man shall come in his glory,
and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory:
“Then shall the King say unto them on his right
hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.’ Matthew 25: 34.
“For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with
the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise
first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the
Lord.” 1 Thessalonians 4:16,17.
“After the millennium, both the wicked are blown
away so that no place is found for them, and the righteous, now a great mountain, return from heaven and fill
the whole earth.” PJ.

Where Are God’s People?—
“For ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.”
Colossians 3:3,4.
“Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers,
and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were
for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the LORD cometh out of his place
to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall
no more cover her slain.” Isaiah 26:20,21.
“God’s people are hiding in Christ the stone.” PJ.

And Filled the Earth.—

51

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“This indicates that the image denotes something
which occupies the territory of the earth, inasmuch as
the stone which succeeds it, expanding into a mountain, occupies its place and fills the earth.” Biblical
Institute, 33.

away.’ ‘The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.’ Rev. 21:4; Isaiah 33:24.
“There is the New Jerusalem, the metropolis of
the glorified new earth, ‘a crown of glory in the hand
of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy
God.’ ‘Her light was like unto a stone most precious,
even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal.’ ‘The nations
of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it:
and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and
honor into it.’ Saith the Lord: ‘I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in My people.’ ‘The tabernacle of God is
with men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall
be His people, and God Himself shall be with them,
and be their God.’ Isaiah 62:3; Rev. 21:11, 24; Isaiah
65:19; Rev. 21:3.
“In the City of God ‘there shall be no night.’
None will need or desire repose. There will be no weariness in doing the will of God and offering praise to
His name. We shall ever feel the freshness of the
morning and shall ever be far from its close. ‘And they
need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord
God giveth them light.’ Rev. 22:5. The light of the sun
will be superseded by a radiance which is not painfully
dazzling, yet which immeasurably surpasses the
brightness of our noontide. The glory of God and the
Lamb floods the Holy City with unfading light. The
redeemed walk in the sunless glory of perpetual day.
“‘I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it.’ Rev.
21:22. The people of God are privileged to hold open
communion with the Father and the Son. ‘Now we see
through a glass, darkly.’ 1 Cor. 13:12. We behold the
image of God reflected, as in a mirror, in the works of
nature and in His dealings with men; but then we shall
see Him face to face, without a dimming veil between.
We shall stand in His presence and behold the glory of
His countenance.
“There the redeemed shall know, even as also
they are known. The loves and sympathies which
God Himself has planted in the soul shall there find
truest and sweetest exercise. The pure communion
with holy beings, the harmonious social life with the
blessed angels and with the faithful ones of all ages
who have washed their robes and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb, the sacred ties that bind together ‘the whole family in heaven and earth’ (Eph.
3:15)—these help to constitute the happiness of the
redeemed.
“There, immortal minds will contemplate with
never-failing delight the wonders of creative power,
the mysteries of redeeming love. There will be no
cruel, deceiving foe to tempt to forgetfulness of God.
Every faculty will be developed, every capacity increased. The acquirement of knowledge will not weary
the mind or exhaust the energies. There the grandest
enterprises may be carried forward, the loftiest aspirations reached, the highest ambitions realized; and still
there will arise new heights to surmount, new won-

“God’s people, both the living righteous and the
dead in Christ from all ages, will be given glorified
bodies to inherit the kingdom of glory at Christ’s Second Coming. The stone, thus, becomes a great mountain. This stone kingdom will fill the whole earth at
the end of the millennium when the New Jerusalem
and all the redeemed with our Saviour descends from
heaven to earth.” PJ.
“And he carried me away in the spirit to a great
and high mountain, and shewed me that great city, the
holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from
God, Having the glory of God: and her light was like
unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone,
clear as crystal.’ Revelation 20:10,11.
“In the Bible the inheritance of the saved is
called ‘a country.’ Hebrews 11:14-16. There the heavenly Shepherd leads His flock to fountains of living
waters. The tree of life yields its fruit every month,
and the leaves of the tree are for the service of the nations. There are ever-flowing streams, clear as crystal,
and beside them waving trees cast their shadows upon
the paths prepared for the ransomed of the Lord. There
the wide-spreading plains swell into hills of beauty,
and the mountains of God rear their lofty summits. On
those peaceful plains, beside those living streams,
God’s people, so long pilgrims and wanderers, shall
find a home.
“‘My people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting
places.’ ‘Violence shall no more be heard in thy
land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but
thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates
Praise.’ ‘They shall build houses, and inhabit them;
and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of
them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they
shall not plant, and another eat:... Mine elect shall long
enjoy the work of their hands.’ Isaiah 32:18; 60:18;
Isaiah 65:21,22.
“There, ‘the wilderness and the solitary place
shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and
blossom as the rose.’ ‘Instead of the thorn shall come
up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall come up
the myrtle tree.’ ‘The wolf also shall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; . . .
and a little child shall lead them.’ ‘They shall not hurt
nor destroy in all My holy mountain,’ saith the Lord.
Isaiah 35:1; 55:13; Isaiah 11:6, 9.
“Pain cannot exist in the atmosphere of heaven.
There will be no more tears, no funeral trains, no badges of mourning. ‘There shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying:... for the former things are passed

52

DANIEL 2
ders to admire, new truths to comprehend, fresh
objects to call forth the powers of mind and soul and
body.
“All the treasures of the universe will be open to
the study of God’s redeemed. Unfettered by mortality,
they wing their tireless flight to worlds afar—worlds
that thrilled with sorrow at the spectacle of human woe
and rang with songs of gladness at the tidings of a ransomed soul. With unutterable delight the children of
earth enter into the joy and the wisdom of unfallen beings. They share the treasures of knowledge and understanding gained through ages upon ages in contemplation of God’s handiwork. With undimmed vision
they gaze upon the glory of creation—suns and stars
and systems, all in their appointed order circling the
throne of Deity. Upon all things, from the least to the
greatest, the Creator’s name is written, and in all are
the riches of His power displayed.” Great Controversy, 675-677.

strength, and glory.’ His kingdom was universal, extending ‘wheresoever the children of men dwell,’ yet it
was to be followed by three other universal kingdoms,
after which ‘the God of heaven’ would ‘set up a
kingdom,’ which should ‘never be destroyed.’”
Youth Instructor, 10/11/1904.
The God of Heaven Hath Given.—
“In his inscriptions Nebuchadnezzar attributes his
regal success to his god Marduk, but Daniel, in a
kindly manner, corrects this mistaken idea. He affirms that it is the God of heaven who has bestowed
such power upon him.” 4SDABC, 771.
The Beasts of the Field and Fowls of Heaven.—
“All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his
boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of
the field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all great nations.” Ezekiel 31:6.
Thou Art.—
“In his interpretation of the image, Daniel told
Nebuchadnezzar, Thou art this head of gold. Verse 38.
He did not mean Nebuchadnezzar as an individual; for
he was speaking of kingdoms. Verses 39,40. One part
of the image could not represent a kingdom, and
another part an individual. This would be inconsistent. The head of gold therefore symbolizes that
kingdom over which Nebuchadnezzar was ruler.” Biblical Institute, 33,34.

DANIEL 2:36-38
This is the dream; and we will tell the
interpretation thereof before the king.
Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for
the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.
And wheresoever the children of men
dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls
of the heaven hath he given into thine
hand, and hath made thee ruler over them
all. Thou art this head of gold.

“Daniel was not inaccurate …to equate the
Neo-Babylonian empire with Nebuchadnezzar since
he ruled it for 43 of the 66 years that it existed. He
conquered much of the territory belonging to that empire and was responsible for the great architectural expansion of its capital city.” BRI, 2SOD, 172.

This Is The Dream.-“’This is the dream,’ confidently declared Daniel;
and the king, listening with closest attention to every particular, knew it was the very dream over
which he had been so troubled. Thus his mind was
prepared to receive with favor the interpretation.
The King of kings was about to communicate great
truth to the Babylonian monarch. God would reveal
that He has power over the kingdoms of the world,
power to enthrone and to dethrone kings. Nebuchadnezzar’s mind was to be awakened, if possible, to a
sense of his responsibility to Heaven. The events of
the future, reaching down to the end of time, were to be
opened before him.” Prophets & Kings, 497,498.

Thou Art This Head of Gold.—
“With what interest and astonishment must
the king have listened as he was informed by the
prophet that his kingdom was the golden head of
the magnificent image. Daniel informed the king that
the God of heavens had given him his kingdom, and
made him ruler over all. This would restrain him
from the pride of thinking that he had attained his position by his own power and wisdom, and would enlist
the gratitude of his heart toward the true God.
The kingdom of Babylon, which finally developed into the nation represented by the golden head of
the great historic image, was founded by Nimrod, the
great-grandson of Noah, more than two thousand years
before Christ. ‘Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a
mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter before
the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the
mighty hunter before the Lord. And the beginning of
his kingdom was Babel [‘Babylon,’ margin], and
Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.’
Genesis 10: 8-10. It appears that Nimrod also founded

We Will Tell the Interpretation.—
“Not ‘I’, but ‘We will tell the interpretation.’
Daniel gives equal credit with himself to his three
companions who prayed with him.” Bunch, BOD, 23.
Thou, O King, Art a King of Kings.-“Although in the interpretation he was declared to
be ‘a king of kings,’ this was because ‘the God of
heaven’ had given him ‘a kingdom, power, and

53

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the city of Nineveh, which afterward became the capital of Assyria. (See marginal reading of Gen. 10:11.)
“The Babylonian Empire rose to power under the
general who also became king, Nabopolassar. When
he died in 604 BC his son Nebuchadnezzar became
king. As R. Campbell Thompson declares: ‘Events had
already shown that Nebuchadrezzar was a vigorous and
brilliant commander, and physically as well as mentally a strong man, fully worthy of succeeding his father.
He was to become the greatest man of his time in
the Near East, as a soldier, a statesman, and an architect. Had his successors been of such a stamp instead of callow boys or dilettanti without redeeming
vigor, the Persians would have found Babylonia a
harder problem. “All the nations,” says Jeremiah (Jeremiah 27: 7, R.V.), “shall serve him, and his son, and
his son’s son, until the time of his own land come.”
[The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. III, p. 212.]’
“Jerusalem was taken by Nebuchadnezzar in the
first year of his reign, and the third year of Judah (Daniel 1: 1). 606 BC Nebuchadnezzar reigned two years
conjointly with his father, Nabopolassar. From this
point the Jews computed his reign, but the Chaldeans
from the date of his sole reign, 604 BC, as stated above.
Respecting the successors of Nebuchadnezzar, the authority just quoted adds:
“ ‘Nebuchadnezzar died about August-September,
562 BC, and was succeeded by his son Amel-Marduk
(562-560 BC), whom Jeremiah calls Evil-Merodach.
He was given little time to prove his worth; the two
years of his brief reign are merely enough to show that
political conditions were again hostile to the royal
house.’ [Ibid., p. 217].
“The later Babylonian rulers, weak in power,
could not equal the reign of Nebuchadnezzar. Cyrus,
king of Persia, besieged Babylon, and took it by stratagem.
“The character of the Babylonian Empire is indicated by the head of gold. It was the golden kingdom
of a golden age. Babylon, its metropolis, towered to a
height never reached by any of its successors. Situated
in the garden of the East; laid out in a perfect square
said to be sixty miles in circumference, fifteen miles
on each side; surrounded by a wall estimated to
have been two hundred to three hundred feet high
and eighty-seven feet thick, with a moat, or ditch,
around this, or equal cubic capacity with the wall itself;
divided into squares by its many streets, each one hundred and fifty feet in width, crossing at right angles,
every one of them straight and level; its two hundred
and twenty-five square miles of enclosed surface laid
out in luxuriant pleasure grounds and gardens, interspersed with magnificent dwellings—this city, with its
sixty miles of moat, its sixty miles of outer wall, its
thirty miles of river wall through its center, its gates of
solid brass, its hanging gardens rising terrace above
terrace till they equaled in height the walls themselves,
its temple of Belus three miles in circumference, its

two royal palaces, one three and a half and the other eight miles in circumference, with its subterranean tunnel under the River Euphrates connecting
these two palaces, its perfect arrangements for convenience, ornament, and defense, and its unlimited
resources—this city, containing in itself many things
which were themselves wonders of the world, was itself another and still mightier wonder. There, with the
whole earth prostate at her feet, a queen in peerless
grandeur, drawing from the pen of inspiration itself this
glowing title, ‘The glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the
Chaldees’ excellency,’ stood this city, fit capital of that
kingdom which was represented by the golden head of
this great historic image.” Smith, DR, 39-44.

“The Scriptures speak of Nimrod as ‘a mighty
hunter.’ He was not only politically powerful but a
rebel against heaven. The name Nimrod means ‘he
shall rebel.’ The Jewish Encyclopedia tells that Nimrod was ‘he who made all the people rebellious against
God.’ He was the priest-king of devil worship, and
Babylon became the headquarters of the mystery
cults, a counter-religion.” Anderson, UDP, 48.
“It was in Babylon that the first earthly kingdom
was established after the Flood, and there too, the idea
of world-empire was born in Nimrod its founder and
original sovereign. Marduk was the deified Nimrod,
the father of the gods, and Nebuchadnezzar claimed
to be his son who ruled in his stead and by his will
and favor.” Bunch, BOD, 26.
Head of Gold.—
“Under Nebuchadnezzar Babylon was the recognized center of wealth and glory. Gold flowed into it
from all the provinces of the empire. The immense
treasures gathered by king Solomon and brought to
Jerusalem were later confiscated and carried to Babylon. Tremendous quantities of gold and bronze made
Babylon the wealthiest city of its time. When Herodotus, the ancient historian, visited Babylon a century
after Nebuchadnezzar’s day, he found an abundance of
gold still there. Temples, altars, shrines—all were
plated with this precious metal.” Anderson, UDP, 47.

54

DANIEL 2
ing and watching around their beleaguered walls. But
God had decreed that the proud and wicked city should
come down from her throne of glory. And when He
speaks, what mortal arm can defeat His word?
“In their feeling of security lay the source of their
danger. Cyrus resolved to accomplish by stratagem
what he could not effect by force. Learning of the
approach of an annual festival in which the whole
city would be given up to mirth and revelry, he
fixed upon that day as the time to carry his purpose
into execution.
“There was no entrance for him into that city unless he could find it where the River Euphrates entered
and emerged, as it passed under the walls. He resolved
to make the channel of the river his highway into the
stronghold of his enemy. To do this, the water must be
turned aside from its channel through the city. For this
purpose, on the evening of the feast day above referred
to, he detailed on body of soldiers to turn the river at a
given hour into a large artificial lake a short distance
above the city; another to take their station at the point
where the river entered the city; and a third to take a
position fifteen miles below, where the river emerged
from the city. The two latter bodies were instructed to
enter the channel as soon as they found the river fordable, and in the darkness of the night explore their way
beneath the walls, and press on to the palace of the
king where they were to surprise and kill the guards,
and capture or slay the king. When the water was
turned into the lake, the river soon became shallow
enough to ford, and the soldiers followed its channel
into the heart of the city of Babylon. [See Herodotus,
pp. 67-71; George Rawlinson, The Seven Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World, Vol. II, pp. 254259; Humphrey Prideaux, The Old and New Testament
Connected in the History of the Jews, Vol. I, pp. 136,
137.]
“But all this would have been in vain, had not the
whole city given itself over on that eventful night to the
most abandoned carelessness and presumption, a state
of things upon which Cyrus calculated largely for the
carrying out of his purpose. On each side of the river
through the entire length of the city were walls of great
height, and of equal thickness with the outer walls. In
these walls were huge gates of brass, which, when
closed and guarded, debarred all entrance from the river bed to any of the streets that crossed the river. Had
the gates been closed at this time, the soldiers of Cyrus
might have marched into the city along the river bed,
and then marched out again, for all that they would
have been able to accomplish toward the subjugation of
the place.
“But in the drunken revelry of that fatal night,
these river gates were left open, as had been foretold by
the prophet Isaiah years before in these words: ‘Thus
saith the Lord to His anointed, to Cyrus, whose
right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before
him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two-leaved gates; and the gates shall

“Babylon hath been a golden cup in the
LORD’s hand, that made all the earth drunken: the
nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the nations
are mad.” Jeremiah 51:7.

DANIEL 2:39
And after thee shall arise another
kingdom inferior to thee, and another third
kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule
over all the earth.
After Thee.—
“Nebuchadnezzar reigned forty-three years, and
was succeeded by the following rulers: His son, EvilMerodach, two years; Neriglissar, his son-in-law, four
years; Laborosoarchod, Neriglissar's son, nine months,
which, being less than on year, is not counted in the
canon of Ptolemy; and lastly, Nabonidus, whose son,
Belshazzar, grandson of Nebuchadnezzar, was associated with him on the throne.
“ ‘The proof of this association is contained in the
cylinders of Nabonidus found at Mugheir, where the
protection of the gods is asked for Nabu-nadid and his
son Bel-shar-uzur, who are coupled together in a way
that implies the co-sovereignty of the latter. (British
Museum Series, Vol. I. pl.68, no.1.) The date of the
association was at the latest 540 BC, Nabonidus’ fifteenth year, since the third year of Belshazzar is mentioned in Daniel 8: 1. If Belshazzar was (as I have
supposed) a son of a daughter of Nebuchadnezzar married to Nabonidus after he became king, he could not
be more than fourteen in his father’s fifteenth year.’
[George Rawlinson, The Seven Great Monarchies of
the Ancient Eastern World, Vol. II, p. 610, Note 202.]”
Smith, DR, 44.
The Fall of Babylon.—
“Cyaxares, king of the Medes, who is called ‘Darius’ in Daniel 5: 31, summoned to his aid his nephew
Cyrus of the Persian line. The war was prosecuted
with uninterrupted success by the Medes and Persians,
until in the eighteenth year of Nabonidus (the third year
of his son Belshazzar), Cyrus laid siege to Babylon, the
only city in all the East which then held out against
him. The Babylonians gathered within their seemingly
impregnable walls, with provision on hand for twenty
years, and land within the limits of their broad city
sufficient to furnish food for the inhabitants and garrison for an indefinite period. They scoffed at Cyrus
from their lofty walls, and derided his seemingly useless efforts to bring them into subjection. According to
all human calculation, they had good ground for their
feelings of security. Never, weighed in the balance of
earthly probability, could that city be taken with the
means of warfare then known. Hence they breathed as
freely and slept as soundly as though no foe were wait-

55

GEMS FROM DANIEL
not be shut.’ Isaiah 45: 1. The entrance of the Persian
soldiers was not perceived. Many a cheek would have
paled with terror, had the sudden going down of the
river been noticed, and its fearful import understood.
Many a tongue would have spread wild alarm through
the city, had the dark forms of armed foes been seen
stealthily treading their way to the citadel of their supposed security. But no one noticed the sudden subsidence of the waters of the river; no one saw the entrance
of the Persian warriors; no one cared for aught but to
see how deeply and recklessly he could plunge into the
wild debauch. That night’s dissipation cost the Babylonians their kingdom and their freedom. They
went into their brutish revelry subjects of the king of
Babylon; they awoke from it slaves to the king of Persia.
“The soldiers of Cyrus first made known their
presence in the city by falling upon the royal guards in
the vestibule of the palace of the king. Belshazzar soon
became aware of the cause of the disturbance, and died
fighting for his life. This feast of Belshazzar is described in the fifth chapter of Daniel, and the scene
closes with the simple record, ‘In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius
the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.’
“The historian Prideaux says: ‘Darius the Mede,
that is Cyaxares, the uncle of Cyrus, took the kingdom;
for Cyrus allowed him the title of all his conquests as
long as he lived.’ [Humphrey Prideaux, The Old and
New Testament Connected in the History of the Jews,
Vol. I, p. 137.]
“Thus the first empire, symbolized by the head of
gold of the great image, came to an ignoble end. It
would naturally be supposed that the conqueror, becoming possessed of so noble a city as Babylon, far
surpassing anything else in the world, would have taken it as the seat of his empire, and maintained it in its
splendor. But God had said that that city should become a heap, and the habitation of the beasts of the
desert; that its houses should be full of doleful creatures; that the wild beasts of the islands should cry in
its desolate dwellings, and dragons in its pleasant palaces. (Isaiah 13: 19-22.) It must first be deserted.
Cyrus established a second capital at Susa, a celebrated
city in the province of Elam, east from Babylon, on the
banks of the River Choaspes, a branch of the Tigris.
This was probably done in the first year of his sole
reign.
“The pride of the Babylonians being particularly
provoked by this act, in the fifth year of Darius Hystaspes, 517 BC, they rose in rebellion and brought upon
themselves again the whole strength of the Persian
Empire. The city was once more taken by stratagem.
Darius took away the brazen gates of the city, and beat
down the walls from two hundred cubits to fifty cubits.
This was the beginning of its destruction. By this act,
it was left exposed to the ravages of every hostile band.
Xerxes, on his return from Greece, plundered the tem-

ple of Belus of its immense wealth, and then laid the
lofty structure in ruins. Alexander the Great endeavored to rebuild it, but after employing ten thousand
men two months to clear away the rubbish, he died
from excessive drunkenness and debauchery, and the
work was suspended. In the year 294 BC, Seleucus
Nicator built the city of New Babylon in the neighborhood of the old city, and took much of the material and
many of the inhabitants of the old city, to build up and
people [repopulate] the new. Now almost exhausted of
inhabitants, neglect and decay were telling fearfully
upon the ancient capital. The violence of Parthian
princes hastened its ruin. About the end of the fourth
century, it was used by the Persian kings as an enclosure for wild beasts. At the end of the twelfth
century, according to a celebrated traveler, the few
remaining ruins of Nebuchadnezzar’s palace were
so full of serpents and venomous reptiles that they
could not be closely inspected without great danger.
And today scarcely enough even of the ruins is left to
mark the spot where once stood the largest, richest, and
proudest city of the ancient world.
“Thus the ruin of great Babylon shows us how
accurately God fulfills His word, and makes the doubts
of skepticism appear like willful blindness.” Smith,
DR,, 44-50.
Shall Arise Another Kingdom.—
“The use of the word ‘kingdom’ here, shows
that kingdoms, and not particular kings, are represented by the different parts of this image. Hence
when it was said to Nebuchadnezzar, ‘Thou art this
head of gold,’ although the personal pronoun was
used, the kingdom not the king himself was meant.”
Smith, DR, 50,51.
Inferior.—
“The expression correctly means ‘downward,’ or
‘earthward,’ but in this verse Daniel is speaking, not of
the relative position of metals, but of nations. As we
contrast the two kingdoms, we find that though the
latter coveted more territory, it certainly was inferior in
luxury and magnificence. The Median and Persian
conquerors adopted the culture of the complex Babylonian civilization, for their own was far less developed.”
4SDABC, 772,773.
“The image revealed to Nebuchadnezzar, while
representing the deterioration of the kingdoms of the
earth in power and glory, also fitly represents the deterioration of religion and morality among the people of these kingdoms. As nations forget God, in like
proportion they become weak morally.
“Babylon passed away because in her prosperity
she forgot God, and ascribed the glory of her prosperity
to human achievement.
“The Medo-Persian kingdom was visited by the
wrath of heaven because in this kingdom God’s law
was trampled under foot. The fear of the Lord found no

56

DANIEL 2
place in the hearts of the people. The prevailing influences in Medo-Persia were wickedness, blasphemy,
and corruption.
“The kingdoms that followed were even more
base and corrupt. They deteriorated because they
cast off their allegiance to God. As they forgot Him,
they sank lower and still lower in the scale of moral
value.” Youth Instructor, 9/22/1903; 4BC, 1168.

what respect inferior? Not in power, for it conquered
Babylon. Not in extent, for Cyrus subdued all the East
from the Aegean Sea to the River Indus, and thus
erected a more extensive empire. But it was inferior
in wealth, luxury, and magnificence.
“Viewed from a Scriptural standpoint, the principal event under the Babylonian Empire was the captivity of the children of Israel; under the Medo-Persian
kingdom it was the restoration of Israel to their own
land. At the taking of Babylon, Cyrus, as an act of
courtesy assigned the first place in the kingdom to his
uncle, Darius, in 538 BC. But two years afterward
Darius died, leaving Cyrus sole monarch of the empire.
In this year, which closed Israel’s seventy years of
captivity, Cyrus issued his famous decree for the
return of the Jews and the rebuilding of their temple. This was the first installment of the great decree
for the restoration and building again of Jerusalem (Ezra 6: 14), which was completed in the seventh year of
the reign of Artaxerxes, 457 BC, a date of much importance, as will hereafter be shown.
“After a reign of seven years, Cyrus left the
kingdom to his son Cambyses, who reigned seven
years and five months, to 522 BC. Eight monarchs
reigned between this time and the year 336 BC.
The year 335 BC is set down as the first of Darius
Codomannus, the last of the line of the old Persian
kings. This man, according to Prideaux, was of noble
stature, of goodly person, of the greatest personal valor,
and of a mild and generous disposition. It was his ill
fortune to have to contend with one who was an agent
in the fulfillment of prophecy, and no qualifications,
natural or acquired, could make him successful in the
unequal contest. Scarcely was he warm upon the
throne, ere he found his formidable enemy, Alexander,
at the head of the Greek soldiers, preparing to dismount
him from it.
“The cause and the particulars of the contest between the Greeks and the Persians we leave to histories
especially devoted to such matters. Suffice it to say
that the deciding point was reached on the field of
Arbela in 331 BC, where the Grecians, though only
one to twenty in number as compared with the Persians, won a decisive victory. Alexander became
absolute lord of the Persian Empire to an extent
never attained by any of its own kings.” Smith, DR,
51,52.

Inferior to Thee.—
“The culture of Babylon was renowned throughout the ancient world while that of the Medes and Persians was looked down upon as rustic and primitive.
The Persians had no written language until the time
of their empire. Old Persian was created as a written
language by the Persian kings to use in inscribing
monuments. They more commonly used the Elamite
language for keeping their own records. On the other
hand, the written Babylonian language went well back
into the third millennium BC, and that rich heritage of
language brought with it all of the science, religion,
and culture of the Babylonian Empire. So there were
various ways in which Babylon was superior to Persia
even though the Babylonians did not conquer as much
territory as the Persians did.” Shea, DARG, 101.
The Medes.—
“The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and
Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and
Tiras.” Genesis 10:2.
Medo-Persian Kingdom.—
“The second kingdom of Daniel’s prophecy is
sometimes called the Medo-Persian Empire, because it
began as a combination of Media and Persia. It included the older Median Empire and the new acquisitions
of the Persian conqueror Cyrus. …The Median Empire
was contemporary with the Neo-Babylonian, not is
successor. Media fell to Cyrus the Persian before Babylon did. [In 553 or 550 BC Cyrus, who had become
king of Persia as a vassal of the Median Empire, defeated Astyages of Media. Thus formerly subordinate
Persians became the dominant power in what had been
the Median Empire.] The fact that after Belshazzar’s
death Darius the Mede ‘was made king over the realm
of the Chaldeans’ does not mean that there was a separate Median Empire after the Babylonian and before
the Persians took over. Darius the Mede ruled in Babylon by permission of the real conqueror, Cyrus, as Daniel obviously knew.
“The book of Daniel repeatedly refers to the nation that conquered Babylon, and that Darius represented, as that of ‘the Medes and Persians,’ and it pictures that dual empire elsewhere as a single beast.”
4SDABC, 773.

The Religion of Medo-Persia.—
“The Persian religion was comparatively pure
with no images, personal gods, temples or shrines.
The Persians worshiped the elements of nature: fire,
air, earth and water. They believed in and reckoned
with two great ruling principles: good and evil, which
were identified with light and darkness. So naturally
the sun was worshiped as the symbol of good, and at
night they worshiped fire for the same reason. Their
chief god was Mithras, the genius of light, which
was early identified with the sun and with fire. This

“The succeeding kingdom, Medo-Persia, answered to the breast and arms of silver of the great image. It was to be inferior to the preceding kingdom. In

57

GEMS FROM DANIEL
explains the Lord’s statement to Cyrus recorded in Isa.
45:5-7. He was the Creator and Author of light and
darkness, the symbols of good and evil. The Avesta,
the sacred book of the Persians, in many ways resembles the Old Testament. The religious system was
founded by Zoroaster and is known as Zoroasterism.
Little is known of Zoroaster.” Bunch, BOD, 28.

der the Great, inheriting his father’s newly expanded
Greco-Macedonian kingdom, set out to extend Macedonian dominion and Greek culture eastward, and
conquered the Persian Empire.” 4SDABC, 773,774.
“‘Another third kingdom of brass ...shall bear
rule over all the earth,’ the prophet had said.
“Few and brief are the inspired words which involved in their fulfillment a succession in world rulership. In the ever-changing political kaleidoscope,
Grecia came into the field of vision, to be for a time
the all-absorbing object of attention, as the third of
what are called the universal empires of the earth.
“After the battle which decided the fate of the
empire [331 BC], Darius endeavored to rally the shattered remnants of his army, and make a stand for his
kingdom and his rights. But he could not gather out of
all the host of his recently so numerous and wellappointed army a force with which he deemed it prudent to hazard another engagement with the victorious
Grecians. Alexander pursued him on the wings of the
wind. Time after time Darius barely eluded the grasp
of his swiftly following foe. At length three traitors,
Bessus, Nabarzanes, and Barsaentes, seized the unfortunate prince, shut him up in a close cart, and fled with
him as their prisoner toward Bactria. It was their purpose, if Alexander pursued them, to purchase their own
safety by delivering up their king. Hereupon Alexander, learning of the dangerous position of Darius in the
hands of the traitors, immediately put himself with the
lightest part of his army upon a forced pursuit. After
several days hard march, he came up with the traitors.
They urged Darius to mount on horseback for a more
speedy flight. Upon his refusing to do this, they gave
him several mortal wounds, and left him dying in the
cart, while they mounted their steeds and rode away.
“When Alexander arrived, he beheld only the lifeless form of the Persian king, who but a few months
before was seated upon the throne of the universal empire…. Alexander saw the field cleared of his last formidable foe.
“He entered upon a pompous campaign into India, because, according to Grecian fable, Bacchus and
Hercules, two sons of Jupiter, whose son he also
claimed to be, had done the same. With contemptible
arrogance, he claimed for himself divine honors. He
gave up conquered cities, freely and unprovoked, to the
mercy of his bloodthirsty and licentious soldiery.
“He often murdered his friends and favorites in
his drunken frenzies. He encouraged such excessive
drinking among his followers that on one occasion
twenty of them died as the result of their carousal.
At length, having sat through one long drinking spree,
he was immediately invited to another, when, after
drinking to each of the twenty guests present, he twice
drank, says history, incredible as it may seem, the full
Herculean cup containing six of our quarts. He was
seized with a violent fever, of which he died eleven
days later, Jun 13, 323 BC, while yet he stood only at

Medo-Persia, a Kingdom of Silver.—
“Persia, however, was known for her treasures of
silver. Xerxes, a prominent king of Persia, inherited
immense hoards of silver from his father, Darius Hystaspes. In Hebrew, as in all Semitic languages, the
word for money, keseph, is the same as is used for silver. In the Medo-Persian Empire reputedly all taxes had to be paid in silver. Consequently, the kings of
this second empire grew extremely wealthy in silver.”
Anderson, UDP, 48.
Another Third Kingdom of Brass.—
“This was the Grecian Empire, which be a rapid
series of conquests, replaced Medo-Persia. The thighs
and abdomen of the image were of this material—a
forecast of the ‘brazen coated Greeks’ as they were
called. This was the third Gentile power to ‘bear rule
over all the earth.’ Dan. 2:39. The Greeks were experts
in the molding of bronze. The soldiers wore breastplates of bronze, helmets of bronze, and carried shields
of bronze. They carried bronze swords.” Anderson,
UDP, 49.
The Third Kingdom, the Grecian Empire.—
“The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and
Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and
Tiras.” Genesis 10:2.
“The Hebrew word for Greece is yawan (Javan),
which is the name of one of the sons of Japheth. Javan
is mentioned in the genealogy immediately after Madai, the progenitor of the Medes (see on Gen. 10:2).
About the time the Israelites were settling in Canaan,
those Indo-European tribes later called Greeks were
migrating in successive waves into the Aegean region
(mainland Greece, the islands, and the western coasts
of Asia Minor), conquering or driving out the earlier
Mediterranean inhabitants …(including the Philistines).
“…When we think of ancient Greece we think
chiefly of the golden age of Greek civilization, under
the leadership of Athens, in the 5th century BC. This
flowering of Greek culture followed the period of the
greatest united effort of the divided city states—the
successful defense of Greece against Persia about the
time of Queen Esther.
“The Grecia of ch. 8:21 does not refer to the divided city states of classical Greece, but rather to the
later Macedonian kingdom that conquered Persia. The
Macedonians, a kindred nation north of Greece proper,
conquered the Greek cities and incorporated them
for the first time into a strong, united state. Alexan-

58

DANIEL 2
nify the Macedonians again, but must necessarily denote some other nation: and we will venture to say that
there is not a nation upon earth, to which this description is applicable, but the Romans.’ [Thomas
Newton, Dissertations on the Prophecies, Vol. I, p.
240.]
“Gibbon, following the symbolic imagery of Daniel, thus describes this empire:
“ ‘The arms of the Republic, sometimes vanquished in battle, always victorious in war, advanced
with rapid steps to the Euphrates, the Danube, the
Rhine, and the ocean; and the images of gold, or silver, or brass, that might serve to represent the nations and their kings, were successively broken by
the iron monarchy of Rome.’ [Edward Gibbon, The
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. III, general observations following chap. 38, p. 634.]
“At the opening of the Christian Era, this empire
took in the whole south of Europe, France, England,
the greater part of the Netherlands, Switzerland, and
the south of Germany, Hungary, Turkey, and Greece,
not to speak of its possessions in Asia and Africa.
Well therefore may Gibbon say of it:
“ ‘The empire of the Romans filled the world,
and when that empire fell into the hands of a single
person, the world became a safe and dreary prison
for his enemies... To resist was fatal, and it was impossible to fly.’ [Ibid., Vol. I, chap. 3, pp. 99, 100.]
“It will be noticed that at first the kingdom is described unqualifiedly as strong as iron. This was the
period of its strength, during which it has been likened
to a mighty colossus bestriding the nations, conquering
everything, and giving laws to the world. But this was
not to continue.” Smith, DR, 54,55.

the threshold of mature life, in the thirty-second
year of his age.” Smith, DR, 52-54.
Which Shall Bear Rule Over All the Earth.—
“History records that the rule of Alexander extended over Macedonia, Greece, and the Persian Empire, including Egypt and extending eastward to India.
It was the most extensive empire of the ancient
world up to that time. Its dominion was ‘over all the
earth’ in the sense that no power on earth was equal to
it, not that it covered the whole world, or even the
known world of that time. A ‘world power’ may be
defined as the one that stands above all the rest, invincible, not necessarily actually governing the whole
known world.” 4SDABC, 774.
“Greece was altogether different from the preceding two, and instead of gaining recognition because of
the form of religion or government, she gained control
of the world by the power of her intellect. With her
education and philosophy she gained a foothold
which no other nation ever held. When Babylon
was overthrown and Medo-Persia was no more,
Greece lived on in the minds of men.” Haskell, SDP,
202.

DANIEL 2:40
And the fourth kingdom shall be
strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh
in pieces and subdueth all things: and as
iron that breaketh all these, shall it break
in pieces and bruise.

Two Legs of Iron—No Division.—
“The two legs do not denote the division of
Rome into the Eastern and Western empires. If
they do, Rome should have been thus divided from the
beginning of its history, or the legs should have been
united down to the ankles, as it was not till AD 330 that
the seat of the empire was moved from Rome to Constantinople. But history forbids the former, and consistency forbids the latter.” Biblical Institute, 36.

Iron Monarchy of Rome.—
“...A fourth empire should arise, more fierce,
more determined, and more powerful than any kingdom that had preceded it. As strong as iron, this kingdom would subdue and break in pieces all the nations
of the world.” R&H, 2/6/1900.
“That Babylon, Medo-Persia, and Greece are represented respectively by the head of gold, the breast
and arms of silver, and the sides of brass, is acknowledged by all. But with as little ground for a diversity of
views, there is strangely a difference of opinion as to
what kingdom is symbolized by the fourth division of
the great image--the legs of iron. What kingdom succeeded Greece in the empire of the world, for the
legs of iron denote the fourth kingdom in the series?
The testimony of history is full and explicit on this
point. One kingdom did this, and one only, and that
was Rome. It conquered Grecia; it subdued all things;
like iron, it broke in pieces and bruised.
“Says Bishop Newton: ‘The four different metals
must signify four different nations: and as the gold
signified the Babylonians, and the silver the Persians,
and the brass the Macedonians; so the iron cannot sig-

“The two arms of silver represent the two kingdoms of the Medes and Persians because they were two
kingdoms in alliance together from the beginning.” PJ.
Iron Breaketh in Pieces and Subdueth All Things.—
“About 500 BC the Roman state became a republic, and remained a republic for nearly 500 years. By
265 BC all Italy was under Roman control. By 200
BC, Rome had emerged victorious from the life and
death struggle with her powerful North African rival
Carthage [originally a Phoenician colony]. Henceforth
Rome was mistress of the western Mediterranean, and
more powerful than any of the states in the east, although she had not yet come to grips with them. From

59

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL2:41,42
And whereas thou sawest the feet and
toes, part of potters’ clay, and part of iron,
the kingdom shall be divided; but there
shall be in it of the strength of the iron,
forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed
with miry clay.
And as the toes of the feet were part of
iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall
be partly strong, and partly broken.

then on Rome first dominated and then absorbed in
turn the surviving kingdoms of Alexander’s successors, and thus became the next great world power
after Alexander’s. This fourth empire was the longest
lived and most extensive of the four, stretching in the
2nd Christian century from Britain to the Euphrates.”
4SDABC, 774,775.
Early Christian Church Had Same Interpretation.—
“The early Christian church interpreted the
prophecies of Daniel 2, 7, and 8 as we do now. Hippolytus, who lived AD 160-236, and is thought to have
been a disciple of Irenaeus, one of the four greatest
theologians of his age, says in his exposition of Daniel
2 and Daniel 7:
“ ‘The golden head of the image and lioness denoted the Babylonians; the shoulders and arms of silver, and the bear, represented the Persians and
Medes; the belly and thighs of brass, and the leopard,
meant the Greeks, who held the sovereignty from Alexander’s time; the legs of iron, and the beast dreadful and terrible, expressed the Romans, who hold
the sovereignty at present; the toes of the feet which
were part clay and part iron, and the ten horns, were
emblems of the kingdoms that are yet to rise; the other little horn that grows up among them meant the
Antichrist in their midst; the stone that smites the
earth and brings judgment upon the world was Christ.’
[Hippolytus, ‘Treatise on Christ and Antichrist,’ AnteNicene Fathers, Vol. V, p. 210, par 28.]
“ ‘Speak with me, O blessed Daniel. Give me full
assurance, I beseech thee. Thou dost prophesy concerning the lioness in Babylon; for thou wast a captive
there. Thou hast unfolded the future regarding the
bear…. The leopard has arisen; the he-goat is come; he
hath broken his horns in pieces; he hath stamped upon
him with his feet. He has been exalted by his fall; (the)
four horns have come up from under that one. Rejoice,
blessed Daniel! thou hast not been in error: all these
things have come to pass.’
“ ‘After this again thou hast told me of the beast
dreadful and terrible. “It had iron teeth and claws of
brass: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the
residue with the feet of it.” Already the iron rules;
already it subdues and breaks all in pieces; already
it brings all the unwilling into subjection; already
we see these things ourselves. Now we glorify God,
being instructed by thee.’ [Ibid., pars. 32, 33.].”
Smith, DR, 64-68.

Clay.—
“O house of Israel,
cannot I do with you as
this potter? saith the
LORD. Behold, as the
clay is in the potter’s
hand, so are ye in mine
hand, O house of Israel.”
Jeremiah 18:6.
“But now, O LORD,
thou art our father; we are
the clay, and thou our
potter; and we all are the
work of thy hand.” Isaiah
64:8.
“The clay is also a symbol of the people of God,
the church. [Isa. 64:8 quoted.]” Swearingen, TOOTN,
13.
Miry Clay.—
“The ‘miry clay’ of this prophecy can symbolize a
muddy, dirty, slimy ‘church,’ i.e.. an unfaithful, apostate church that would attempt to unify with the fragmented political elements of the collapsed pagan Roman Empire.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 13.
Clay and Iron = Mingling of Church and State.—
“We have come to a time when God’s sacred work is represented by the feet of the image in
which the iron was mixed with the miry clay. God
has a people, a chosen people, whose discernment must
be sanctified, who must not become unholy by laying
upon the foundation wood, hay, and stubble. Every
soul who is loyal to the commandments of God will see
that the distinguishing feature of our faith is the seventh-day Sabbath. If the government would honor the
Sabbath as God has commanded, it would stand in the
strength of God and in defense of the faith once delivered to the saints. But statesmen will uphold the
spurious sabbath, and will mingle their religious
faith with the observance of this child of the papacy,
placing it above the Sabbath which the Lord has sanctified and blessed, setting it apart for man to keep holy,
as a sign between Him and His people to a thousand
generations. The mingling of churchcraft and state-

Iron of Rome Goes to the End, to the Toes.—
“In Daniel (2) we saw that the iron was the power
that came up after Greece, and though it changed form,
it was still iron until the end. …The power that
comes up after Greece remains until the time of the
end, though in a different form.” Goldstein, 1844MS,
22.

60

DANIEL 2
They are as much independent kingdoms as are the
beasts themselves, for the beasts are spoken of in precisely the same manner—as ‘four kings, which shall
arise.’ Daniel 7: 17. They do not denote a line of
successive kings, but kings or kingdoms which existed contemporaneously, for three of them were
plucked up by the little horn. The ten horns, beyond
controversy, represent the ten kingdoms into which
Rome was divided.
“We have seen that in Daniel’s interpretation of
the image he uses the words ‘king’ and ‘kingdom’ interchangeably, the former denoting the same as the
latter. In verse 44 he says that ‘in the days of these
kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom.’ This
shows that at the time the kingdom of God is set up,
there will exist a plurality of kings. It cannot refer to
the four preceding kingdoms; for it would be absurd to
use such language in reference to a line of successive
kings, since it would be in the days of the last king
only, not in the days of any of the preceding, that the
kingdom of God would be set up.” Smith, DR, 55-57.

craft is represented by the iron and the clay. This
union is weakening all the power of the churches.
This investing the church with the power of the
state will bring evil results. Men have almost passed
the point of God’s forbearance. They have invested
their strength in politics, and have united with the papacy. But the time will come when God will punish
those who have made void His law, and their evil work
will recoil upon themselves (MS 63, 1899).” 4BC,
1168.

The Ten Kingdoms.—
“Here, then, is a division presented; and what
have we in the symbol to indicate it?—Nothing but
the toes of the image. Unless they do, we are left utterly in the dark on the nature and extent of the division
which the prophecy shows did exist. To suppose this
would be to cast a serious imputation upon the prophecy itself. We are therefore held to the conclusion that
the ten toes of the image denote the ten parts into
which the Roman Empire was divided.
“This division was accomplished between AD
351 and 476. The era of this dissolution thus covered a hundred and twenty-five years, from about
the middle of the fourth century to the last quarter of
the fifth. No historians of whom we are aware, place
the beginning of this work of the dismemberment of
the Roman Empire earlier than AD 351, and there is
general agreement in assigning its close in AD 476.
Concerning the intermediate dates, that is, the precise
time from which each of the ten kingdoms that arose
on the ruins of the Roman Empire is to be dated, there
is some difference of views among historians. Nor
does this seem strange, when we consider that there
was an era of great confusion, that the map of the
Roman Empire during that time underwent many sudden and violent changes, and that paths of hostile nations charging upon its territory crossed and recrossed
each other in a labyrinth of confusion. But all historians agree in this, that out of the territory of Western
Rome, ten separate kingdoms were ultimately established, and we may safely assign them to the time between the dates above named; namely AD 351 and 476.
“The ten nations which were most instrumental in
breaking up the Roman Empire, and which at some
time in their history held respectively portions of Roman territory as separate and independent kingdoms,
may be enumerated (without respect to the time of their

How the Clay Began to Mix With the Iron.—
“[The clay started to mix with the iron when
Constantine became the first Christian emperor of
the pagan Roman Empire in 313 AD.] “Soon bishops became government officers, carrying out the dictates of the state. State officials were also appointed to
high positions in the church, irrespective of their qualifications either morally or spiritually. This not only
corrupted the church but paved the way for the introduction of pagan practices into the worship services.”
Anderson, UDP, 105.
The Kingdom of Rome Shall Be Divided.—
“The element of weakness symbolized by the
clay, pertained to the feet as well as to the toes. Rome,
before its division into ten kingdoms, lost that iron vigor which it possessed to a superlative degree during the
first centuries of its career. Luxury, with its accompanying effeminacy and degeneracy, the destroyer of
nations as well as of individuals, began to corrode and
weaken its iron sinews, and thus prepared the way for
its disintegration into ten kingdoms.
“The iron legs of the image terminate in feet and
toes. To the toes, of which there were of course ten,
our attention is called by the explicit mention of them
in the prophecy. The kingdom represented by that part
of the image to which the toes belonged, was finally
divided into ten parts. The question naturally arises,
Do the ten toes of the image represent the ten final divisions of the Roman Empire? We answer, Yes.
“The image of Daniel 2 is exactly parallel with
the four beasts in the vision of Daniel 7. The fourth
beast represents the same kingdom as do the iron legs
of the image. The ten horns of the beast correspond
naturally to the ten toes of the image. These horns
are plainly declared to be ten kings which should arise.

61

GEMS FROM DANIEL
establishment) as follows: Huns, Ostrogoths, Visigoths, Franks, Vandals, Suevi, Burgundians, Heruli,
Anglo-Saxons, and Lombards. [In harmony with seven leading commentators, the author includes the Huns
as one of the ten kingdoms. Others, however, with historical precedent, name the Alamanni, or Germans,
instead of the Huns.—Editors.] The connection between these and some of the modern nations of Europe, is still traceable in the names, as England,
Burgundy, Lombardy, France, etc.
“But it may be asked, Why not suppose the two
legs denote division as well as the toes? Would it not
be as inconsistent to say that the toes denote division
and the legs do not, as to say that the legs denote division and the toes do not? We answer that the prophecy itself must govern our conclusions in this matter;
for though it says nothing of division in connection
with the legs, it does introduce the subject of division as we come to the feet and toes. The record says,
‘Whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters’ clay and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided.’ No division could take place, or at least none
is said to have taken place, until the weakening element
of the clay is introduced; and we do not find this until
we come to the feet and toes. But we are not to understand that the clay denotes one division and the
iron the other; for after the long-existing unity of
the kingdom was broken, no one of the fragments
was broken, no one of the fragments was a strong as
the original iron, but all were in a state of weakness
denoted by the mixture of iron and clay.
“The conclusion is inevitable, therefore, that the
prophet has here stated the cause for the effect. The
introduction of the weakness of the clay element, as
we come to the feet, resulted in the division of the
kingdom into ten parts, as represented by the ten toes;
and this result, or division, is more than intimated in
the sudden mention of a plurality of contemporaneous
kings. Therefore, while we find no evidence that the
legs denote division, but serious objections against
such a view, we do find good reason for supposing that
the toes denote division, as here claimed.
“Furthermore, each of the four monarchies had
its own particular territory, which was the kingdom
proper, and where we are to look for the chief events in
its history shadowed forth by the symbol. We are not,
therefore, to look for the divisions of the Roman Empire in the territory formerly occupied by Babylon, or
Persia, or Grecia, but in the territory proper of the
Roman kingdom, which was finally known as the
Western Empire. Rome conquered the world, but
the kingdom of Rome proper lay west of Grecia.
That is what was represented by the legs of iron.
There, then, we look for the ten kingdoms, and there
we find them. We are not obliged to mutilate or deform the symbol to make it a fit and accurate representation of historical events.” Smith, DR, 57-59.

“Broken. Literally, ‘fragile,’ ‘brittle.’” 4SDABC,
775.
“These barbarian kingdoms differed greatly in
military prowess as Gibbon states when he refers to
‘the powerful monarchies of the Franks and the Visigoths, and the dependent kingdoms of the Suevi and
Burgundians.’ There would always be nations in western Europe that were strong, and some that were
weak.” Source Unknown.
Ten Toes Represents Our Position Today.—
“Our kingdom is not of this world. We are waiting for our Lord from heaven to come to earth to put
down all authority and power, and set up His everlasting kingdom. Earthly powers are shaken. We need
not, and cannot, expect union among the nations of the
earth. Our position in the image of Nebuchadnezzar
is represented by the toes, in a divided state, and of
a crumbling material, that will not hold together.
Prophecy shows us that the great day of God is right
upon us. It hasteth greatly.” 1 Testimonies, 360.

DANIEL 2:43
And whereas thou sawest iron mixed
with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall
not cleave one to another, even as iron is
not mixed with clay.
Rome the Last Universal Empire.—
“With Rome fell the last of the world’s universal empires. Heretofore it was possible for one nation,
rising superior to its neighbors in prowess, bravery, and
the science of war, to consolidate them into one vast
empire. But when Rome fell, such possibilities forever
passed away. The iron was mixed with clay, and lost
the power of cohesion. No man or combination of
men can again consolidate the fragments. This point is
so well set forth by another that we quote his words:
“ ‘From this, its divided state, the first strength of
the empire departed—but not as that of the others had
done. No other kingdom was to succeed it, as it had
the three which went before it. It was to continue, in
this tenfold division, until the kingdom of the stone
smote it, upon its feet; broke them in pieces, and scattered them as the wind does “the chaff of the summer
threshing-floor!” Yet, through all this time, a portion
of its strength was to remain. And so the prophet says,
“And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part
of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.” Verse 42....
“‘Time and again men have dreamed of rearing
on these dominions one mighty kingdom. Charlemagne tried it. Charles V tried it. Louis XIV tried it.
Napoleon tried it. But neither succeeded. A single

Partly Strong and Partly Broken.—

62

DANIEL 2
verse of prophecy was stronger than all their host...
“Partly strong, and partly broken,” was the prophetic
description. And such, too, has been the historic fact
concerning them.... Ten kingdoms were formed out of
it; and “broken,” as then it was, it still continues—i.e.,
“partly broken.” ...It is “partly strong”—i.e., it retains,
even in its broken state, enough of its iron strength to
resist all attempts to mold its part together. “This shall
not be,” says the word of God. “This has not been,”
replies the book of history.’” Smith, DR, 60.

Frederick VIII of Denmark. The eldest daughter married Edward, the prince of Wales, and became Queen
Alexandria of England. The second son, Prince William, became the king of Greece and was known as
George V. The second daughter married Czar Alexander of Russia. The two sons of Frederick VIII, king of
Denmark, took the thrones of Denmark and Norway.
A son of the Empress of Russia became Czar Nicholas,
and a son of Queen Alexandria of England became
George V, and a son of George V of Greece became
Constantine X of Greece. Thus the kings of Norway,
Denmark, Russia, England, and Greece were first
cousins, all being grandsons of Christian IX of
Denmark.” Bunch, BOD, 30.

They Shall Mingle Themselves With the Seed of
Men—Spiritual.—
“ ‘Mixing themselves with the seed of men,’ that
is, uniting church and state, ecclesiastical and civil,
in the government.” Miller, Evidence, 44.

“The eldest son of Queen Victoria became Edward VII of England, and her eldest daughter married
Emperor Frederick of Germany and became Constantine X of Greece. Therefore, the Queen of Greece and
the Emperor of Germany were brother and sister, and
both were cousins of the King of England. Czar
Nicholas II married Princess Alix of England, a grandchild of Queen Victoria of England and of Emperor
Wilhelm of Germany. Haakon VII of Norway married
Princess Maude, sister of King George of England.
Hence, the Czarina of Russia, the Queen of Norway,
and the Queen of Greece, were first cousins, while
the Queen of Norway and the king of England were
brother and sister.” Bunch, BOD, 31.

“The seed of God comes from God and represents
the Word of God—truth. ‘Now the parable is this:
The seed is the word of God [= Jesus, Jn. 1:1].’ Luke
8:11.
“It is God’s Word of truth that truly unites us.
John 17:17,19,21: Sanctify them through thy truth:
thy word is truth. …And for their sakes I sanctify
myself, that they also might be sanctified through the
truth. …That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us:
that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.’
Thus, mingling ourselves with the seed of God would
unite us. We cleave together only in the truth.
“The seed of man comes from man and represents the words and teachings of men. The seed of
men is powerless. Jesus said, ‘In vain do they worship
Me teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.’
Matt. 15:9. The seed of men—man-made false doctrines—have no power in them to keep men in unity.
“Notice the two seeds compared in this verse of
Scripture: ‘Being born again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth
and abideth for ever.’ 1Peter 1:23. The corruptible
seed is the seed of man—religious teachings not found
in the Word of God. These ‘seeds’ are powerless to
unite us with God or with man. In fact, they cause division. The incorruptible seed is the Word of God—
the truths that contain the power of God in them to
unite us with Himself and other members of His
body—the church.” PJ.

“ ‘They shall mingle themselves with the seed of
men’—i.e., marriages shall be formed, in hope thus
to consolidate their power, and, in the end, to unite
these divided kingdoms into one.
“ ‘And shall this device succeed?—No. The
prophet answers: “They shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.” And the history of Europe, is but a running commentary on the exact
fulfillment of these words. From the time of Canute
until the present age, it has been the policy of the reigning monarchs, the beaten path which they have trodden, in order to reach a mightier scepter and a wider
sway.... Napoleon ...sought to reach by alliance,
what he could not gain by force, i.e., to build up one
mighty, consolidated empire. And did he succeed?—
Nay. The very power with which he was allied, proved
his destruction, in the troops of Blucher, on the field of
Waterloo! The iron would not mingle with clay.’ [William Newton, Lectures on the First Two Visions of the
Book of Daniel, pp. 34-36.]
“But Napoleon was not the last to try the experiment. Numerous European wars followed the efforts
of the Little Corporal. To avert future conflicts, benevolent rulers resorted to the expedient of intermarriage to ensure peace, until by the opening of the
twentieth century it was asserted that every ranking
hereditary ruler of Europe was related to the British royal family. World War I showed the futility of
these attempts.” Smith, DR, 61

“The result of making void the law of God may
be seen in the increasing immorality of these several
kingdoms. If the inhabitants had kept the fear of
God ever before them, they would have been given
wisdom and power, which would have bound them
together, and kept them strong.” R&H, 2/6/1900.
They Shall Mingle Themselves With the Seed of
Men—Physical.—
“King Christian IX of Denmark had six children,
three sons and three daughters. The eldest son became

63

GEMS FROM DANIEL
attempt to mingle—nay, more, there was an approach
at mingling in both cases. But it was to be abortive.
And how marked the emphasis with which history affirms this declaration of the word of God!’ [William
Newton, Lectures on the First Two Visions of the Book
of Daniel, p. 36.]” Smith, DR, 61-63.
They Shall Not Cleave Together.—
“Attempts to unite into one great empire the various nations that grew out of the fourth empire have
ended in failure. Temporarily certain sections have
been united, but the union has not proved peaceful or
permanent.
“There have also been many political alliances
among the nations. Farseeing statesmen have tried in
various ways to bring about a federation of nations that
would operate successfully, but all such attempts have
proved disappointing.
“The prophecy does not specifically declare that
there could not be a temporary union of various elements, through force of arms or political domination.
It does declare, however, that the constituent nations,
should such a union be attempted or effected, would
not become organically fused, and that they would remain mutually suspicious and unfriendly. A federation
created on such a foundation is doomed to crumble.
The temporary success of some dictator or nation must,
therefore, not be labeled a failure of Daniel’s prophecy.
In the end Satan will actually be able to achieve a
temporary union of all nations (Rev. 17:12-18; cf.
Rev. 16:14; GC 624), but the federation will be brief,
and in a short time the elements composing this union
will turn on one another.” 4SDABC, 775,776.

Various Dictators Tried but Failed to Unite Europe.
League of Nations, and United Nations.—
“With the conviction that [WW1] had been fought
which would end war, came the announced inherent
rights of minorities, and the principles of selfdetermination, ensured by a world league of nations
which would restrain dictators and punish aggressors.
“Yet under the very shadow of the League of Nations’ palace arose leaders who would destroy world
peace and shatter the ideal of world union, while
preaching a new social revolution. They vainly promised the triumph of culture and a union born of racial
superiority ensuring the ‘partly strong’ and ‘partly broken’ nations of Europe ‘a thousand years of tranquility.’
“Out of the welter of confusion, the wreck of nations, the destruction of institutions, the sacrifice of
treasure resultant from centuries of frugality, through
eyes grief-dimmed by the loss of the flower of its
young manhood, the ravishment of its womanhood, the
slaughter of infancy and age, through clouds of smoking human blood a distraught world looks anxiously for
its signs of surcease. Will the elusive mirage of world
peace based upon a trust in European solidarity, the
result of wishful thinking, again cause men to forget
the counsel of the word of God, ‘They shall not cleave
one to another’?
“Alliances may come, and it may appear that the
iron and miry clay of the feet and toes of the great image have finally fused, but God said, ‘They shall not
cleave one to another.’ It may seem that old animosities have disappeared and that the ‘ten kings’ have
gone the way of all the earth, but ‘the Scripture cannot
be broken.’ John 10: 35.
“We conclude with a word by William Newton:
‘And yet if, as the result of these alliances, or of other
causes, that number is sometimes disturbed, it need
not surprise us. The iron was “mixed with clay.” For a
season, in the image, you might not distinguish between them. But they would not remain so. ‘They
shall not cleave one to another.’ The nature of the
substances forbids them to do so in the one case; the
word of prophecy in the other. Yet there was to be the

DANIEL 2:44
And in the days of these kings shall the
God of heaven set up a kingdom, which
shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom
shall not be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these
kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.
In the Days of These Kings.—
“Psalm 2 is written when Jesus becomes King,
and receives His kingdom. He then asks of the Father
and receives the heathen for His inheritance. Finally
he comes to earth to smite them with a rod of iron and
break them like a potter’s vessel. The setting of the
psalm is the days of ‘these kings’ of the earth.” PJ
“PSALM 2:1 Why do the heathen rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing? 2 The kings of the earth
set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together,
against the LORD, and against his anointed, saying, 3
Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their
cords from us. 4 He that sitteth in the heavens shall

64

DANIEL 2
laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision. 5 Then
shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them
in his sore displeasure. 6 Yet have I set my king upon
my holy hill of Zion. 7 I will declare the decree: the
LORD hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day
have I begotten thee. 8 Ask of me, and I shall give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession. 9 Thou shalt
break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them
in pieces like a potter's vessel. 10 Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth.
11 Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling. 12 Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish
from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.”

Ten Divisions Exist Till Second Coming.—
“It will be asked if those kings of kingdoms are
still in existence, in the days of which the God of
Heaven was to set up his kingdom. If they were established so long ago as 483, have they not all
passed away? We answer, No. They are the kingdoms which, as Dr. Scott remarks, have generally been
known since that time as the ten kingdoms of western
Europe. Many of them can easily be traced to the present time. Originally they were the Huns, Ostrogoths,
Visigoths, Franks, Vandals, Suevi, Heruli, Burgundians, Anglo-Saxons and Lombards. And we have now
the French from the Franks, the English from the Anglo-Saxons, the Portuguese from the Suevi, the Spanish
from the Visigoths, the modern Italians from the Ostrogoths, and the Huns, and Lombards from the original stock of that name.
“…We are still in the days of these kings, and
wait for the setting up of the kingdom of God, which is
the next and only remaining event in this line of prophecy.” Biblical Institute, 37,38.

“The kings mentioned in the text are most certainly the ten kings, or ten kingdoms, of the divided
fourth kingdom; for they are the subject of discourse. The phrase, ‘In the days of these kings,’ does
not refer to the days of the kingdom of Babylon, of
Media and Persia, of Greece, nor to the days of Rome
before it was divided into ten kingdoms. But it does
refer to Rome after it had been divided into ten kingdoms, represented by the ten toes of the image. Therefore the kingdom was not set up at the time of the first
advent of Christ. Neither could it be set up, according
to the text, until the Roman kingdom should be divided
into the ten kingdoms, which division took place between the years A.D. 356 and 483. The setting up of
this kingdom is evidently a future event.” White,
James, BA, 80.81.
“Britain, France, and Germany have spread
their power over the whole world; and have so intertwined themselves in the affairs of the whole
world that what touches the world touches them,
and what touches them touches the world.” Jones,
GNOT, 33.

The God of Heaven to Set Up a Kingdom.—
“The establishment of the eternal kingdom is by a
succession of events, the first of which occurs prior to
the destruction of earthly governments.
“1. The Son of God, at the close of his ministration for sinners, and before his second appearing, will receive the kingdom from the Father. In
the seventh chapter of this prophetic book we read these words: ‘I saw in the night visions, and behold, one
like the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven,
and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him
near before him. And there was given him dominion,
and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages, should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his
kingdom, that which shall not be destroyed.’
Dan.7:13,14. This language describes a grand transaction in Heaven between the Father and the Son. The
Son, at his second advent to this world, does not approach the Father. So far from this, that the apostle
represents the Father as remaining in Heaven, and
sending his Son. ‘And he [the Father] shall send Jesus

“Remember, that by the end of time, the ten kingdom of Europe are global in the extent of their influence, when you include the nations birthed from their
former colonies, etc. Thus, the horn of England would
include all the nations of the British Commonwealth
(all of North America, many countries in Africa, Asia,
even in S.Am., C. America, and the Carribean. Spain’s
influence would extend to most of South and Central
America, the Philippines, and parts of Africa. When
you think of the global influence of the other countries
of Europe (France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Portugal) through their former colonies, the
extent of their influence covers the world.” PJ.
“For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of
the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that
great day of God Almighty.” Revelation 16:14.

65

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Christ, which before was preached unto you.’ Acts
3:20.
“The words of the Psalmist are to the point: ‘Ask
of me [says the Father to the Son], and I shall give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt
break them with a rod of iron, thou shalt dash them
in pieces like a potter's vessel.’ Ps.2:8,9. Before the
Son makes his second advent to this world, he receives
from the Father ‘dominion, and glory, and a kingdom.’
The heathen are his, and the uttermost parts of the earth
are his possession. Thus the God of Heaven sets up
the kingdom by investing his Son with royal authority before sending him to manifest it in the earth
among his enemies.
“2. After the coronation of the King of kings,
the opening heavens will reveal him coming in grandeur and in glory, leading on the armies of Heaven to
the last great conflict with the beast, the false
prophet, and the kings of the earth. See Rev.19.
‘His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were
many crowns.’ ‘And he hath on his vesture and on his
thigh a name written, “Kings of kings, and Lord of
lords.”’ His mission then will be to ‘judge and make
war.’ On one side will be the beast, and the kings of
the earth and their enemies; and on the other side will
be the King of kings, followed by all the holy angels.
The armies of Heaven achieve a glorious victory. ‘And
the beast was taken, and with him, the false prophet
that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast,
and them that worshiped his image. These both were
cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.
And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that
sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his
mouth.’
“In Rev.19, we see the complete destruction of
all wicked men, or the dashing of the nations in
pieces as a potter's vessel, or the image broken by
the stone, and utterly destroyed and removed like
the chaff before the wind. The destruction of the enemies of the Lord, represented by the several names of
‘man of sin,’ ‘mystery of iniquity,’ and ‘that wicked,’
is thus described by the apostle—‘whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming.’ 2 Thess. 2:8.
“3. At the second advent of Christ, the righteous dead will be raised, the living righteous will be
changed, and thus the subjects of the eternal kingdom will be made immortal. 1 Thess.4:14-18; 1
Cor.15:51-55. This is the first resurrection at the commencement of the millennium.
“4. The immortal subjects of the kingdom will
ascend with their Lord to the eternal city, and reign
with him in the judgment of the wicked a thousand
years, during which time the earth will be desolate.
We have seen from New-Testament testimony that
all wicked men will be destroyed at the second advent. See 2 Thess.1:7-9; 2:7,8; Matt.13:26-30, 37-43;

3:12; Luke 17:26-30. The prophets of the Old Testament clearly describe the desolation of the earth during
the millennium. See Isa.6:8-11; 13:9; 24:1-3; 34:1-15;
28:21,22; Jer.4:20,27; 25:32-38; Zeph.1:2,3; 3:6-8.
“5. At the close of the millennium, the wicked
will be raised from the dead. ‘But the rest of the dead
lived not again until the thousand years were finished.’
Rev.20:5 They will then be destroyed. ‘And fire
came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured
them.’ Rev.20:9. Satan, and all the fallen angels, and
all wicked men, will then be consumed by the fire of
Jehovah’s wrath. Rev.20:10; Matt.25:41; 2 Pet.2:4;
Jude 6. In the general conflagration of that time, the
old earth and atmospheric heaven will pass away from
the face of Him that sitteth on the great white throne.
Rev.20:11. ‘The heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the
earth also; and the works that are therein shall be
burned up.’ 2 Pet.3:10.
6. From the old earth, melted and cleansed from
sin and sinners, will come forth, molded by the hand of
the great Restorer, the new earth, free from all the
marks of the curse. ‘And I saw a new heaven and a
new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away.’ Rev.21:1. Then will be fulfilled the
words of David: ‘For yet a little while, and the wicked
shall not be; yea, thou shalt diligently consider his
place, and it shall not be. But the meek shall inherit the
earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
peace.’ Ps.37:10,11. And Christ refers to the same in
his sermon on the mount. ‘Blessed are the meek; for
they shall inherit the earth.’ Matt.5:5.
“It is at the close of the one thousand years of
Revelation 20, after the final destruction of all
God’s enemies, that ‘the saints of the Most High
shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom
forever, even forever and ever.’ ‘And the kingdom
and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under
the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the
saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom.’ Dan.7:18,27. Then will the kingdom in
all its parts - the King, the subjects, the territory, the
holy city being the metropolis—be complete. Then the
stone will have become a great mountain, so as to
fill the whole earth.” White, James, BA, 82-86.
‘A certain nobleman went into a far country
to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.’
Luke 19:12.”
“Our kingdom is not of this world. We are waiting for our Lord from heaven to come to earth to put
down all authority and power, and set up His everlasting kingdom.” 1 Testimonies, 360.
When Is This Kingdom To Be Established?—
“...The Bible plainly declares that the kingdom
of God was still future at the time of our Lord’s last

66

DANIEL 2
Passover. (Matt. 26:29.) Christ did not set up the
kingdom before His ascension. (Acts 1:6.) It states
further that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of God. (1 Cor. 15:50.) It is a matter of promise to the
apostles, and to all those who love God. (James 2:5.) It
is promised in the future to the little flock. (Luke
12:32.) Through much tribulation the saints are to enter the coming kingdom. (Acts 14:22.) It is to be set
up when Christ shall judge the living and the dead.
(2 Timothy 4:1.) This is to be when He shall come in
His glory with all His holy angels. (Matt. 25: 31-34.)
“We do not say that the exact time is revealed (we
emphasize the fact that it is not) in this prophecy of
Daniel 2 or in any other prophecy; but so near an approximation is given that the generation which is to see
the establishment of this kingdom may mark its approach unerringly, and make that preparation which
will entitle the children of God to share in all its glories.
“Time has fully developed this great image in all
its parts. Most accurately does it represent the important political events it was designed to symbolize.
It has stood complete for more than fourteen centuries.
It waits to be smitten upon the feet by the stone cut out
of the mountain without hands, that is, the kingdom of
Christ. This is to be accomplished when the Lord shall
be revealed in flaming fire, ‘taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ.’ 2 Thessalonians 1: 8. (See also
Psalm 2: 8, 9.) ‘In the days of these kings the God of
heaven is to set up a kingdom.’ We have been in the
days of these kings for many centuries, and we are still
in their days. So far as this prophecy is concerned,
the very next event is the setting up of God’s everlasting kingdom. Other prophecies and innumerable
signs show unmistakably that the coming of Christ is
near at hand.” Smith, DR, 64,65.

feeling of our infirmities,’ the apostle says: ‘Let us
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy, and find grace.’ Hebrews 4:15,
16. The throne of grace represents the kingdom of
grace; for the existence of a throne implies the existence of a kingdom. In many of His parables Christ
uses the expression ‘the kingdom of heaven’ to designate the work of divine grace upon the hearts of men.
“So the throne of glory represents the kingdom
of glory; and this kingdom is referred to in the Saviour’s words: ‘When the Son of man shall come in His
glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then shall He
sit upon the throne of His glory: and before Him shall
be gathered all nations.’ Matthew 25:31, 32. This
kingdom is yet future. It is not to be set up until the
second advent of Christ.
“The kingdom of grace was instituted immediately after the fall of man, when a plan was devised
for the redemption of the guilty race. It then existed
in the purpose and by the promise of God; and through
faith, men could become its subjects. Yet it was not
actually established until the death of Christ.”
Great Controversy, 346,347.
“It cannot mean the preaching of the gospel or
the kingdom of grace, for then the stone would have
struck where the legs branch from the truck of the
body of the image. The stone represents a kingdom
that destroys and then supplants earthly kingdoms and
this is never true of the preaching of the gospel. The
gospel may reform and refine, but it does not physically destroy nations.” Bunch, BOD, 33.
“This Stone Kingdom cannot be the Kingdom of
Grace set up by the Gospel. It follows the dividing of
Rome. It destroys all earthly kingdoms. This was
not so of the preaching of the Gospel. The Gospel does
not destroy nations.” Burnside, DPUF, 55.

“How the kingdom thus set up in the days of these kings shall break in pieces all the wicked kingdoms
of earth, is very plainly stated in Rev.19:11-21.” Andrews, JEO, 83.

This Kingdom Predicted by Ezekiel.—
“The final overthrow of all earthly dominions is
plainly foretold in the word of truth. In the prophecy
uttered when sentence from God was pronounced upon
the last king of Israel is given the message:
“ ‘Thus saith the Lord God; Remove the diadem,
and take off the crown:... exalt him that is low, and
abase him that is high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no more, until He come [Jesus
Christ at Second Coming] whose right it is; and I will
give it Him.’ Ezekiel 2126,27.
“The crown removed from Israel passed successively to the kingdoms of Babylon, Medo-Persia,
Greece, and Rome. God says, ‘It shall be no more,
until He come whose right it is; and I will give it
Him.’” Education, 179.

Not the Kingdom of Grace.—
“The ‘kingdom of God’ which they [the disciples]
had declared to be at hand was established by the death
of Christ. This kingdom was not, as they had been
taught to believe, an earthly empire. Nor was it that
future, immortal kingdom which shall be set up when
‘the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the
people of the saints of the Most High;’ that everlasting
kingdom, in which ‘all dominions shall serve and obey
Him.’ Daniel 7:27. As used in the Bible, the expression ‘kingdom of God’ is employed to designate both
the kingdom of grace and the kingdom of glory. The
kingdom of grace is brought to view by Paul in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. After pointing to Christ, the
compassionate intercessor who is ‘touched with the

It Shall Break in Pieces and Consume All These
Kingdoms.—
“Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the

67

GEMS FROM DANIEL
scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner: this is the
Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
“And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be
broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder.’ Matthew 21:42, 44.

No Repeat of these Kingdoms.—
“Daniel 2 predicts that there will be four world
empires. (The fourth empire has two phases—Pagan
and Papal Rome.) After Papal Rome, Christ’s kingdom, the fifth, is established. It is an everlasting
kingdom! That means that there is no repeat of this
prophecy. It starts at Daniel’s time and go on to everlasting fifth kingdom of Jesus Christ! The prophecy of
Daniel 2 never ends! And so is never repeated.” PJ.

“I will declare the decree: the LORD hath said
unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten
thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod
of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's
vessel.” Psalm 2:7-9.

DANIEL 2:45
Forasmuch as thou sawest that the
stone was cut out of the mountain without
hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron,
the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold;
the great God hath made known to the
king what shall come to pass hereafter: and
the dream is certain, and the interpretation
thereof sure.

“And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that
with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule
them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.” Revelation 19:15.
Kings of Israel Depicted Christ’s Smiting the Image.—
“But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy
their altars, and break down their images, and cut
down their groves, and burn their graven images with
fire.” Deuteronomy 7:5.

The Sequence of Events.—
“1. The stone smote the image upon his feet.
“2. Then was the iron and clay, the brass, the silver and gold, broken in pieces.
“3. The wind carried them away, like the chaff of
the summer threshing-floors, so that no place was
found for them. No language can describe destruction
more complete.
“4. Then, and not till then, the stone that smote
the image became a great mountain and filled the
whole earth.” White, James, BA, 78.

“And he [Moses] took the calf which they had
made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strowed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.” Exodus 32:20.
“And he [Josiah} brake in pieces the images….
Moreover the altar that was at Bethel, [and] the high
place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin, had made, both that altar and the high
place he brake down, and burned the high place, and
stamped it small to powder, and burned the grove. ”
2 Kings 23:14.

The Stone.—
“Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay
in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation.” Isaiah
28:16.
“Looking with pity upon them, the Saviour continued, ‘Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing,
and it is marvelous in our eyes? Therefore say I unto
you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you,
and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall
be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will
grind him to powder.’
“This prophecy the Jews had often repeated in the
synagogues, applying it to the coming Messiah. Christ
was the cornerstone of the Jewish economy, and of the
whole plan of salvation. This foundation stone the
Jewish builders, the priests and rulers of Israel, were
now rejecting. The Saviour called their attention to the
prophecies that would show them their danger. By
every means in His power He sought to make plain to

“And the idols he shall utterly abolish. And
they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the
caves of the earth, for fear of the LORD, and for the
glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly
the earth.
“In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver,
and his idols of gold, which they made each one for
himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats; To go
into the clefts of the ragged rocks, for fear of the
LORD, and for the glory of his majesty, when he
ariseth to shake terribly the earth.” Isaiah 2:18-21.
Christ’s Kingdom Shall Stand Forever.—
“The kingdom that never will be destroyed, shall
stand forever, that is, the inhabitants of it are sealed
and will never fall back into sin. Righteousness will
exalt the nation that is forever righteous, forever. PJ.

68

DANIEL 2
them the nature of the deed they were about to do.
“And His words had another purpose. In asking
the question, ‘When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?’ Christ designed that the Pharisees should answer as they did. He designed that they should condemn themselves. His warnings, failing to arouse them
to repentance, would seal their doom, and He wished
them to see that they had brought ruin on themselves.
He designed to show them the justice of God in the
withdrawal of their national privileges, which had already begun, and which would end, not only in the
destruction of their temple and their city, but in the
dispersion of the nation.
“The hearers recognized the warning. But notwithstanding the sentence they themselves had pronounced, the priests and rulers were ready to fill out the
picture by saying, ‘This is the heir; come, let us kill
him.’ ‘But when they sought to lay hands on Him,
they feared the multitude,’ for the public sentiment
was in Christ’s favor.
“In quoting the prophecy of the rejected stone,
Christ referred to an actual occurrence in the history of
Israel. The incident was connected with the building of
the first temple. While it had a special application at
the time of Christ’s first advent, and should have appealed with special force to the Jews, it has also a lesson for us. When the temple of Solomon was erected,
the immense stones for the walls and the foundation
were entirely prepared at the quarry; after they were
brought to the place of building, not an instrument was
to be used upon them; the workmen had only to place
them in position. For use in the foundation, one stone
of unusual size and peculiar shape had been brought;
but the workmen could find no place for it, and would
not accept it. It was an annoyance to them as it lay
unused in their way. Long it remained a rejected stone.
But when the builders came to the laying of the corner,
they searched for a long time to find a stone of sufficient size and strength, and of the proper shape, to take
that particular place, and bear the great weight which
would rest upon it. Should they make an unwise
choice for this important place, the safety of the entire
building would be endangered. They must find a stone
capable of resisting the influence of the sun, of frost,
and of tempest. Several stones had at different times
been chosen, but under the pressure of immense
weights they had crumbled to pieces. Others could not
bear the test of the sudden atmospheric changes. But
at last attention was called to the stone so long rejected. It had been exposed to the air, to sun and
storm, without revealing the slightest crack. The
builders examined this stone. It had borne every test
but one. If it could bear the test of severe pressure,
they decided to accept it for the cornerstone. The trial
was made. The stone was accepted, brought to its assigned position, and found to be an exact fit. In prophetic vision, Isaiah was shown that this stone was a
symbol of Christ. He says:

“ ‘Sanctify the Lord of hosts Himself; and let
Him be your fear, and let Him be your dread. And
He shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to both the houses of
Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. And many among them shall stumble,
and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken.’ Carried down in prophetic vision to the first advent, the prophet is shown that Christ is to bear trials
and tests of which the treatment of the chief cornerstone in the temple of Solomon was symbolic. ‘Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion
for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious
cornerstone, a sure foundation: he that believeth
shall not make haste.’ Isa. 8:13-15; 28:16.
“In infinite wisdom, God chose the foundation
stone, and laid it Himself. He called it ‘a sure foundation. The entire world may lay upon it their burdens
and griefs; it can endure them all. With perfect safety
they may build upon it. Christ is a ‘tried stone.’ Those
who trust in Him, He never disappoints. He has borne
every test. He has endured the pressure of Adam’s
guilt, and the guilt of his posterity, and has come off
more than conqueror of the powers of evil. He has
borne the burdens cast upon Him by every repenting
sinner. In Christ the guilty heart has found relief. He
is the sure foundation. All who make Him their dependence rest in perfect security.
“In Isaiah's prophecy, Christ is declared to be
both a sure foundation and a stone of stumbling.
The apostle Peter, writing by inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, clearly shows to whom Christ is a foundation
stone, and to whom a rock of offense:
“ ‘If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, Behold,
I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone, elect, precious: and
he that believeth on Him shall not be confounded. Unto you therefore which believe He is precious: but
unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the
builders disallowed, the same is made the head of
the corner, and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offense, even to them which stumble at the word,
being disobedient.’ 1 Peter 2:3-8.
“To those who believe, Christ is the sure foundation. These are they who fall upon the Rock and are
broken. Submission to Christ and faith in Him are here
represented. To fall upon the Rock and be broken is to
give up our self-righteousness and to go to Christ with
the humility of a child, repenting of our transgressions,
and believing in His forgiving love. And so also it is
by faith and obedience that we build on Christ as our
foundation.
“Upon this living stone, Jews and Gentiles alike
may build. This is the only foundation upon which we

69

GEMS FROM DANIEL
may securely build. It is broad enough for all, and
strong enough to sustain the weight and burden of the
whole world. And by connection with Christ, the living stone, all who build upon this foundation become
living stones. Many persons are by their own endeavors hewn, polished, and beautified; but they cannot
become ‘living stones,’ because they are not connected
with Christ. Without this connection, no man can be
saved. Without the life of Christ in us, we cannot withstand the storms of temptation. Our eternal safety depends upon our building upon the sure foundation.
Multitudes are today building upon foundations that
have not been tested. When the rain falls, and the
tempest rages, and the floods come, their house will
fall, because it is not founded upon the eternal Rock,
the chief cornerstone Christ Jesus.
“ ‘To them which stumble at the word, being
disobedient,’ Christ is a rock of offense. But ‘the
stone which the builders disallowed, the same is
made the head of the corner.’ Like the rejected
stone, Christ in His earthly mission had borne neglect
and abuse. He was ‘despised and rejected of men; a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: . . . He
was despised, and we esteemed Him not.’ Isa. 53:3.
But the time was near when He would be glorified. By
the resurrection from the dead He would be declared
‘the Son of God with power.’ Rom. 1:4. At His second coming He would be revealed as Lord of heaven
and earth. Those who were now about to crucify Him
would recognize His greatness. Before the universe the
rejected stone would become the head of the corner.
‘And on ‘whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder.’ The people who rejected Christ were
soon to see their city and their nation destroyed. Their
glory would be broken, and scattered as the dust before
the wind. And what was it that destroyed the Jews? It
was the rock which, had they built upon it, would have
been their security. It was the goodness of God despised, the righteousness spurned, the mercy slighted.
Men set themselves in opposition to God, and all that
would have been their salvation was turned to their
destruction. All that God ordained unto life they found
to be unto death. In the Jews’ crucifixion of Christ was
involved the destruction of Jerusalem. The blood shed
upon Calvary was the weight that sank them to ruin for
this world and for the world to come. So it will be in
the great final day, when judgment shall fall upon the
rejecters of God’s grace. Christ, their rock of offense,
will then appear to them as an avenging mountain. The
glory of His countenance, which to the righteous is life,
will be to the wicked a consuming fire. Because of
love rejected, grace despised, the sinner will be destroyed.” Desire of Ages, 597-600.

himself:.’” PJ.
“He was taken from prison and from judgment:
and who shall declare his generation? For he was cut
off out of the land of the living: for the transgression
of my people was he stricken.” Isaiah 53:8.
Cut Out of the Mountain.—
“What is the mountain out of which the stone was
cut that smote the image on its feet? It is not cut out of
a mountain, but the mountain. The mountain of God
represents God’s church (in heaven and on earth).
“By the multitude of thy merchandise they have
filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast
sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the
mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering
cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.” Ezekiel
28:16.
“For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of
the height of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, there shall
all the house of Israel, all of them in the land, serve
me.” Ezekiel 20:40.
“Thus saith the LORD; I am returned unto Zion,
and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem
shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the
LORD of hosts the holy mountain.” Zech. 8:3.
“But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the
city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of angels, To the general
assembly and church of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect, And to Jesus the
mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of
Abel.” Hebrews 12:22-24.
Jesus was cut out of the mountain of God—His
church. (See also Micah God’s church is also represented as a woman.
“And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a
woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her
feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars: And
she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and
pained to be delivered.
“And there appeared another wonder in heaven;
and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and
ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his
tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did
cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the
woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour
her child as soon as it was born.
“And she brought forth a man child, who was
to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child
was caught up unto God, and to his throne.” Revelation 12:1-5.
“Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he
saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a
body hast thou prepared me.” Hebrews 10:5.” PJ.
“Jesus was cut out of Mount Zion (God’s church)
in two ways. He was the Only Begotten Son of God—

Cut Out.—
“The word ‘cut out’ is the Chaldean word g’zar
that corresponds to the Hebrew word, gazar, which
means to ‘cut down’ or ‘cut off.’ ‘And after threescore
and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for

70

DANIEL 2
begotten of a woman under the law in fallen humanity,
but with a sanctified mind through the agency of the
Holy Spirit at Bethlehem. Gal. 4:4; Rev. 12:1. He was
also the Only Begotten Son of God at His resurrection—rising with a glorified human body. Acts 13:33.
“And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that
the promise which was made unto the fathers, God hath
fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he
hath raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in
the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee.” Acts 13:32,33.

It Shall Break In Pieces.—
“This is a physical, literal breaking up and disintegration of Satan’s last great global empire. This is
not a spiritual blow. If it was, the stone would be hitting the entire image. This is the set of the kingdom of
glory, not the kingdom of grace.” PJ.
“I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form,
and void; and the heavens, and they had no light….
“I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the cities thereof were broken down at
the presence of the LORD, and by his fierce anger.”
Jeremiah 4:23-26.

Cut Out Without Hands.—
“We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that
is made with hands, and within three days I will build
another made without hands.” [The absence of human aid, assistance, or intervention]. Mark 14:58.

“Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the
scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner… And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.” Matthew 21:42, 44.

“This final and everlasting dominion is set up
without human power or effort or even help. No human agency is responsible for the stone’s being cut
or chiseled out of the mountain or its being hurled
with crushing force against the image. The destruction of earthly dominions and the setting up of the everlasting kingdom are supernaturally accomplished. It
is done ‘without hands.’ ‘By no human hands.’—
Moffatt. It is a power that human hands have nothing
to do with. ‘A house not built by human hands but
eternal.’ 2 Cor. 5:1.” Bunch, BOD, 34.

“I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.”
Daniel 7:11.
“And to you who are troubled rest with us, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels,
“In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power;
“When he shall come to be glorified in his saints,
and to be admired in all them that believe (because our
testimony among you was believed) in that day.” 2
Thessalonians 1:7-10.

“The phrase ‘without hands’ refers to Christ in
His resurrected, glorified state. Before His crucifixion,
His false accusers stated that ‘We heard him say, I will
destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within
three days I will build another made without hands’
(Mark 14:58). Yet when Christ said, ‘Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it up’ (John 2:19),
He was speaking of the ‘temple of his body’ (John
2:21). Therefore, the phrase ‘without hands’ refers to
Christ in His glorified resurrected state, having been
raised by the power of the Holy Spirit (1 Peter 3:18).
And, because Christ came forth from the tomb in His
resurrected, glorified body made ‘without hands,’
He will return again to give His faithful followers this
same glorified, resurrected body. Referring to this glorified, resurrected body that the righteous will receive
when Christ returns, the apostle Paul stated that ‘we
know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens’ (2 Cor. 5:1).
“Overall, the Bible clearly demonstrates that the
‘stone’ made ‘without hands’ is a symbol of the resurrected, glorified Christ who will return the second time
to earth from the ‘mountain’ of God’s kingdom; when
this take place, He will pulverize the ‘great image,’
resurrect His faithful followers with glorified bodies
‘not made with hands,’ and eventually allow them to
populate the new earth in the eternal world.”
Swearingen, TOOTN, 15,16.

“And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white
horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful
and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and
make war. …And out of his mouth goeth a sharp
sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and
he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth
the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty
God.” Revelation 19:11, 15.
“And the slain of the LORD shall be at that
day from one end of the earth even unto the other
end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither
gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the
ground.” Jeremiah 25:33.
Why Broken in Pieces?—
“The prophet Isaiah had declared that the Lord
would cleanse His people from their iniquities ‘by the
spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.’ The
word of the Lord to Israel was, ‘I will turn My hand

71

GEMS FROM DANIEL
upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take
away all thy tin.’ Isaiah 4:4; 1:25. To sin, wherever
found, ‘our God is a consuming fire.’ Hebrews 12:29.
In all who submit to His power the Spirit of God
will consume sin. But if men cling to sin, they become identified with it. Then the glory of God,
which destroys sin, must destroy them.” Desire of
Ages, 107.

legs of Rome. History had not yet ‘fleshed out’ the
feet and toes of the image by the division of the empire
into the nations of western Europe.
“The striking of the feet indicates that the full anatomical proportions of the image will have been attained, that is, human history will have run its full
course before the stone kingdom makes its appearance.” BRI, 2SOD, 331.332.

How the Stone of Daniel 2 Relates to Chapter One.—
“Our habits of eating and drinking show
whether we are of the world or among the number
whom the Lord by His mighty cleaver of truth has
separated from the world. These are His peculiar
people, zealous of good works. God has spoken in His
word. In the case of Daniel and his three companions,
there are sermons upon health reform. God has spoken
in the history of the children of Israel, from whom for
their good He sought to withhold a flesh diet. He fed
them with bread from heaven; ‘man did eat angels’
food.’ But they encouraged their earthly appetite; and
the more they centered their thoughts upon the fleshpots of Egypt, the more they hated the food which God
gave them to keep them in health physically, mentally,
and morally. They longed for the fleshpots, and in this
they did just as many in our own time have done.” (6T
372) Counsels on Diet & Foods, 379,380.

“When Christ came to earth in the incarnation, the
Roman empire was a single unit. The division of Rome
into Eastern and Western empires was still future as
well as were the nations that developed from the latter.
There were no feet and toes in existence, as it were.
The stone kingdom must wait until these kingdoms
represented by the feet and toes come into historical
existence.
“Secondly, it may be said that political kingdoms
collapse either by deterioration from within or by some
external force of arms. This human activity thereby
prepares the way for the establishment of new political
entities. But of the stone kingdom it is stated that its
establishment would be achieved ‘by no human hand’
(2:45). This statement places in juxtaposition two concepts: an image of kingdoms made with human hands
in contrast to a stone kingdom created apart from human devising. Thus the stone kingdom comes into
existence by a divine act.
“Thirdly, each preceding kingdom in the image
was overthrown and succeeded by another. Since the
stone kingdom is to last forever, it is logical to conclude that it would follow the iron and clay phase of
the kingdoms rather than arise during the existence
of Rome. It would naturally overthrow the last
kingdoms to exist.
“Fourthly, the passage indicates that the stone
kingdom will annihilate all earthly kingdoms (2:44),
and must, of necessity, come at the end of human
history. The nations will be reduced to ‘the chaff of the
summer threshing floors; and the wind [shall carry]
them away, so that not a trace of them [shall be] found’
(2:35). In their place the stone kingdom will be established permanently, embracing the whole earth (2:4445, 35).
“Nothing short of the establishment of Christ’s
kingdom at His second coming could fulfill the superlative descriptions concerning this stone kingdom. The
phrase, ‘it shall stand forever’ (2:44) lifts this kingdom above the temporal into the eternal. And this
interpretation also harmonizes with the account given
by Paul. ‘Then comes the end, when he [Christ] delivers the kingdom to God the Father after destroying
every rule and every authority and power’ (1 Cor.
15:24).” BRI, 2SOD, 352,353.

Luther and the Reformation View of the Stone.—
“Martin Luther (1483-1546) was the foremost;
catalyst for gathering around him a host of supporters
who boldly challenged the Roman Catholic Church,
naming the pope to be the antichrist. In His study of
prophecy, Daniel 2 was given what had become the
standard interpretation of the kingdoms from Babylon
to Rome. Then he adds:
“ ‘In this the whole world agrees, and history
supports it fully in detail. But the prophet has the most
to say about the Roman empire, …the legs, the feet,
and the toes. The Roman empire will be divided.
Spain, France, England, and others emerged from
it, some of them weak, others strong, and although
it will be divided there will still be some strength, as
symbolized by the iron in it…. This empire shall last
until the end; no one will destroy it but Jesus Himself, when His kingdom comes.’
“This expressed view of Luther’s was the agreed
position of Melanchthon (1497-1560), Luther’s friend
and most popular teacher at the University of Wittenberg, and others who espoused the Reformation.” BRI,
2SOD, 339.
Stone Kingdom Comes at the End of the World.—
“Since it is specifically noted that the stone
kingdom strikes the metal image on its feet, it is evident that God did not intend a first century establishment of His kingdom of glory. Neither was it to
begin with the first advent of Christ. Our Lord lived
and ascended to heaven during the era of the iron

Papacy Calls Itself the Stone, the Fifth Kingdom.—
“In his famous treatise, De Civitate Dei (‘The
City of God’), Augustine argues that the kingdom of
God established by Christ will last forever and the

72

DANIEL 2
kingdom of this world is doomed to destruction.
…Through Augustine’s influence the emphasis is
shifted away from the significance of the Second
Coming back to the first advent of Christ. He taught
‘that the coming of the Saviour which continually occurs in His church, that is, in His members, in which
He comes little by little, and piece by piece, since the
whole Church is His body.’ Focus was placed upon
the present church as comprising the kingdom of God.
Consequently, it was natural for him to apply the reign
of Christ cited in prophecy to the reign of the Roman
Church. Hence, Augustine concluded that the stone
(that is, the church) had become a mountain which
presently was filling the earth.”
BRI, 2SOD,
336,337.

shiped, saying, ‘Of a truth it is, that your God is a
God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of
secrets’ (verse 47).” Sanctified Life, 36.
“Nebuchadnezzar was not worshiping Daniel, but
through Daniel was adoring Daniel’s God.”
4SDABC, 776.
“This wonderful dream caused a marked change
in his ideas and opinions, and for a little time he was
influenced by the fear of God; but his heart was not
yet cleansed from its pride, its worldly ambition, its
desire for self-exaltation.”
Youth Instructor,
2/4/1904.
Your God is a God of gods.—
“To Daniel God revealed the light of His purposes, which had been hidden for many generations. He
chose that Daniel should see in vision the light of His
truth, and reflect this light on the proud kingdom of
Babylon. On the despot king was permitted to flash
light from the throne of God. Nebuchadnezzar was
shown that the God of heaven was ruler over all the
monarchs and kings of earth. His name was to go
forth as the God over all gods. God desired Nebuchadnezzar to understand that the rulers of earthly
kingdoms had a ruler in the heavens. God’s faithfulness in rescuing the three captives from the flames
and vindicating their course of action showed His
wonderful power.” 4BC 1169.

“St. Augustine (died 430 AD) taught that the
Stone Kingdom was the Roman Catholic Church. This
‘Stone’ of Daniel 2 was the first advent. The smashing
of the image was therefore the work of the Roman
Catholic Church. Thus Augustine’s writings became
‘the Bible of the Inquisition.” Augustine favored a
forced religion.
“…Augustine greatly influenced Luther and Calvin and they followed him in the belief of ‘original
sin,’ immaculate conception’, etc. Augustine has been
well called ‘The founder of the Papacy,’ and his false
teachings on the Kingdom of God laid the foundation
for the persecution of the Dark Ages.” Burnside,
DPUF, 54.

“For the LORD your God is God of gods, and
Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible,
which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.” Deuteronomy 10:17. [Note: God the Father is God of
Gods. He is the God of Jesus Christ and of the Holy
Spirit, both of Whom, though equal with God the Father, have demonstrated self-sacrificing love by freely
choosing to take subordinate positions in the plan of
salvation. See John 14:26; 15:26; 17:3, 20:17.]” PJ.

DANIEL 2:46-48
Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell
upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and
commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him.
The king answered unto Daniel, and
said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a
God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a
revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.
Then the king made Daniel a great
man, and gave him many great gifts, and
made him ruler over the whole province of
Babylon, and chief of the governors over
all the wise men of Babylon.

“The Babylonians had boasted that their victories
had proven their gods to be superior to those of all the
conquered nations including the Hebrews, and they had
doubtless reminded Daniel and his companions of this
and even taunted them. (See 2 Kings 18:33-35; 19:1013). Now an event takes place that completely refutes
these charges. The gods and religion of the Babylonians are put to the acid test and are found wanting.”
Bunch, BOD, 15.
Nebuchadnezzar Revokes Decree.—
“Nebuchadnezzar revoked the decree for the
destruction of the wise men. Their lives were spared
because of Daniel’s connection with the Revealer of
secrets. [Vss. 28,29 quoted.]” Prophets & Kings, 499.

King Nebuchadnezzar Fell Down and Worshiped.—
“The king listens with solemn attention as every
particular of the dream is reproduced; and when the
interpretation is faithfully given, he feels that he can
rely upon it as a divine revelation.
“The solemn truths conveyed in this vision of the
night made a deep impression on the sovereign’s mind,
and in humility and awe he fell down and wor-

“The great men of Babylon were willing to be
benefited by the instruction that God gave through

73

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Daniel, to help the king out of his difficulty by the interpretation of his dream. But they were anxious to
mix in their heathen religion with that of the Hebrews. Had Daniel and his fellows consented to
such a compromise, they would, in the view of the
Babylonians, have been complete as statesmen, fit to
be entrusted with the affairs of the kingdom. But
the four Hebrews entered into no such arrangement.
They were true to God, and God upheld them and honored them. The lesson is for us. ‘Seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you’ (Letter 57, 1896).”
4BC 1167,1168.

words just after the vision of Daniel 2 was given and
interpreted. Zedekiah rebelled not only against Nebuchadnezzar, but against God and what He was doing in
Babylon.]

DANIEL 2:49
Then Daniel requested of the king, and
he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
over the affairs of the province of Babylon:
but Daniel sat in the gate of the king.
Daniel Requested of the King.—
Daniel did not become bewildered or intoxicated
by his signal victory and his wonderful advancement.
He first remembered the three who were companions with him in anxiety respecting the king’s matter. As they had helped him with their prayers, he
determined that they should share his honors. At
his request they were placed over the affairs of Babylon, while Daniel himself sat in the gate of the king.
The gate was the place where councils were held
and where matters of chief moment were considered. The record is a simple declaration that Daniel
became chief counselor to the king.” Smith, DR,69.

Nebuchadnezzar Exalts Daniel.—
“He has made known to the monarch the dream
and its interpretation, while the courtiers and the baffled soothsayers and astrologers waited in silent awe
and wonder.
“In fulfillment of his promise of rewards the king
made Daniel a great man. There are two things which
in this life are specially supposed to make a man great,
and both these Daniel received from the king: A man
is considered great if he is a man of wealth; and we
read that the king gave him many and great gifts.
If in conjunction with riches a man has power, certainly in popular estimation he is considered a great man;
and power was bestowed upon Daniel in abundant
measure. He was made ruler over the province of
Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise
men of Babylon. Thus speedily and abundantly did
Daniel begin to be rewarded for his fidelity to his own
conscience and requirements of God.” Smith, DR,
68,69.

Daniel Sat In the Gate of the King.—
“[Verse 29 quoted.] ‘The gate of the king’ was a
place where justice was dispensed. Daniel’s three
companions were made counselors, judges, and rulers
in the land. These men were not puffed up with vanity,
but they saw and rejoiced that God was recognized
above all earthly potentates, and that his kingdom
was extolled above all earthly kingdoms.
“The Lord was working in the Babylonian kingdom, and communicating light to the four Hebrew
youth, in order that he might represent his work before
the idolatrous nation. He would reveal that he had
power over the kingdoms of the world—power to
enthrone and to dethrone kings. The King over all
kings was communicating great truths to the Babylonian monarch, and awakening in his mind a realization of
his responsibility to God. Nebuchadnezzar saw clearly
the difference between the wisdom of God and the
wisdom of the most learned men of his kingdom.
“The events of the future, reaching down to the
end of time, were opened before the king of Babylon,
in order that he might have light on this important subject. The record of the dream and its interpretation
was traced by the prophetic pen, in order that the
rulers of the kingdoms that should succeed Babylon
might have the same light.” Youth Instructor,
9/8/1903.

An Influence to Save Jerusalem.—
“It should be remembered that this dream as
recorded in the second chapter of Daniel was given
to Nebuchadnezzar in the second year of his sole
reign. It was still during the lifetime of Jehoiakim,
king of Judah. …Having acknowledged the God of
Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar was in a position to save
Jerusalem instead of destroying it. It was because of
these experiences that God could send word by his
prophet a few years later that, should Zedekiah, king of
Judah, deliver himself to the king of Babylon, Jerusalem would not be burned, and the world would receive
the light of the gospel.” Haskell, SDP, 36,37.
“Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith
the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: If thou
wilt assuredly go forth unto the king of Babylon’s
princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall
not be burned with fire: and thou shalt live, and thine
house: but if thou wilt not go forth to the king of
Babylon’s princes, then shall this city be given into the
hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with
fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.”
Jeremiah 38:17,18. [Note: Jeremiah spoke these

“For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy
God, and the LORD hath chosen thee to be a peculiar
people unto himself, above all the nations that are
upon the earth. Thou shalt not eat any abominable

74

DANIEL 2
thing.” Deut. 14:2,3.

degree, assured to every nation and to every individual under the broad heavens.
“Hundreds of years before certain nations came
upon the stage of action, the Omniscient One looked
down the ages and predicted the rise and fall of the
universal kingdoms. God declared to Nebuchadnezzar
that the kingdom of Babylon should fall, and a second
kingdom would arise, which also would have its period
of trial. Failing to exalt the true God, its glory
would fade, and a third kingdom would occupy its
place. This also would pass away; and a fourth, strong
as iron, would subdue the nations of the world.
“Had the rulers of Babylon—that richest of all
earthly kingdoms—kept always before them the
fear of Jehovah, they would have been given wisdom and power which would have bound them to
Him and kept them strong. But they made God their
refuge only when harassed and perplexed. At such
times, failing to find help in their great men, they
sought it from men like Daniel—men who they knew
honored the living God and were honored by Him. To
these men they appealed to unravel the mysteries of
Providence; for though the rulers of proud Babylon
were men of the highest intellect, they had separated
themselves so far from God by transgression that they
could not understand the revelations and the warnings
given them concerning the future.
“In the history of nations the student of God’s
word may behold the literal fulfillment of divine
prophecy. Babylon, shattered and broken at last,
passed away because in prosperity its rulers had
regarded themselves as independent of God, and
had ascribed the glory of their kingdom to human
achievement. The Medo-Persian realm was visited
by the wrath of Heaven because in it God’s law had
been trampled underfoot. The fear of the Lord had
found no place in the hearts of the vast majority of
the people. Wickedness, blasphemy, and corruption
prevailed. The kingdoms that followed were even
more base and corrupt; and these sank lower and
still lower in the scale of moral worth.
“The power exercised by every ruler on the
earth is Heaven-imparted; and upon his use of the
power thus bestowed, his success depends. To each
the word of the divine Watcher is, ‘I girded thee,
though thou hast not known Me.’ Isaiah 45:5. And to
each the words spoken to Nebuchadnezzar of old are
the lesson of life: ‘Break off thy sins by righteousness,
and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor: if it
may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.’ Daniel 4:27.
“To understand these things—to understand that
‘righteousness exalteth a nation;’ that ‘the throne is
established by righteousness,’ and ‘upholden by
mercy;’ to recognize the outworking of these principles in the manifestation of His power who ‘removeth
kings, and setteth up kings’—this is to understand the
philosophy of history. Proverbs 14:34; 16:12; 20:28;
Daniel 2:21.
“In the word of God only is this clearly set forth.

Fulfillment of Promise.—
“That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and
thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies.” Genesis 22:17.
Temperance Promotes Good Government.—
“The victory in the area of appetite led Daniel and
his three companions to positions of rulership in the
world’s capital. Temperance means abstinence from
those things that are harmful to the body-temple, and
the moderate use of those things that are good. God
can bless those who are temperate in their lives to be
good governors of the people. The person who can
rule himself, can best rule others. Their minds can
clearly discern and comprehend the principles of true
and good government, that treats all men fairly and
equally.” PJ.
The Right Interpretation of History.-“In the annals of human history, the growth of nations, the rise and fall of empires, appear as if dependent on the will and prowess of man; the shaping
of events seems, to a great degree, to be determined by
his power, ambition, or caprice. But in the word of
God the curtain is drawn aside, and we behold, above,
behind, and through all the play and counterplay of
human interest and power and passions, the agencies
of the All-merciful One, silently, patiently working
out the counsels of His own will.
“In words of matchless beauty and tenderness, the
apostle Paul set before the sages of Athens the divine
purpose in the creation and distribution of races
and nations. ‘God that made the world and all things
therein,’ declared the apostle, ‘hath made of one blood
all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the
earth, and hath determined the times before appointed,
and the bounds of their habitation; that they should
seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after Him, and
find Him.’ Acts 17:24-27.
“God has made plain that whosoever will, may
come ‘into the bond of the covenant.’ Ezekiel 20:37.
In the creation it was His purpose that the earth should
be inhabited by beings whose existence would be a
blessing to themselves and to one another, and an honor to their Creator. All who will may identify themselves with this purpose. Of them it is spoken, ‘This
people have I formed for Myself; they shall show
forth My praise.’ Isaiah 43:21.
“In His law God has made known the principles that underlie all true prosperity, both of nations
and of individuals. To the Israelites Moses declared of
this law: ‘This is your wisdom and your understanding.’ ‘It is not a vain thing for you; because it is your
life.’ Deut. 4:6; 32:47. The blessings thus assured to
Israel are, on the same conditions and in the same

75

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Here it is shown that the strength of nations, as of
individuals, is not found in the opportunities or facilities that appear to make them invincible; it is not found
in their boasted greatness. It is measured by the fidelity with which they fulfill God’s purpose.” Prophets
& Kings, 499-502.

“The prophecies which the great I AM has given
in His word, uniting link after link in the chain of
events, from eternity in the past to eternity in the future, tell us where we are today in the procession of the
ages and what may be expected in the time to come.
All that prophecy has foretold as coming to pass, until
the present time, has been traced on the pages of history, and we may be assured that all which is yet to come
will be fulfilled in its order.” Prophets & Kings, 535536.

God Is In Control.—
“Every nation that has come upon the stage of
action has been permitted to occupy its place on the
earth, that the fact might be determined whether it
would fulfill the purposes of the Watcher and the Holy
One. Prophecy has traced the rise and progress of the
world's great empires—Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece,
and Rome. With each of these, as with the nations of
less power, history has repeated itself. Each has had its
period of test; each has failed, its glory faded, its power
departed.
“While nations have rejected God’s principles,
and in this rejection have wrought their own ruin, yet a
divine, overruling purpose has manifestly been at work
throughout the ages. It was this that the prophet Ezekiel saw in the wonderful representation given him during his exile in the land of the Chaldeans, when before
his astonished gaze were portrayed the symbols that
revealed an overruling Power that has to do with the
affairs of earthly rulers.
“Upon the banks of the river Chebar, Ezekiel beheld a whirlwind seeming to come from the north, ‘a
great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness
was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the color
of amber.’ A number of wheels intersecting one another were moved by four living beings. High above
all these ‘was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the
throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man
above upon it.’ ‘And there appeared in the cherubims
the form of a man’s hand under their wings.’ Ezekiel
1:4, 26; 10:8. The wheels were so complicated in arrangement that at first sight they appeared to be in confusion; yet they moved in perfect harmony. Heavenly
beings, sustained and guided by the hand beneath the
wings of the cherubim, were impelling those wheels;
above them, upon the sapphire throne, was the Eternal
One; and round about the throne was a rainbow, the
emblem of divine mercy.
“As the wheellike complications were under the
guidance of the hand beneath the wings of the cherubim, so the complicated play of human events is under
divine control. Amidst the strife and tumult of nations
He that sitteth above the cherubim still guides the affairs of this earth.
“The history of nations speaks to us today. To
every nation and to every individual God has assigned a place in His great plan. Today men and
nations are being tested by the plummet in the hand of
Him who makes no mistake. All are by their own
choice deciding their destiny, and God is overruling
all for the accomplishment of His purposes.

Deterioration of Metals Shows Decline in Religion.—
“While representing the kingdoms of this
earth, the image that was revealed to Nebuchadnezzar also fitly represented deterioration of religion.
We grow weak morally and spiritually, just in proportion as we forget God. Those who claim to be
Protestants are not today what Luther was. They have
left the old landmarks, and have depended on forms,
ceremonies, and outward display to make up for the
lack of purity and piety, meekness and lowliness, found
in obedience to God. Sin is ruining nations today
just as it has done in time past. Even leaders in the
religious world have not a good conscience toward
God.” R&H, 2/6/1900.
“The gold was the head. Next, it would be a step
in deterioration, and still down and down to miry clay.
That has been the course of the world from Babylon
until now. But the world’s idea is that today that thing
is to be just the other way; that the times of Babylon
were inferior to these. The world holds the very reverse of God’s idea, even yet. Nebuchadnezzar’s
kingdom—the world-empire at that time—God says is
represented by the head of gold; and the world-empire
in our time, God says is represented by miry clay.
“In the days of Nebuchadnezzar all that goes to
make the true glory of a kingdom and empire in the
world was as gold compared with what it is in this day.
I know that persons glorify the modern civilization, and
much more; yet whatever a man may think, God has set
up his idea, which is the truth. That truth is that the
greatness, the glory, the grandeur, the civilization, the
magnificence, in this day, as compared with the kingdom, government, and people during the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, are only as clay compared to gold.”
Jones, GCDB, 2/22/1899.
Exact Fulfillment of Daniel 2, Anchor For Faith.—
“At Geneva where Farel and Calvin had spread
the truth of the Reformation, Gaussen preached the
message of the second advent. While a student at
school, Gaussen had encountered that spirit of rationalism which pervaded all Europe during the latter
part of the eighteenth and the opening of the nineteenth century; and when he entered the ministry he
was not only ignorant of true faith, but inclined to
skepticism. In his youth he had become interested in
the study of prophecy. After reading Rollin’s Ancient

76

DANIEL 2
History, his attention was called to the second chapter of Daniel, and he was struck with the wonderful
exactness with which the prophecy had been fulfilled, as seen in the historian’s record. Here was a
testimony to the inspiration of the Scriptures, which
served as an anchor to him amid the perils of later
years. He could not rest satisfied with the teachings of
rationalism, and in studying the Bible and searching for
clearer light he was, after a time, led to a positive
faith.” Great Controversy, 364.

perished. James 1:10. So perished the Medo-Persian
kingdom, and the kingdoms of Grecia and Rome. And
so perishes all that has not God for its foundation. Only that which is bound up with His purpose, and
expresses His character, can endure. His principles
are the only steadfast things our world knows.
“A careful study of the working out of God’s purpose in the history of nations and in the revelation of
things to come, will help us to estimate at their true
value things seen and things unseen, and to learn what
is the true aim of life. Thus, viewing the things of time
in the light of eternity, we may, like Daniel and his
fellows, live for that which is true and noble and enduring. And learning in this life the principles of the
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, that blessed kingdom which is to endure for ever and ever, we may be
prepared at His coming to enter with Him into its
possession.” Prophets & Kings, 548.

God Kingdom of Inward Glory Only Endures.—
“From the rise and fall of nations as made plain in
the books of Daniel and the Revelation, we need to
learn how worthless is mere outward and worldly
glory. Babylon, with all its power and magnificence,
the like of which our world has never since beheld—
power and magnificence which to the people of that
day seemed so stable and enduring—how completely
has it passed away! As ‘the flower of the grass,’ it has

77

GEMS FROM DANIEL

78

DANIEL 2

79

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER THREE
1 Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose
height was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits:
he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.
2 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the
princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar
the king had set up.
3 Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the
treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the
provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood
before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
4 Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,
5 That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down
and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath
set up:
6 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same
hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
7 Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of
the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick,
all the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set
up.
8 Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the Jews.
9 They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live
for ever.
10 Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the
golden image:
11 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should
be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
12 There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of
the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego;
these men, O king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy
gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.
13 Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to
bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought
these men before the king.
14 Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor
worship the golden image which I have set up?
15 Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds
of musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have
made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour
into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God
that shall deliver you out of my hands?
16 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the

king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this
matter.
17 If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand,
O king.
18 But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not
serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set
up.
19 Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his
visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego:
therefore he spake, and commanded that they should heat the
furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated.
20 And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his
army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast
them into the burning fiery furnace.
21 Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and
their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst
of the burning fiery furnace.
22 Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent, and
the furnace exceeding hot, the flames of the fire slew those men
that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
23 And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in
haste, and spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast
three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and
said unto the king, True, O king.
25 He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in
the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the
fourth is like the Son of God.
26 Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and
come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth
of the midst of the fire.
27 And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's
counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose
bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed,
neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed
on them.
28 Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed be the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his angel, and
delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the
king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve
nor worship any god, except their own God.
29 Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and
language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their
houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other God
that can deliver after this sort.
30 Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
in the province of Babylon.

INTRODUCTION

DANIEL 3:1
Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was threescore
cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits:
he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the
province of Babylon.

“The experiences related in Daniel three are of vital importance to God’s people today. The crisis then
faced is a crisis that will face all of God’s people before the end. As these men were faithful so must we be
faithful even at the risk of life itself.” Thiele, OSID, 35.

80

DANIEL 3
break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it
shall stand forever.... The dream is certain, and the
interpretation thereof sure.’ Daniel 2:44, 45.
“The king had acknowledged the power of God,
saying to Daniel, ‘Of a truth it is, that your God is a
God of gods,... and a revealer of secrets.’ Verse 47.
For a time afterward, Nebuchadnezzar was influenced
by the fear of God; but his heart was not yet cleansed
from worldly ambition and a desire for self-exaltation.
The prosperity attending his reign filled him with
pride. In time he ceased to honor God, and resumed his idol worship with increased zeal and bigotry.
“The words, ‘Thou art this head of gold,’ had
made a deep impression upon the ruler’s mind. Verse
38. The wise men of his realm, taking advantage of
this and of his return to idolatry, proposed that he
make an image similar to the one seen in his dream,
and set it up where all might behold the head of
gold, which had been interpreted as representing
his kingdom.
“Pleased with the flattering suggestion, he determined to carry it out, and to go even farther. Instead of
reproducing the image as he had seen it, he would excel the original. His image should not deteriorate in
value from the head to the feet, but should be entirely
of gold—symbolic throughout of Babylon as an eternal, indestructible, all-powerful kingdom, which should
break in pieces all other kingdoms and stand forever.
“The thought of establishing the empire and a
dynasty that should endure forever, appealed very
strongly to the mighty ruler before whose arms the
nations of earth had been unable to stand. With an
enthusiasm born of boundless ambition and selfish
pride, he entered into counsel with his wise men as to
how to bring this about. Forgetting the remarkable
providences connected with the dream of the great
image; forgetting also that the God of Israel
through His servant Daniel had made plain the significance of the image, and that in connection with
this interpretation the great men of the realm had
been saved an ignominious death; forgetting all except their desire to establish their own power and
supremacy, the king and his counselors of state determined that by every means possible they would
endeavor to exalt Babylon as supreme, and worthy
of universal allegiance.
“The symbolic representation by which God
had revealed to king and people His purpose for the
nations of earth, was now to be made to serve for the
glorification of human power. Daniel’s interpretation was to be rejected and forgotten; truth was to
be misinterpreted and misapplied. The symbol designed of Heaven to unfold to the minds of men important events of the future, was to be used to hinder
the spread of the knowledge that God desired the world
to receive. Thus through the devisings of ambitious
men, Satan was seeking to thwart the divine purpose
for the human race. The enemy of mankind knew

Nebuchadnezzar Made an Image of Gold.—
“According to Usher’s chronology it had been
twenty-three years since the dream of this same
Nebuchadnezzar as recorded in the second chapter of
Daniel. …Jerusalem had in the meantime been destroyed. The Jews as a nation, were scattered throughout the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar; their king, Jehoiachin, languished in one of the prisons of Babylon. It
was a time of sorrow and mourning for the chosen
people of God. Could it be that they were forgotten
by Him who smote Egypt, and led the hosts across the
Red Sea? As far as human eye could see, it was right
to think so.” Haskell, SDP, 39.
“Light direct from Heaven had been permitted to
shine upon King Nebuchadnezzar, and for a little time
he was influenced by the fear of God. But a few years
of prosperity filled his heart with pride, and he forgot his acknowledgment of the living God. He resumed his idol worship with increased zeal and bigotry.” Sanctified Life, 36,37.
“They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he
maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they worship.
“They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry
him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from
his place shall he not remove: yea, one shall cry
unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of
his trouble.
“Remember this, and shew yourselves men.”
Isaiah 46:6-8.
Image of Daniel 3 Based on Image of Daniel 2.—
“We may well believe that this image had some
reference to the dream of the king as described in
the previous chapter. In that dream the head was of
gold, representing Nebuchadnezzar’s kingdom. That
was succeeded by metals of inferior quality, denoting a
succession of kingdoms. Nebuchadnezzar was doubtless gratified that his kingdom should be represented
by gold; but that it should ever be succeeded by another kingdom was not so pleasing. Therefore, instead of
having simply the head of his image of gold, he
made it all of gold, to denote that his kingdom
should not give way to another kingdom, but be
perpetual.” Smith, DR, 71.
“The dream of the great image, opening before
Nebuchadnezzar events reaching to the close of time,
had been given that he might understand the part he
was to act in the world’s history, and the relation
that his kingdom should sustain to the kingdom of
heaven. In the interpretation of the dream, he had been
plainly instructed regarding the establishment of God’s
everlasting kingdom. ‘In the days of these kings,’ Daniel had declared, ‘shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the
kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall

81

GEMS FROM DANIEL
that truth unmixed with error is a power mighty to
save; but that when used to exalt self and to further
the projects of men, it becomes a power for evil.”
Prophets & Kings, 503-505.

fitly represent Babylon as eternal, indestructible,
and all-powerful–a kingdom that would last forever.
“Thus the grand lesson given by God to the
heathen, and to all people, was misconstrued and
misplaced. That which was designed by God to teach
lessons of truth, and to give the world clear, distinct
rays of light, Nebuchadnezzar turned from its purpose,
making it minister to his pride and vanity. The prophetic illustration was made to serve for the glorification of humanity. The symbol designed to unfold
important events was turned into a symbol which
would hinder the spread of that knowledge which
God designed the kingdoms of the earth should receive. By the height and beauty of his image, by the
material of which it was formed, the king sought to
make error and false doctrine magnificent and attractive, more powerful, seemingly, than anything God had
given
“Those who are willing to be taught, may learn a
lesson from the conduct of the king of Babylon. As the
enemy sought to make God-given light serve his own
purposes, by leading the king to work for his own glory
instead of working for the glory of God, so he works
today to pervert truth in order to hinder God’s purposes. All false religion has its origin in a corruption of
the true. When unmixed with evil, truth is a mighty
power to save; but if we allow the enemy to work
through us, if by the light given us we seek to exalt
self, even this truth may become a power for evil.
“…The enemy would lead us all to the use, as did
Nebuchadnezzar, the light and knowledge of God for
our own exaltation. But self-exaltation can find no
place in the work of God. ‘Thus saith the Lord, Let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man
glory in his riches; but let him that glorieth glory in
this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am
the Lord which exercise loving- kindness, judgment,
and righteousness, in the earth; for in these things I
delight, saith the Lord.’” Signs, 4/29/1897.

Lessons of Daniel 2 Misinterpreted, Misapplied.—
“Instead of treasuring the conviction which had
been made on his mind in regard to the fall of all earthly kingdoms, and the greatness and power of Jehovah's
kingdom, the king, after the immediate impression
wore away, thought only of his own greatness, and
studied how he might make the dream turn to his own
exaltation and honor.
“He said much regarding the interpretation given
by Daniel, but the words, ‘Thou art this head of gold,’
produced the greatest effect upon his mind. These
impressed him so much that his wise men, who had
not been able to tell the dream, proposed that he
make such an image as the one seen in his dream,
and that he set it up, that all might see the head of
gold, which was a representation of his kingdom.
“This pleased the king. His pride and vanity
found full scope in the thought that he could thus represent his importance; and he resolved that instead of
merely copying the image he had seen, he would make
an image that should excel the original. It was his design that the whole image should represent the greatness of Babylon. Therefore that which had been
said regarding the kingdoms that were to follow,
should be blotted from his mind, and from the
minds of those who had heard the dream, by the
splendor of the image he was about to make. This
image should not deteriorate in value from the head to
the feet, as had the one he had been shown, but should
be composed throughout of the most precious metal.
“God had spoken plainly to Nebuchadnezzar in
regard to his kingdom. ‘In the days of these kings,’
said Daniel, ‘shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall
not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces
and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever.... The dream is certain, and the interpretation
thereof sure.’
“The king had acknowledged the power of God,
saying, ‘Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods,
and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets;’ but
notwithstanding this acknowledgment, he now united
with the men he had once sentenced to death, to dishonor God. He had purposed to destroy these men,
because he had discerned their deceptions, and because
he was convinced that their learning did not possess the
power he had supposed; and they had been saved from
a cruel death by the intercession of Daniel. Now he
joins with them to frame a design for his image, and
to make the light from heaven serve his pride, and
forward his exaltation. The kingdom of Babylon
was interpreted to be the kingdom that was to break
in pieces all other kingdoms, and to stand forever;
and they endeavored to make an image which would

An Image of Gold.—
“From the treasures obtained in war he made a
golden image to represent the one that he had seen in
his dream, setting it up in the plain of Dura, and commanding all the rulers and the people to worship it, on
pain of death. This statue was about ninety feet in
height and nine in breadth, and in the eyes of that
idolatrous people it presented a most imposing and
majestic appearance.” Sanctified Life, 36,37.
“From his rich store of treasure, Nebuchadnezzar
caused to be made a great golden image, similar in its
general features to that which had been seen in vision,
save in the one particular of the material of which it
was composed. Accustomed as they were to magnificent representations of their heathen deities, the Chaldeans had never before produced anything so imposing and majestic as this resplendent statue,

82

DANIEL 3
threescore cubits in height and six cubits in breadth.
And it is not surprising that in a land where idol
worship was of universal prevalence, the beautiful
and priceless image in the plain of Dura, representing the glory of Babylon and its magnificence and
power, should be consecrated as an object of worship. This was accordingly provided for, and a decree
went forth that on the day of the dedication all should
show their supreme loyalty to the Babylonian power by
bowing before the image.”
Prophets & Kings,
505,506.

“Babylonians had divided time into 60 seconds to
the minute, 60 minutes to the hour, 24 hours to the day,
360 degrees to the circle, 60 X 6 = 360. In Daniel 3,
the image is mentioned six times, vs. 5,7,10, 12,14,15.”
Burnside, DPUF, 74.
This Image, A Symbol of the Image of Beast.—
“Is it true that the end of all things is at hand?
What mean the awful calamities by sea—vessels shipwrecked and lives hurled into eternity without a moment's warning? What mean the awful accidents by
land—fire consuming the riches men have hoarded,
much of which has been accumulated by oppression of
the poor? The Lord will not interfere to protect the
property of those who transgress His law, break His
covenant, and trample upon His Sabbath, accepting in
its place a spurious rest day. As Nebuchadnezzar set
up an image on the plains of Dura, and commanded
all to bow before it, so this false sabbath has been
exalted before the world, and men are commanded
to keep it holy. But it has not a vestige of sanctity.
Nowhere in God’s Word are we commanded to reverence the first day of the week.” 15 Manuscript Releases, 354.

60 cubits high, and 6 cubits wide.—
“The figures giving the measurements of the image witness to the use of the sexagesimal system (a
system founded on the number 60) in Babylonia, a use
attested also by cuneiform sources. The sexagesimal
system of reckoning was an invention of the Babylonians. The system has certain advantages over the decimal system. For example, 60 is divisible evenly by 12
factors, whereas 100 is divisible evenly by only 9 factors. The system is still in use for certain measurements, such as of seconds, minutes, hours. It was
therefore natural for the Babylonians to construct this
image according to measurements of the sexagesimal
system. The mentioning of this detail gives a true
Babylonian color to the narrative.” 4SDABC, 780.

“By many, the Sabbath of the fourth commandment is made void, being treated as a thing of naught;
while the spurious sabbath, the child of the papacy, is
exalted. In the place of God’s laws, are elevated the
laws of the man of sin—laws that are to be received
and regarded as the wonderful golden image of
Nebuchadnezzar was by the Babylonians. Forming
this great image, Nebuchadnezzar commanded that it
should receive universal homage from all, both great
and small, high and low, rich and poor (MS 24, 1891).”
4BC, 1169.

“The wise men of Babylon assigned mystical religious numbers to their many deities. The leading god
of their classical trio was Anu. His assigned number
was 60, the base figure in the sexagesimal system.
Nebuchadnezzar decided that his all-gold image, together with its massive foundation, should stand a full
60 cubits high. A Babylonian cubit (the distance from
elbow to fingertip) was standardized at approximately
half a meter, or 19.6 inches. Thus the image was to
rise 30 meters, or nearly 100 feet, above the level
plain.” God Cares, Vol.1, 47,48.

“Nebuchadnezzar was rewriting the history of the
world when he made the image all of gold. The same
is being done today. The history of the Dark Ages is
being rewritten and made to appear as a golden age.
The forgetting of history will lead to the creation of
the image to the beast—and again all the world will
be gathered together to worship it, and again, a death
decree will be made to enforce the worship. Again, the
stone, Christ with his people [Immanuel, God with us],
will smash it to pieces. ‘Associate yourselves, O ye
people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear,
all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall
come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand:
for God is with us. Isaiah 8:9,10.” PJ.

“Sixty cubits high would be about one hundred
feet, and six cubits wide would be about ten feet. The
ratio of ten to one is evidence that the height includes
the height of the pedestal on which the image was
standing. If the width of the image across the shoulders were ten feet, the height of the image itself would
be about thirty-five feet.
“…The number of Anu, their highest god, was
sixty, and that likewise was the number of Marduk or
Bel, when he replaced Anu as the head of the Babylonian pantheon. The number six and multiples thereof
was common in occult circles. Often it had evil or
sexual connotations. Hex is the Greek word for six,
and sex is the Latin word for six.
“In Rev. 13:18 the number of the beast is given as
600-60-6. There are indications that six is the number
chosen by the evil one as a symbol of himself.” Thiele,
OSID, 35.

In the plain of Dura.—
“The name Dura is also the simple Babylonian
word for a ‘wall.’ Dur is the word for ‘wall,’ and the
letter a at the end of the word is the article ‘the’ in
Aramaic. So translating this phrase directly, instead of

83

GEMS FROM DANIEL
leaving it as an unknown place name, indicates that
Nebuchadnezzar set up his image on ‘the plain of the
wall.’
“But the question remains: ‘What plain and what
wall?’ There were two major walls surrounding the
city of Babylon. The inner wall, about a mile long on
each side, surrounded the central part of the city. The
territory inside this inner wall was urban, containing
many building and streets along with the palace and the
largest temple in the city.
“Later, Nebuchadnezzar added an outer wall several miles long that extended to the east bank of the
Euphrates River and around the city. In Nebuchadnezzar’s time, Babylonian engineers and builders had not
yet filled this area between the inner and outer walls
with building, although construction was taking place.
The open area served as a parade ground for the army
and a place within the city walls where the troops could
bivouac. This large open space between the two
walls could properly be called the ‘plain of the
wall,’ or ‘the plain of Dura.’ In all likelihood this
was where the events of chapter 3 took place.
“Such a location would have facilitated attendance at this great assembly by officials from Babylon
(vs. 3). It would also have put the image close to the
palace of the king.” Shea, DARG, 70,71.

struments, to bow down and worship it. Should any
fail of doing this, they were immediately to be cast into
the midst of a burning fiery furnace. The worship of
this image had been brought about by the wise men of
Babylon in order to make the Hebrew youth join in
their idolatrous worship. They were beautiful singers, and the Chaldeans wanted them to forget their
God and accept the worship of the Babylonian
idols.” My Life Today, 68.
“By this decree Nebuchadnezzar gathered the
governors and rulers of provinces from all over the
world to a great ecumenical worship celebration. It
was a most lovely scene with the most glorious music—all that could delight the senses. This worship of
this great golden image corresponds to the creation
of the image of the beast in the last days.
“And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by
the means of those miracles which he had power to do
in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on
the earth, that they should make an image to the beast,
which had the wound by a sword, and did live. And he
had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that
the image of the beast should both speak, and cause
that as many as would not worship the image of the
beast should be killed. Rev. 13:14,15.” PJ
Dedication of the Image.—
“The dedication of this image was made a great
occasion, for the chief men of the kingdom were called
together. To such pains and expense will men go in
sustaining idolatrous and heathen systems of worship. Alas, that those who have the true religion
should be so far outdone in these respects by the upholders of the false and counterfeit! The worship was
accompanied with music; and whoever failed to
participate therein was threatened with being
thrown into a fiery furnace. Such are ever the
strongest motives to impel men in any direction—
pleasure on the one hand, pain on the other.” Smith,
DR, 71,72.

DANIEL 3:2,3
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to
gather together the princes, the governors,
and the captains, the judges, the treasurers,
the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar
the king had set up.
Then the princes, the governors, and
captains, the judges, the treasurers, the
counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers
of the provinces, were gathered together
unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they
stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

DANIEL 3:4-6
Then an herald cried aloud, To you it
is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,
That at what time ye hear the sound of
the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery,
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall
down and worship the golden image that
Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up:
And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into
the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

The Whole World Gathered Together.—
“Never before in human history had there been
such a gathering of the world’s mighty men.” Bunch,
BOD, 38.
An Ecumenical Gathering.—
“A severe test came to ...these youth when Nebuchadnezzar issued a proclamation, calling upon all the
officers of the kingdom to assemble at the dedication
of the great image, and at the sound of the musical in-

84

DANIEL 3
To You It is Commanded.-“As Nebuchadnezzar tried to force his subjects
to obey his mandates, so men will try to force us to
disregard the Word of God. They will endeavor to
compel us to render homage to man-made statutes; but
in God’s strength we are to refuse to dishonor him.
The laws of earthly kingdoms are to be obeyed only
when they do not conflict with the laws of God. When
governments are tyrannical and overbearing, when they
trample on God’s law, their laws are contemptible in
his sight. And when they try to control the minds and
consciences of those whom Christ died to make free,
God’s children are to show their loyalty to him by refusing to disobey his commandments.
“Today, as in the days of Babylon, the accuser
of the brethren is working through human agencies
to hurt and destroy those who are dear to the Lord.
Men in power do not realize that they cannot in justice
control the minds of their fellow-men, and Satan works
through them to corrupt right dealing. Those who try
to keep the commandments of God, will meet with
much opposition. Satanic attributes will take possession of the hearts of men, making them as hard as steel;
and all who depart from evil will make themselves a
prey to the hatred of those that refuse to obey the law
of God.
“But when the State forms laws directly opposed
to the laws of Jehovah, and thus strives to compel men
to obey them, it is following the example set by the
king of Babylon. When it takes the guardianship of the
religious interests of the nation, a spirit of intolerance
is manifested if men seek to practice the truth, which,
by earnest study, they have found in God’s Word.
Those who are actuated by such a spirit of oppression
cannot understand what religious liberty means.
“Every man has a right to worship God according to his own convictions; no one is called upon to obey laws that are opposed to the laws of God;
and the only position the State can take, and have the
approval of God, is to guard the rights of every individual, permitting no oppression to come upon any one
because of religious belief.
“As Nebuchadnezzar tried to force his subjects to
obey his mandates, so men will try to force us to disregard the Word of God. They will endeavor to compel
us to render homage to man-made statutes; but in
God’s strength we are to refuse to dishonor him. The
laws of earthly kingdoms are to be obeyed only when
they do not conflict with the laws of God. When governments are tyrannical and overbearing, when they
trample on God’s law, their laws are contemptible in
his sight. And when they try to control the minds
and consciences of those whom Christ died to make
free, God’s children are to show their loyalty to him
by refusing to disobey his commandments.” Signs,
5/13/1897.

children to obey human laws in direct opposition to
the laws of Jehovah. The most learned of the nation,
men who were noted for their aptness and educational
advantages, thus worked to form a confederacy that
would exalt the king of Babylon and excite enmity
against the Hebrew captives. They prevailed upon the
king to enact certain laws which these youth could not
consent to respect
“The worship of the image which the king had
set up, was made the established religion of the
country. But the Hebrew children were determined
not to dishonor the God of heaven, who made the
world, and all things that are therein. Their God was
the King of kings and Lord of lords, and they would
serve him, at whatever cost.” Signs, 9/2/1897

“This scheme, devised in the counsel of Satan,
was made in order to compel the three Hebrew

“The worship of the golden image bade fair to
become connected permanently with the established

“Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they have
prescribed.” Isa 10:1.
“The authorities of this world will rise up in
their pride and power to make laws to restrict religious liberty. They will assume a right that is God's
alone, and, like Nebuchadnezzar, will think that
they can force the conscience, which only God can
control. Even now they are making a beginning, and
this they will carry forward till they reach a boundary
over which they cannot step. Then God will interpose
in behalf of his loyal, commandment-keeping people.”
R&H, 12/20/1898.
Falling Down and Worshiping.—
“To bow down when in prayer to God is the
proper attitude to occupy. This act of worship was
required of the three Hebrew captives in Babylon. . . .
But such an act was homage to be rendered to God
alone—the Sovereign of the world, the Ruler of the
universe; and these three Hebrews refused to give such
honor to any idol even though composed of pure gold.
In doing so, they would, to all intents and purposes, be
bowing to the king of Babylon.
“Both in public and private worship it is our
duty to bow down upon our knees before God when
we offer our petitions to Him. This act shows our
dependence upon God.” 2 Selected Messages, 312.
“Today the reverse happens. God’s followers
very often don’t kneel to worship God in public worship anymore. Instead, they stand.” PJ.
Fall Down and Worship the Golden Image.—
“Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image,
neither rear you up a standing image, neither shall
ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow
down unto it: for I am the LORD your God.” Leviticus 26:1.

85

GEMS FROM DANIEL
forms of idolatry recognized as the state religion of
the land.” Prophets & Kings, 506.

same time show a recognition that the gods of Babylonia—the gods of the empire—were supreme over
all local gods.” 4SDABC, 782.

“In the form and system of government of Babylon the authority of the king was absolute. His word
was the law. In this absolutism of sovereignty King
Nebuchadnezzar assumed that he was sovereign of the
souls, as well as the bodies, of the religious life as well
as the civil conduct, of those who were subject to his
power. And since he was ruler of the nations he
would be ruler in the religion, and of the religion, of
the nations.” Jones, IIR,13,14.

Whoso Falleth Not Down and Worshippeth.—
“The king and his counselors, apparently expecting instances of refusal, threatened with the most punishment any who refused to obey the command. Exclusive of the Jews, whose religious convictions prohibited their bowing down before any image (Ex.
20:5), ancient peoples did not object to worshiping
idols. Hence the refusal to bow down before Nebuchadnezzar’s image would be regarded as proof of
hostility toward Nebuchadnezzar and his government. …From his contacts with Daniel the king must
have known that a faithful Jew would refuse to worship
the image, and that such a refusal could not be interpreted as a sign of disloyalty.” 4SDABC, 782.

“Kings were given divine honors because they
were the chief human representatives of the gods.
Since all the world must obey Nebuchadnezzar, why
should not all the world be compelled to worship the
image that symbolized himself and his kingdom.”
Bunch, BOD, 38.

The Penalty.—
“Thou shalt ‘fall down and worship the golden
image’ was the command of the King. ‘Thou shall not
bow down to any graven image’ was the command
of God. The mandate of modern Babylon will be
death. God’s penalty for sin is eternal death. Hebrews
had to choose between two death sentences, the first
or ‘second death’.” Burnside, DPUF, 75.

The Law Made By Those Wise Men Who Escaped
Death in Daniel 2.—
“Now the very men who had escaped death
through the mercy of God to his servants, had been
the prime movers in securing the decree in regard
to the worship of the golden image.” Youth Instructor, 3/8/1904.

“Those who face the mandates of modern Babylon will also face the sentence of death. Rev. 13:15.
But God’s penalty for Hebrews had to choose between
two death sentences, and so will we in the final test.
[The beast can threaten the body with death, but God
warns about the death of both soul and body in the second death.] They chose to ‘obey God rather than man’
knowing that ‘it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands
of the living God.’ Which will you choose when the
choice must be made?” Bunch, BOD, 40.
“The event on the plain of Dura is the first recorded instance of a government attempting to
achieve conformity through worship. King Nebuchadnezzar attempted to enforce uniformity of worship
by attaching a death decree to the ceremony of the
golden image. According to prophecy, God’s people in
the time of the end will face a similar decree through
modern Babylon.
“A comparison between Daniel 3 and Revelation
13:11-18 indicates that (1) the issue is worship in both
chapters; (2) both chapters have an image to worship,
one literal, the other a spiritual one; (3) in Daniel 3
literal Babylon demanded this worship, while in Revelation 13, spiritual Babylon will require the worship
of the image to the beast; (4) the three Hebrews faced
death. In the future, church and state will unite to enforce uniformity of worship. Those who refuse to
submit will face economic boycott and, ultimately, also
the death penalty (Rev. 13:15).” Pfandl, DTSOB, 37.

God’s will was that no one should bow down.
Bowing Down, An Act of Loyalty to Government.—
“W. H. Shea understands this act as a ‘loyalty
oath.’ He explains, ‘By bowing down to the image and
worshiping it, a person would also pledge allegiance
and loyalty to it and what it represents.’ He observes
in Nebuchadnezzar’s chronicle (as published by D. J.
Wiseman) a reference to a revolt in the king’s tenth
reign, that is, 595/4 BC. This datum he brings in
relation to Zedekiah’s visit to Babylon in 594/3 BC
(Jer. 51:59-64). He suggests that the revolt led to the
subsequent giving of a ‘loyalty oath’ by the Babylonian
court officials.” BRI, 2SOD, 107.
“The payment of homage to the image would give
proof of subjection to the power of the king, but at the

86

DANIEL 3
account, music is a blessing; but it is often made one of
Satan’s most attractive agencies to ensnare souls.
When abused, it leads the unconsecrated to pride, vanity, and folly. When allowed to take the place of devotion and prayer, it is a terrible curse.” 1 Testimonies,
506.

Fiery Furnace.—
“The fiery furnace was probably a brick-kiln.
…These kilns are ordinarily cone-shaped structures
built of bricks. The unbaked bricks to be fired line the
inner walls. An opening on one side of the wall permits fuel to be thrown into the interior. Fuel consists
of a mixture of crude oil and chaff. A tremendous heat
is thus produced, and through the opening the observer
can see the fired bricks heated to a white glow.”
4SDABC, 782,783.

Similar to Apostasy at Baal-Peor.—
“At Balaam’s suggestion, a grand festival in
honor of their gods was appointed by the king of
Moab, and it was secretly arranged that Balaam should
induce the Israelites to attend. He was regarded by
them as a prophet of God, and hence had little difficulty in accomplishing his purpose. Great numbers of the
people joined him in witnessing the festivities. They
ventured upon the forbidden ground, and were entangled in the snare of Satan. Beguiled with music and
dancing, and allured by the beauty of heathen vestals, they cast off their fealty to Jehovah. As they
united in mirth and feasting, indulgence in wine beclouded their senses and broke down the barriers of
self-control. Passion had full sway; and having defiled
their consciences by lewdness, they were persuaded to
bow down to idols. They offered sacrifice upon heathen altars and participated in the most degrading
rites.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 454.

Cast Into the Burning Fiery Furnace.—
“Force is the last resort of every false religion.
At first it tries attraction, as the king of Babylon tried
the power of music and outward show. If these attractions, invented by men inspired by Satan, failed to
make men worship the image, the hungry flames of the
furnace were ready to consume them. So it will be
now. The papacy has exercised her power to compel
men to obey her, and she will continue to do so. We
need the same spirit that was manifested by God’s
servants in the conflict with paganism.”
Signs,
5/6/1897.
“The Babylonian king, however, threatened utter
destruction to all who refused to worship his golden
image. The motive power in the heavenly government
is love; human power when exercised becomes tyranny. All tyranny is a repetition of the Babylonian principles. We sometimes call it papal; it is likewise
Babylonian.” Haskell, SDP, 41

All The People Fell Down and Worshipped.—
“On that eventful day the powers of darkness
seemed to be gaining a signal triumph; the worship of
the golden image bade fair to become connected
permanently with the established forms of idolatry
recognized as the state religion of the land. Satan
hoped thereby to defeat God’s purpose of making the
presence of captive Israel in Babylon a means of blessing to all the nations of heathendom.
“But God decreed otherwise. Not all had bowed
the knee to the idolatrous symbol of human power. In
the midst of the worshipping multitude there were three
men who were firmly resolved not thus to dishonor the
God of heaven. Their God was King of kings and Lord
of lords; they would bow to none other.” Prophets &
Kings, 506.

“Truth constrains, but never compels. A religion
that relies on force is of the devil and not of God.”
Burnside, DPUF, 77.

DANIEL 3:7
Therefore at that time, when all the
people heard the sound of the cornet, flute,
harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of
musick, all the people, the nations, and the
languages, fell down and worshipped the
golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the
king had set up.

Except.—
“The worship of the image which the king had
set up, was made the established religion of the
country. But the Hebrew children were determined
not to dishonor the God of heaven, who made the
world, and all things that are therein. Their God was
the King of kings and Lord of lords, and they would
serve him, at whatever cost.” Signs, 9/2/1897.

The Sound of Music.—
“Music is the idol which many professed Sabbathkeeping Christians worship. Satan has no objection to music if he can make that a channel
through which to gain access to the minds of the
youth. Anything will suit his purpose that will divert
the mind from God and engage the time which should
be devoted to His service. He works through the
means which will exert the strongest influence to hold
the largest numbers in a pleasing infatuation, while
they are paralyzed by his power. When turned to good

DANIEL 3:8-12
Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the Jews.
They spake and said to the king Nebu87

GEMS FROM DANIEL
image, be present on this occasion? Was it not because
they were willing to comply with the king’s requirements as far as they could without compromising their
religious principles? The king required them to be
present. With this requirement they could comply,
and they did. He required them to worship the image. This their religion forbade, and this they refused to do.” Smith, DR, 72

chadnezzar, O king, live for ever.
Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that
every man that shall hear the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall
down and worship the golden image:
And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast into the
midst of a burning fiery furnace.
There are certain Jews whom thou
hast set over the affairs of the province of
Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; these men, O king, have not regarded
thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship
the golden image which thou hast set up.

“Refusal to obey the king’s order was treason.
The situation was important and the atmosphere tense.
To understand the real issues involved, we must see
this as one of the unusual ways God chose to reveal
truth to Babylon.” Anderson, UDP, 63.
Whom Thou Hast Set Over the Affairs of Babylon.—
“A clear reference to the promotion recorded at
the close of the preceding chapter (ch. 2:49). …Their
denunciation arose from jealousy. Their words also
contained hidden insinuations against the king, and
virtually blamed him for a lack of political foresight by
appointing to high administrative offices foreign prisoners of war from whom naturally no loyalty toward
the Babylonian king and his gods could be expected.
This, they implied, the king should have foreseen.”
4SDABC, 783.

Three Hebrews Do Not Bow Down.—
“Not all had bowed the knee to the idolatrous
symbol of human power. In the midst of the worshipping multitude there were three men who were firmly
resolved not thus to dishonor the God of heaven. Their
God was King of kings and Lord of lords; they would
bow to none other.
“To Nebuchadnezzar, flushed with triumph, was
brought the word that among his subjects there were
some who dared disobey his mandate. Certain of the
wise men, jealous of the honors that had been bestowed
upon the faithful companions of Daniel, now reported
to the king their flagrant violation of his wishes.
[Verses 9,12 quoted].” Prophets & Kings, 506,507.

They Serve Not Thy gods.—
“While all the hosts of sin are earnest, zealous,
sanguine in advancing their cause, and are stirred by a
power from beneath, shall not those who stand in
defense of truth manifest earnestness and zeal and
enthusiasm? What if the sincere worker for God
should be called a fanatic? This is the name that
those who have been truly devoted to God have ever
been called upon to bear.” R&H, 3/14/1893.

Biblical Heroism.—
“From age to age the heroes of faith have been
marked by their fidelity to God, and they have been
brought conspicuously before the world that their light
might shine to those in darkness. Daniel and his three
companions are illustrious examples of Christian
heroism.... From their experience in the court of
Babylon we may learn what God will do for those who
serve Him with full purpose of heart.” My Life Today,
68.

DANIEL 3:13-15
Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and
fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought
these men before the king.
Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto
them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor
worship the golden image which I have set
up?
Now if ye be ready that at what time ye
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all
kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship
the image which I have made; well: but if
ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same
hour into the midst of a burning fiery fur-

Chaldeans Accuse the Three Hebrews.—
“The Chaldeans who accused the Jews were
probably the sect of philosophers who went by that
name, and who were still smarting under their failure to
interpret the king’s dream of Daniel 2. They were eager to seize upon any pretext to accuse the Jews before
the king, and either disgrace or destroy them. They
worked upon the king’s prejudice by strong insinuations of their ingratitude. Thou hast set them over the
affairs of Babylon, and yet they have disregarded thee,
they said. Where Daniel was upon this occasion, is not
known. He was probably absent on some business of
the empire. But why should Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, since they knew they could not worship the

88

DANIEL 3
what the king wanted, and their failure to fulfill his
command was an intentional and deliberate refusal to
obey him. With most kings this would have been
enough to seal their fate. But no, said Nebuchadnezzar, I will overlook this offense if upon a second
trial they comply with the law.” Smith, DR, 73.

nace; and who is that God that shall deliver
you out of my hands?
King Commands Three Men to Appear before him.—
“The king commanded that the men be brought
before him. ‘Is it true,’ he inquired, ‘do not ye serve
my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have
set up?’ He endeavored by threats to induce them to
unite with the multitude. Pointing to the fiery furnace,
he reminded them of the punishment awaiting them if
they should persist in their refusal to obey his will. But
firmly the Hebrews testified to their allegiance to the
God of heaven, and their faith in His power to deliver.
The act of bowing to the image was understood by
all to be an act of worship. Such homage they could
render to God alone.” Prophets & Kings, 507.

Ye Shall Be Cast Into a Fiery Furnace.—
“Coercion in religious matters is a usurpation of
the divine prerogative and proceeds from a lust of
power. …If religion can only be propagated by the
lash of the sword it is not worth propagating at all.
If the great God cannot maintain His own authority and
rule without the aid of human violence, surely it is best
to believe that there is no God.’—Davies in Pulpit
Commentary. ‘When a religion is good it will take
care of itself; but when it can no longer take care of
itself and God does not see fit to take care of it, so that
it has to appeal to the civil power for support, it is evidence to my mind that its cause is a bad one.’—
Benjamin Franklin.” Bunch, BOD, 43.

Do Not Ye Serve My Gods?—
“It must have been generally known that these
Jewish officials did not worship the Babylonian idols.
But because the king himself had recognized the God
they served as ‘a God of gods, and a Lord of kings’
(ch. 2:47), there had previously been no valid reason to
accuse these men of subversive acts. Now, however, a
direct command had been neglected, even despised,
and the bold refusal to comply with the royal order to
worship the image was probably interpreted as though
the king’s tolerance toward these deviators was leading
to defiance and rebellion. This would account for
Nebuchadnezzar’s rage and fury.” 4SDABC, 783.

The Same Hour.—
“The death sentence was to be immediately executed. In those days there were no long delays in
executing sentences as in modern times. The procrastination of our modern courts in trying cases and executing sentences is one of the chief curses of modern
civilization and causes of increasing crime. Nebuchadnezzar’s sentence was to be executed in ‘the same
hour’ his command was disobeyed. This is the first
mention in the Scriptures of the division of time into
hours. The Greeks claimed to be the inventors of the
hour as a division of time, but they doubtless borrowed
it from the Babylonians.” Bunch, BOD, 40.

“The Babylonians believed that each city was under the protection of certain gods and if they were not
properly respected or worshiped they would take revenge on the city and its inhabitants. There were also
national gods who protected the king and the nation.
To refuse obeisance to them might invite a national
calamity if the insult were allowed to pass unnoticed
and the offenders unpunished.” Bunch, BOD, 40.

Who is That God that Shall Deliver?—
“Then with his hand stretched upward in defiance, he demanded, ‘Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?’” Prophets & Kings, 507.

Another Trial Offered.—
“As the three Hebrews stood before the king,
he was convinced that they possessed something the
other wise men of his kingdom did not have. They
had been faithful in the performance of every duty.
He would give them another trial. If only they would
signify their willingness to unite with the multitude
in worshiping the image, all would be well with them;
‘but if ye worship not,’ he added, ‘ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.’
Then with his hand stretched upward in defiance, he
demanded, ‘Who is that God that shall deliver you out
of my hands?’” Prophets & Kings, 507.

“Nebuchadnezzar’s arrogant defiance expressed
in the words, ‘who is the god that will deliver you out
of my hands?’ only heightens the contrast between
the earthly potentate and the divine Lord when the
Babylonian king finally is forced to bow in homage to
the God of all nations (3:15, 29).” BRI, 2SOD, 53.
“How quickly men forget. Twenty-three years
before he had publicly acknowledge that their God
was ‘a God of gods, and a Lord of kings.’ It is dangerous for an earthly king to defy the Most High who
‘removeth kings, and sitteth up kings.’ He had given
Nebuchadnezzar his kingdom and he could remove it
from him. Pharaoh had said: ‘who is the Lord that I
should obey His voice?’ and the ten plagues were the
answer. Sennacherib defied and challenged the God of
Hezekiah and in answer the angel of death visited his
army and destroyed 185,000 of his officers and mighty

“The forbearance of the king is shown in his
granting Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego another
trial after their first failure to comply with his requirements. Doubtless the matter was thoroughly understood. They could not plead ignorance. They knew

89

GEMS FROM DANIEL
men of valor. The same God heard and accepted the
challenge of Nebuchadnezzar.” Bunch, BOD, 42.

only the beginning of wisdom but the foundation of all
true prosperity. They look with calmness upon the
fiery furnace and the idolatrous throng. They have
trusted in God, and He will not fail them now. Their
answer is respectful, but decided: ‘Be it known unto
thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up’ (Daniel
3:18).
“The proud monarch is surrounded by his
great men, the officers of the government, and the
army that has conquered nations; and all unite in
applauding him as having the wisdom and power of
the gods. In the midst of this imposing display stand
the three youthful Hebrews, steadily persisting in their
refusal to obey the king’s decree. They had been obedient to the laws of Babylon so far as these did not conflict with the claims of God, but they would not be
swayed a hair’s breadth from the duty they owed to
their Creator.” Sanctified Life, 37,38.

“In his rage at being frustrated of complete dominion, Nebuchadnezzar with boasting said to the three
faithful Hebrews, who typify the people of the Third
Angel’s Message, ‘Who is that God that shall deliver
you out of my hands?’ (Daniel 3: 15). The faithful
three trusted in the God of Israel to deliver them, and
the covenant-keeping God walked with them in the
fiery furnace, and ‘delivered’ them. The double, or
repeated and enlarged, application of this experience
refers to the last days, when the people of God-the
people of the Third Angel’s Message who refuse to
bow down to the spiritual image of the beast (Revelation 13, 14, etc.)—will be thrown into times of unparalleled peril; but Jesus, by His angels, will walk with
them in the world-wide, spiritual, fiery furnace and will
‘deliver’ them from their spiritual Babylonian enemies.
Thus we see the connection between the deliverance of
the three Hebrews, brought to view in Daniel 3, and the
deliverance of God’s world-wide, spiritual Hebrews,
mentioned in Daniel 12: 1.” Were. KONAJ, 49.

We Are Not Careful to Answer Thee.—
“The sense is to ‘make defense,’ or ‘apology.’
Since the defendants did not deny the truth of the indictment, they saw no need to make a defense. Their
case rested in the hands of their God (vs.17), and
they made their answer in complete submission to His
will, whatever might be the outcome of their trial.”
4SDABC, 783.

DANIEL 3:16-18
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer
thee in this matter.
If it be so, our God whom we serve is
able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine
hand, O king.
But if not, be it known unto thee, O
king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship the golden image which thou hast
set up.

“Their answer was both honest and decisive. ‘We
are not careful,’ said they, ‘to answer thee in this matter.’ That is, you need not grant us the favor of another
trial; our minds are made up. We can answer as well
now as at any future time; and our answer is, We will
not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image
which thou hast set up. Our God can deliver if He
so desires; but if not, we shall not complain. We
know His will, and we shall render Him unconditional obedience.” Smith, DR, 73.
“There is no help for man, woman, or child who
will not hear and obey the voice of duty, for the voice
of duty is the voice of God. The eyes, the ears, and
the heart will become unimpressible if men and women
refuse to give heed to the divine counsel, and choose
the way that is best pleasing to themselves.” Testimonies to Ministers, 402.

The Answer of the Three Hebrew Men.—
“ ‘In the life of every man and nation there comes
a time to decide,’ said Lowell. God grant that our daily
decisions will prepare us for the supreme test of life.
…The more fundamental the duty, the less room is
there for uncertainty. When duty is clearly defined,
there should be promptness in obedience with no parleying with temptation. Delay in executing a decision
of conscience always weakens the decision. Hesitating
obedience to a known duty is a sign of indifference and
cowardice.” Bunch, BOD, 41,43.

“They knew that they owed to God every faculty
they possessed; and while their hearts were full of generous sympathy toward all men, they had a lofty aspiration to prove themselves loyal to God. When the king
was troubled in regard to his dream, these men, with
Daniel, had fasted and prayed, that they might understand the dream. The Lord had heard their cries, and
he had given to Daniel wisdom to interpret the dream
to the king. Thus their own lives and the lives of the
astrologers and soothsayers had been saved. Now the
very men who had escaped death through the mercy

“In vain were the king’s threats. He could not
turn these noble men from their allegiance to the
great Ruler of nations. They had learned from the
history of their fathers that disobedience to God is dishonor, disaster, and ruin; that the fear of the Lord is not

90

DANIEL 3
right hand of my righteousness.’ Isaiah 43:2; 41:10.”
God Cares, Vol.1, 51.

of God to his servants, had been the prime movers
in securing the decree in regard to the worship of
the golden image. But the three Hebrews made no
mention of these things; they knew that a controversy
with the king would only increase his fury.” Youth
Instructor, 3/8/1904.

If It Be So, Our God is Able… But If Not.—
“That they were not sure of coming through this
experience alive can be seen from their further statement (vs. 18). Had they been sure of deliverance, their
reply could be interpreted as revealing spiritual arrogance. As the case stood, their attitude showed their
firm conviction that their course of action was the only
feasible one, which needed no defense, or even further
explanation….
“God could save them if it was best for them and
for the glory of His name and cause. The ‘if’ should
not be taken as an indication of doubt in God’s power
to save, but as an indication of uncertainty as to
whether it was God’s will to save.” 4SDABC, 784.

Answer of John Chrysostom.—
“John Chrysostom was one of the great Greek
church fathers. Born in AD 347, he was brought
before the Emperor at an early age to answer for his
faith.
“ ‘If you persist in being a Christian,’ said the
emperor, ‘I will banish you from your father’s land.’
“Chrysostom replied, ‘Your Majesty, you cannot;
the whole world is my Father’s land.’
“ ‘Then I will take away all your property.’
“ ‘You cannot do that either. My treasures are in
heaven.’
“ ‘Then I will send you to a place where there will
not be a friend to speak to.’
“ ‘You cannot do that, for I have a Friend that
sticketh closer than a brother. I shall have my Brother
Jesus Christ forever.
“The emperor said, ‘I will take away your life.’
“ ‘You cannot do that either. My life is hid with
Christ in God,’ Chrysostom answered.
“That was not blind obstinacy. It was faith—
‘the faith of Jesus’ which will characterize the last
witnesses of God’s true church on earth. Revelation
14:12.” Anderson, UDP, 66.

“The sentence of death did not change their decision. The martyrs knew what would lessen the fierceness of the fire kindling upon nerve and muscle. In
beholding Christ, in the manifestation of his presence, the most cruel death was made bearable.”
Signs, 9/2/1897.
We Will Not Serve Thy Gods.—
“With the furnace in sight, the captives answered
the king’s horrible threat, saying: ‘O Nebuchadnezzar,
we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be
so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of
thine hand, O king.’ Their faith rose with the
knowledge that God would be glorified in this transaction, and with a firm, triumphant ring of implicit
trust and confidence in their voices, they said, ‘But
if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will
not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image
which thou hast set up.’” Signs, 5/6/1897.

“After taking your position firmly, wisely, cautiously, make not one concession on any point concerning which God has plainly spoken. Be as calm as a
summer evening, but as fixed as the everlasting
hills. By conceding, you would be selling our whole
cause into the hands of the enemy.” 12 Manuscript
Releases, 68.

“Whosoever therefore shall confess me before
men, him will I confess also before my Father which
is in heaven.” Matthew 10:32.

Our God Whom We Serve Is Able to Deliver Us.—
“In the testing time they did not know that the
Lord would deliver them from the furnace, but they
had faith to believe that He had power to do it if it
were His will to do so.” Haskell, SDP, 47.

“Daniel and his companions had a conscience
void of offense toward God. But this was not preserved without a struggle. What a test was brought on
the three associates of Daniel, when they were required
to worship the great image set up by King Nebuchadnezzar in the plain of Dura!
“The three Hebrews were called upon to confess Christ in the face of the burning fiery furnace.
It cost them something to do this, for their lives
were at stake. These youth, imbued with the Holy
Spirit, declared to the whole kingdom of Babylon their
faith—that He whom they worshiped was the only true
and living God. The demonstration of their faith on the
plain of Dura was a most eloquent presentation of their
principles.
“The lessons we may learn from the loyalty of the

“Four centuries earlier King David, who knew
God very well, had written, ‘God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble.’ Psalm
46:1. ‘The angel of the LORD encampeth round
about them that fear him, and delivereth them.’
Psalm 34:7. One century before the fiery furnace experience, God had promised through Isaiah, ‘When
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee;
…when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt
not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee,’ and again: ‘Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be
not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee;
yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the

91

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Hebrew captives toward God and his law, have a direct
and vital bearing upon our experience in these last
days. We have a confession to make different from
that which we have made; and we shall have to make it
under trying circumstances. In order to impress idolaters with the power and greatness of the living God,
we, as his servants, must reveal our own reverence
for God. We must make it manifest that he is the only
object of our adoration and worship, and that no consideration, not even the preservation of life, can induce
us to make the least concession to idolatry.” Youth
Instructor, 7/12/1904.

saith the church’ or a ‘Thus saith the state.’ The
crown of Christ is to be lifted above the diadems of
earthly potentates.
“We are not required to defy authorities. Our
words, whether spoken or written, should be carefully
considered, lest we place ourselves on record as uttering that which would make us appear antagonistic to
law and order. We are not to say or do anything that
would unnecessarily close up our way. We are to go
forward in Christ’s name, advocating the truths committed to us. If we are forbidden by men to do this
work, then we may say, as did the apostles, ‘Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto
you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and
heard.’” Acts of the Apostles, 69.

“Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or
any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under
the earth. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them,
nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous
God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me….” Exodus 20:3-5.

DANIEL 3:19-22
Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury,
and the form of his visage was changed
against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: therefore he spake, and commanded
that they should heat the furnace one seven
times more than it was wont to be heated.
And he commanded the most mighty
men that were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast
them into the burning fiery furnace.
Then these men were bound in their
coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their
other garments, and were cast into the
midst of the burning fiery furnace.
Therefore because the king’s commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flames of the fire slew
those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

“For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul?” Matthew 16:26.
“Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my
servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and
believe me, and understand that I am he: before me
there was no God formed, neither shall there be after
me. I, even I, am the LORD; and beside me there is
no saviour. I have declared, and have saved, and I
have shewed, when there was no strange god among
you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD,
that I am God.” Isaiah 43:10-12. The word for witness in the NT is the same as the word for ‘martyr.’
We must be willing to ‘love not our life even unto
death’ so that we may give a true ‘testimony [witness]
of Jesus Christ.’” PJ
Christ’s Teaching.—
“Holding in His hand the Roman coin, upon
which were stamped the name and image of Caesar, He
declared that since they were living under the protection of the Roman power, they should render to that
power the support it claimed, so long as this did not
conflict with a higher duty. But while peaceably
subject to the laws of the land, they should at all
times give their first allegiance to God.” Desire of
Ages, 602.

Then Was Nebuchadnezzar Full of Fury.—
“The issue was now clearly drawn. The sovereign of the world’s power had personally issued his
command direct to the three individuals: and from
them he had received answer as direct, that they would
not conform. This was conduct, and these were
words, such as the king in his absolutism of power
had never met before. There was therefore a personal
as well as an official resentment aroused in him; and he
was so ‘full of fury’ that ‘the form of his visage was
changed against’ the young men.” Jones, IIR, 17.

“We are to recognize human government as an
ordinance of divine appointment, and teach obedience
to it as a sacred duty, within its legitimate sphere. But
when its claims conflict with the claims of God, we
must obey God rather than men. God’s word must
be recognized as above all human legislation. A
‘Thus saith the Lord’ is not to be set aside for a ‘Thus

“If we put ourselves in the place of Nebuchadnezzar, we can appreciate his problem. To have permitted
these men to defy him would have seriously affected
his standing as ruler. His position before the world

92

DANIEL 3
was at stake.” Anderson, UDP, 64.

ones he cast into it, the victims would only have been
destroyed the sooner. The king would have gained
nothing by his fury. But seeing they were delivered
from it, much was gained on the part of the cause of
God and His truth; for the more intense the heat, the
greater and more impressive the miracle when the
young man were delivered from it.” Smith, DR, 74.

“The king’s wrath knew no limits. In the very
height of his power and glory, to be thus defied by the
representatives of a despised and captive race was
an insult which his proud spirit could not endure.
The fiery furnace had been heated seven times more
than it was wont, and into it were cast the Hebrew exiles. So furious were the flames, that the men who cast
them in were burned to death.” Sanctified Life, 38.

“With the Babylonians as with the Hebrews ‘seven’ was the perfect number, the symbol of completeness and perfection. The furnace was to be heated to
its full capacity. This would be for the benefit of the
condemned man. A small, slow fire would have greatly prolonged and intensified the suffering. The defiant
rebels would be given into the hands of I-sum, the firegod of the Babylonians and the friend of Merodach,
and where was the God who could deliver them?”
Bunch, BOD, 43,44.

The Form of His Visage Was Changed.—
“When the king saw that his will was not received
as the will of God, he was ‘full of fury,’ and the form
of his visage was changed against these men. Satanic attributes made his countenance appear as the
countenance of a demon.” Signs, 5/6/1897.
“Nebuchadnezzar was not entirely free from the
faults and follies into which an absolute monarch so
easily runs. Intoxicated with unlimited power, he
could not brook disobedience or contradiction. Let his
expressed authority be resisted on however good
grounds, and he exhibits the weakness common to our
fallen humanity under like circumstances, and flies into
a passion of rage. Ruler of the world, he was not
equal to that still harder task of ruling his own spirit. Even the form of his visage was changed. Instead of the calm, dignified, self-possessed ruler that
he should have appeared, he betrayed himself in
look and act as the slave of ungovernable passion.”
Smith, DR, 74.

The Most Mighty Men.—
“Military men of
4SDABC, 784.

outstanding

strength.”

In Their Coats, Hosen, Hats, and other Garments.—
“The mention of the separate articles of clothing, consisting of easily inflammable material, was
doubtless with reference to the miracle that followed
(see vs. 27).” 4SDABC, 784
Cast Into the Fiery Furnace.—
“But the Lord did not forget His own. As His
witnesses were cast into the furnace, the Saviour
revealed Himself to them in person, and together
they walked in the midst of the fire. In the presence
of the Lord of heat and cold, the flames lost their power to consume.” Prophets & Kings, 508,509.

“It is a fearful thing for any soul to place himself on Satan’s side of the question; for as soon as he
does this, a change passes over him, as it is said of
the king of Babylon, that his visage changed toward
the three faithful Hebrews. Past history will be repeated. Men will reject the Holy Spirit’s working, and
open the door of the mind to Satanic attributes that
separate them from God. They will turn against the
very messengers through whom God sends the messages of warning.” Pamphlets 154, 59.

“Every circumstance revealed the direct power of
God. The Hebrews were bound in all their garments,
but came out with not even the smell of fire upon them.
The mightiest men in the army were chosen to cast
them in, but the fire burned them before they came in
contact with it. But upon the Hebrews it had not effect,
although they were in the very midst of its flames. It is
evident that the fire was under the control of some
supernatural intelligence, for while it consumed the
cords with which they were bound, so that they were
free to walk about in the midst of the fire, it did not
even singe their garments. They did not spring out of
the fire as soon as free, but remained in it; for the king
had put them into the furnace of fire as in the delights
and luxuries of the palace. Let us in all our trials,
afflictions, persecutions, and straitened places, but
have the ‘form of the fourth’ with us and it is
enough.” Smith, DR, 74,75.

King Commands to Heat Furnace 7 Times More.—
“With all the force he could command, he ordered that the furnace be heated seven times hotter than
its wont, and commanded the most mighty men to bind
the youth, and cast them into the furnace. He felt that
it required more than ordinary power to deal with
these noble men. His mind was strongly impressed
that something unusual would interpose in their
behalf, and his strongest men were ordered to deal
with them.” Signs, 5/6/1897.
“The furnace was heated seven times hotter
than usual; in other words, to its utmost capacity.
The king overreached himself in this for even if the
superheated furnace had the expected effect upon the

The Flames of the Fire Slew Those Men.—
“Here also we have an apt illustration that the
same fire that is death to the wicked is life to the right-

93

GEMS FROM DANIEL
eous. While the fire of the furnace destroyed the might
men of Babylon, the faithful followers of God were
unharmed in its very midst. So it shall be in the final
reckoning. ‘Our God is a consuming fire’ (Heb.
12:29). Consuming not to all, however. ‘Who among
us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? He that walketh
righteously…. Thine eyes shall see the king in His
beauty…. (Isa. 33:14.)” Light Bearers, UOD-4.

temptation, God will sustain you when the temptation comes.” 3 Testimonies, 47.
“The commandments of finite, sinful men are to
sink into insignificance beside the Word of the eternal
God. Truth is to be obeyed at any cost, even though
gaping prisons, chain-gangs, and banishment stare us in
the face. If you are loyal and true, that God who
walked with the three Hebrew children in the fiery furnace, who protected Daniel in the lions’ den, who manifested himself to John on the lonely island, will go
with you wherever you go. His abiding presence will
comfort and sustain you; and you will realize the fulfilment of the promise, ‘If a man love me, he will keep
my words; and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him.’”
Signs, 5/6/1897.

“This shows that those who ‘obey orders’ to kill
someone are guilty before God for carrying out an order from man to disobey one of His laws.” PJ

DANIEL 3:23-25
And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into
the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

Fiery Furnace Represents Christ’s 2nd Coming.—
“In the day of His coming, the last great trumpet
is heard, and there is a terrible shaking of earth and
heaven. The whole earth, from the loftiest mountains
to the deepest mines, will hear. Everything will be
penetrated by fire. The tainted atmosphere will be
cleansed by fire. The fire having fulfilled its mission,
the dead that have been laid away in the grave will
come forth—some to the resurrection of life, to be
caught up to meet their Lord in the air, and some to
behold the coming of Him whom they have despised
and whom they now recognize as the Judge of all the
earth.
“All the righteous are untouched by the flames.
They can walk through the fire, as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego walked in the midst of the
furnace heated seven times hotter than it was wont
to be heated. The Hebrew worthies could not be
consumed, because the form of the fourth, the Son
of God, was with them. So in the day of the coming
of the Lord, smoke and flame will be powerless to
harm the righteous. Those who are united with the
Lord will escape unscathed. Earthquakes, hurricanes,
flame, and flood cannot injure those who are prepared
to meet their Saviour in peace. But those who rejected
our Saviour, and scourged and crucified Him, will be
among those who will be raised from the dead to behold His coming in the clouds of heaven, attended by
the heavenly host—ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands....” Upward Look, 261.

Trial Similar to John’s—
“John was cast into a cauldron of boiling oil; but
the Lord preserved the life of His faithful servant,
even as He preserved the three Hebrews in the fiery
furnace. As the words were spoken, Thus perish all
who believe in that deceiver, Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
John declared, My Master patiently submitted to all
that Satan and his angels could devise to humiliate
and torture Him. He gave His life to save the world.
I am honored in being permitted to suffer for His sake.
I am a weak, sinful man. Christ was holy, harmless,
undefiled. He did no sin, neither was guile found in
His mouth.” Acts of Apostles, 570.
Our Fiery Trial.—
“Living faith in the merits of a crucified Redeemer will carry them through the fiery furnace of affliction and trial. The form of the Fourth will be with
them in the fierce heat of the furnace, which will not
leave even the smell of fire upon their garments.
Children should be encouraged to become Bible students and to have firm religious principles that will
stand the test of the perils sure to be experienced by all
who live upon the earth during the last days in the closing history of the world.” 4 Testimonies, 312,313.
“Oh, it is a great thing to be right with God, the
soul in harmony with its Maker, so that, amid the contagion of evil example, which by its deceitful appearance would lure the soul from duty, angels may be sent
to your rescue! But bear in mind, if you invite temptation, you will not have divine aid to keep you from
being overcome. The three worthies endured the
fiery furnace, for Jesus walked with them in the
fiery flame. If they had, of themselves, walked into
the fire, they would have been consumed. Thus will
it be with you. If you do not walk deliberately into

DANIEL 3:24,25.
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake,
and said unto his counsellors, Did not we
cast three men bound into the midst of the
fire? They answered and said unto the
king, True, O king.
94

DANIEL 3
not at all prevent its referring to Christ, inasmuch as the
word, elahin, used here in its Chaldean form, although
in the plural number, is regularly translated ‘God’
throughout the Old Testament.
“What a scathing rebuke upon the king for his folly and madness was the deliverance of these worthies
from the fiery furnace! A higher power than any on
earth had vindicated those who stood firm against idolatry, and poured contempt on the worship and requirements of the king. None of the gods of the heathen
ever had wrought such deliverance as that, nor were
they able to do so.” Smith, DR, 75

He answered and said, Lo, I see four
men loose, walking in the midst of the fire,
and they have no hurt; and the form of the
fourth is like the Son of God.
I See Four Men Loose, Walking in the Fire.—
“The men, though walking about, made no effort
to come out until they were invited by the king. The
same authority that placed them in the furnace
must release them from the sentence. Paul and Silas
refused to leave the Philippian jail until released by the
same authorities who had unjustly placed them there.”
Bunch, BOD, 45.

“The context reveals that Nebuchadnezzar
acknowledged the superiority of the most high God of
Israel (see chs. 3:26,28,29; 4:2). In these statements
the king was not referring to gods in general, but to the
God in particular.” 4SDABC, 785.

They Have No Hurt.—
“This is the victory that overcometh the world,
even our faith.” 1 John 5:4.
“Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths
of lions. Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the
edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong,
waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the
aliens.” Hebrews 11:33,34.

“From his royal seat the king looked on, expecting to see the men who had defied him utterly destroyed. But his feelings of triumph suddenly changed.
The nobles standing near saw his face grow pale as he
started from the throne and looked intently into the
glowing flames. In alarm the king, turning to his lords,
asked, ‘Did not we cast three men bound into the midst
of the fire? ...Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the
midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of
the fourth is like the Son of God.’
“How did that heathen king know what the
Son of God was like? The Hebrew captives filling
positions of trust in Babylon had in life and character
represented before him the truth. When asked for a
reason of their faith, they had given it without hesitation. Plainly and simply they had presented the principles of righteousness, thus teaching those around them
of the God whom they worshiped. They had told of
Christ, the Redeemer to come; and in the form of
the fourth in the midst of the fire the king recognized the Son of God.” Prophets & Kings, 509.
“When Christ manifests Himself to the children
of men, an unseen power speaks to their souls. They
feel themselves to be in the presence of the Infinite
One. Before His majesty, kings and nobles tremble,
and acknowledge that the living God is above every
earthly power.” Sanctified Life, 38,39.

Just the Binding Ropes Were Burnt

DANIEL 3:26,27
Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to
the mouth of the burning fiery furnace,
and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, ye servants of the most high
God, come forth, and come hither. Then
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came
forth of the midst of the fire.

The Form of the Fourth is Like the Son of God.—
“The king said, ‘the form of the fourth is like
the son of God.’ The language is by some supposed to
refer to Christ. A more literal rendering, according to
the Revised Version, and other good authorities, is
‘like a son of the gods,’ that is He had the appearance
of a divine being. Though this was doubtless Nebuchadnezzar’s accustomed way of speaking of the gods
he worshiped (see comments on Daniel 4: 18), it does

95

GEMS FROM DANIEL
caused the wrath of man to praise Him!”
76.

And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king’s counsellors, being
gathered together, saw these men, upon
whose bodies the fire had no power, nor
was an hair of their head singed, neither
were their coats changed, nor the smell of
fire had passed on them.

Smith, DR,

Golden Image Forgotten in the Minds of People.—
“The center of interest is transferred from the
golden image to the fiery furnace and the three Hebrews. The dedicatory service is forgotten and all
the dignitaries of the nation had assembled before the
furnace to witness the execution. With a look of triumph the king and especially the Chaldean spies saw
the three Jews bound and cast into the fiery furnace.
They expected to hear their cries of anguish and to see
them struggling in the flames. Their pleasure and satisfaction soon gave place to astonishment. The gods of
Nebuchadnezzar, I-sum, Nebo, and Merodach were
defeated, for the fire that had destroyed the mighty
men had no power over the servants of Jehovah. Isa.
43:2 was fulfilled in their behalf. Through faith they
‘quenched the violence of fire.’ The fire that was to
destroy them burned the cords with which they were
bound and set them free.” Bunch, BOD, 44.

Ye Servants of the Most High God.—
“And cried with a loud voice, and said, What
have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most
high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me
not.” Mark 5:7.
“Nebuchadnezzar had just seen the form of the
fourth Being in the fiery furnace and recognized Him
as the Son of God. Now he acknowledges the Father, whom they served, as the Most High God.
Later Nebuchadnezzar spoke of Daniel as one in whom
dwelt ‘the Spirit of the holy Gods.’ Thus Nebuchadnezzar recognized and acknowledged the three members of the Godhead—The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—the Heavenly Trio. Each had a part in his conversion.” PJ.

“What a change in the program that had been
planned. The dedicatory service in honor of the
golden image and the gods of Babylon is broken up.
The image is deserted and the king confesses his mistake publicly and even praises the God of the three
Hebrews for changing his own word and altering his
own decree which was considered unalterable, like
those of the Medes and Persians.” Bunch, BOD, 45.

Come Forth.—
“And now, his own greatness and dignity forgotten, Nebuchadnezzar descended from his throne and,
going to the mouth of the furnace, cried out, [Verse 26
middle, quoted].” Prophets & Kings, 509.

“This miracle produced a striking change in
the minds of the people. The great golden image,
set up with such display, was forgotten.” Sanctified
Life, 39.

“With feelings of deep humiliation and remorse,
the king stood as near the blazing furnace as he dared,
and in a clear, loud voice called out, ‘Ye servants of the
most high God, come forth, and come hither.’ They
obeyed the voice of the king, and came forth unhurt,
without even the smell of fire upon them.” Signs,
5/6/1897.

DANIEL 3:28,29
Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said,
Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, who hath sent his angel,
and delivered his servants that trusted in
him, and have changed the king’s word,
and yielded their bodies, that they might
not serve nor worship any god, except their
own God.
Therefore I make a decree, That every
people, nation, and language, which speak
any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut
in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
dunghill: because there is no other God
that can deliver after this sort.

“When bidden, these
three men came forth from
the furnace. Then the princes, governors, and king’s
counselors, through whose
advice, or at least concurrence, they had been cast into
the furnace (for the king said
to them, ‘Did not we cast three men bound into the
midst of the fire?’ Verse 24), were gathered together to
look upon these men, and have tangible proof of their
miraculous preservation. The worship of the great
image was forgotten. The interest of this vast concourse of people was concentrated upon these three
remarkable men. How the knowledge of this deliverance would be spread abroad throughout the empire, as the people should return to their respective
provinces! What a notable instance in which God

The King Acknowledges the True God.—

96

DANIEL 3
“[Verse 29 quoted.] In these and like words the
king of Babylon endeavored to spread abroad before all
the peoples of earth his conviction that the power and
authority of the God of the Hebrews was worthy of
supreme adoration. And God was pleased with the
effort of the king to show Him reverence, and to make
the royal confession of allegiance as widespread as was
the Babylonian realm.
“It was right for the king to make public confession, and to seek to exalt the God of heaven above all
other gods; but in endeavoring to force his subjects to
make a similar confession of faith and to show similar
reverence, Nebuchadnezzar was exceeding his right as
a temporal sovereign. He had no more right, either
civil or moral, to threaten men with death for not
worshiping God, than he had to make the decree
consigning to the flames all who refused to worship
the golden image. God never compels the obedience
of man. He leaves all free to choose whom they will
serve.
“By the deliverance of His faithful servants, the
Lord declared that He takes His stand with the oppressed, and rebukes all earthly powers that rebel
against the authority of Heaven. The three Hebrews
declared to the whole nation of Babylon their faith in
Him whom they worshiped. They relied on God. In
the hour of their trial they remembered the promise,
‘When thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not
be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.’
Isaiah 43:2. And in a marvelous manner their faith in
the living Word had been honored in the sight of all.
The tidings of their wonderful deliverance were
carried to many countries by the representatives of
the different nations that had been invited by Nebuchadnezzar to the dedication. Through the faithfulness of His children, God was glorified in all the
earth.” Prophets & Kings, 510-512.

done. In those days, each nation had its god or gods,
for there were ‘gods many, and lords many.’ The victory of one nation over another was supposed to be
won because the gods of the conquered nation were not
able to deliver it from the conquerors. The Jews had
been wholly subjugated by the Babylonians, who had
no doubt spoken disparagingly or contemptuously of
the God of the Jews. This the king now prohibited;
for he plainly understood that his success against
the Hebrews was the result of their sins and not of
any lack of power on the part of their God. In what
a conspicuous and exalted light this placed the God of
the Hebrews in comparison with the gods of the nations! It was an acknowledgment that He held men
amenable to some high standard of moral character, and that He did not regard with indifference
their actions in reference to it.” Smith, DR, 76,77.
They Have Changed the King’s Word.—
“In setting up this image, all of gold, Nebuchadnezzar was challenging God’s plan of history as revealed in the dream of four successive empires and the
final establishment of God’s everlasting kingdom.
Babylon’s king was determined that his kingdom
would continue; the golden kingdom was to endure
forever. But God’s deliverance of His servants
‘changed the king’s word,’ as He can change any and
all who challenge His right to rule.” Anderson, UDP,
67.
They Yielded Their Bodies, that They Might Obey.—
“While man owes certain duties to man, there are
duties which he owes only to God. Matt. 22:21; Exodus 20:3-6; Acts 4:19,20; 5:29.” Thiele, OSID,38.
“The greatest want of the world is the want of
men—men who will not be bought or sold, men who in
their inmost souls are true and honest, men who do not
fear to call sin by its right name, men whose conscience is as true to duty as the needle to the pole, men
who will stand for the right though the heavens
fall.” Education, 57.

“Nebuchadnezzar’s heart was so moved upon by
this wonderful miracle that he acknowledged God, and
His superior power. The king was instructed by
Daniel that all men, whether king or subjects, were
not to read the Scriptures and God’s providences in
the light of their dreams and fancies, but were to
read their dreams in the light of the living oracles.”
Manuscript 47a, 1898.

I Make a Decree—Force Used.—
“Nebuchadnezzar did right in publicly exalting
the God of heaven above all other gods. But he had
no right, either civil or moral, to attempt to force
his subjects to similar confession and reverence, and
to threaten men’s lives for not worshipping the true
God, than he had threaten death to all who refused
to worship the golden image. God never compels
the conscience.” Smith, DR, 77.

“But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be
filled with the glory of the LORD.” Numbers 14:21.
“They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain: for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the
sea.” Isaiah 11:9.

“It was right for the king to make public confession, and to seek to exalt the God of heaven above all
other gods; but in endeavoring to force his subjects to
make a similar confession of faith and to show similar
reverence, Nebuchadnezzar was exceeding his right as
a temporal sovereign. He had no more right, either

“Then the king blessed the God of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, and made a decree that none
should speak against Him. This the Chaldeans had

97

GEMS FROM DANIEL
civil or moral, to threaten men with death for not
worshiping God, than he had to make the decree
consigning to the flames all who refused to worship
the golden image. God never compels the obedience
of man. He leaves all free to choose whom they will
serve.” Prophets & Kings, 510,511.

propelled into the limelight of this world’s disfavour, and thus the work of God will be finished in a
‘short work’.” Burnside, DPUF, 79,80.
“And I saw another angel fly in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto
them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation,
and kindred, and tongue, and people.” Rev. 14:6.

“What the Jewish nation as a nation had failed to
do in proclaiming the truth to the nations of the world,
God accomplished under the most trying circumstances, with only three men. The story of the miraculous deliverance was told to the ends of the
earth. The principles of religious liberty and freedom
of conscience were made known. The history of the
Jews was told from mouth to mouth as those unacquainted with the three Hebrews asked who they were
and how they came into Babylon. The Sabbath was
proclaimed. …The glory of Babylon was for the time
forgotten as the splendor of God’s government became
the absorbing theme. Without doubt some men dated
their conversion from that day, and forces were set in
operation which paved the way for the return of the
Jews a few years later.
“…This [decree] gave freedom to every believer
to worship unmolested. Satan, in attempting to destroy
the Hebrews, had overstepped the bounds, and in place
of the death of three, life was granted to thousands.”
Haskell, SDP, 45,46.

DANIEL 3:30
Then the king promoted Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, in the province of
Babylon.
Three Hebrews Promoted.—
“The king promoted the young captives, that is,
he restored to them the offices which they held before
the charges of disobedience and treason were brought
against them. At the end of verse 30 the Septuagint,
the Greek version of the Old Testament, adds to the
Hebrew text: ‘He advanced them to be governors over
all the Jews that were in his kingdom.’ It is not probable that he insisted on any further worship of his image.” Smith, DR, 77
“By faithfulness in the face of death the three
Hebrew worthies had demonstrated qualities of
character that made it evident that they could be
trusted with even great responsibilities than they
had previously borne.” 4SDABC, 785.

Governmental Authority is Limited.—
“The chief lesson for us in the experience of the
three Hebrews is that governmental authority is limited. …Civil rulers are ordained to protect citizens in
the enjoyment of the God-given rights, and to punish
evildoers. For this reason we are commanded to pay
taxes and support civil government. Civil rulers are
not ordained to propagate or enforce religious observances. Church and state must be kept separate
and to each we owe certain well-defined duties. Matt.
22:21. But when Caesar, or the civil ruler, arrogates to
himself those things which belong to God and His religious ministers, he oversteps his authority and should
be resisted. ‘We ought to obey God rather than men.’
Acts 5:29. Our first duty is to the higher power. The
conduct of the three Hebrews with God’s demonstrated
approval is a notable example of our duty when the
laws of the land are in conflict with the law of God.”
Bunch, BOD, 46.

History of Chapter Three Will Be Repeated.—
“History will be repeated. False religion will
be exalted. The first day of the week, a common
working day, possessing no sanctity whatever, will
be set up as was the image at Babylon. All nations
and tongues and peoples will be commanded to worship this spurious sabbath. This is Satan’s plan to
make of no account the day instituted by God, and given to the world as a memorial of creation.
“The decree enforcing the worship of this day is
to go forth to all the world. In a limited degree, it has
already gone forth. In several places the civil power is
speaking with the voice of a dragon, just as the heathen
king spoke to the Hebrew captives.
“Trial and persecution will come to all who, in
obedience to the Word of God, refuse to worship this
false sabbath. Force is the last resort of every false
religion. At first it tries attraction, as the king of
Babylon tried the power of music and outward show.
If these attractions, invented by men inspired by Satan,
failed to make men worship the image, the hungry
flames of the furnace were ready to consume them. So
it will be now. The papacy has exercised her power to
compel men to obey her, and she will continue to do
so. We need the same spirit that was manifested by
God's servants in the conflict with paganism.” Signs

Every People, Nation, and Language.—
“To ‘every people, nation and language’ is the
decree sent. In about a week fast messengers would
carry the message. In a week the truth goes. ‘He will
finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness’.
Romans 9:28.
“The obedience of God’s faithful three, to His
commandments, resulted in God’s truth going to all the
world in a few days. So, through the obedience of
God’s remnant, to God’s Commandments, they will be

98

DANIEL 3
of the Times, 5/6/1897.

him king of the nations the Lord had not made him
king in the religion of the people: that in bringing
him to be head of all the nations, peoples, and languages, God had not given him to be head of the religion of even a solitary individual: that while the Lord
had brought all nations and peoples under the king’s
yoke as to their political and bodily service, the same
Lord had unmistakably shown to the king that he had
given no power nor jurisdiction in any way whatever as
to their soul’s service: that while in all things between
nation and nation, and between man and man, all peoples, nations, and languages had been given to him to
serve him, and God had made him ruler over them all;
yet with the relations between each man and God
the king could have nothing whatever to do: and
that in the presence of the rights of the individual person, in conscience and in worship ‘the king’s word’
must change, the king even of the world is only nobody, for here only God is sovereign and all in all.
“And for the instruction of all kings and all people forever, all this was done that day, and it was written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the
world are come.” Jones, IIR, 19-21.

“Satan has taken the world captive. He has introduced an idol sabbath, apparently giving to it great
importance. He has stolen the homage of the Christian
world away from the Sabbath of the Lord for this idol
sabbath. The world bows to a tradition, a man-made
commandment. As Nebuchadnezzar set up his
golden image on the plain of Dura, and so exalted
himself, so Satan exalts himself in this false sabbath,
for which he has stolen the livery of heaven.” R&H,
3/8/1898.
“In Revelation there is brought to view an image
to the beast—governments on earth which will frame
laws contrary to the requirements of God. Life and
power will be given to this image, and it shall both
speak and decree that as many as will not worship it
shall be put to death. All, small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, will be required to receive a mark
in the right hand or in the forehead. Men will be disfranchised for not worshipping this image; for no one
will be allowed to buy or sell who has not the mark or
the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
“Who will be able to stand the test when this decree to worship the image to the beast is enforced?
Who will choose rather to ‘suffer affliction with the
people of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season?’ What children are now being trained and educated in these principles of integrity to God? From
what homes will come the Daniels and the Meshachs?
This will be the final test brought upon the servants of
God. The scenes portrayed in the third chapter of
Daniel are but a miniature representation of those
trials into which the people of God are coming as
the end approaches.” Haskell, SDP, 48,49.

Lesson of Continual Submission to God’s Will.—
“These three Hebrews possessed genuine sanctification. True Christian principle will not stop to weigh
consequences. It does not ask, What will people think
of me if I do this? or, How will it affect my worldly
prospects if I do that? With the most intense longing
the children of God desire to know what He would
have them do, that their works may glorify Him.
The Lord has made ample provision that the hearts and
lives of all His followers may be controlled by divine
grace, that they may be as burning and shining lights in
the world.
“These faithful Hebrews possessed great natural
ability, they had enjoyed the highest intellectual culture, and now occupied a position of honor; but all this
did not lead them to forget God. Their powers were
yielded to the sanctifying influence of divine grace. By
their steadfast integrity they showed forth the praises of
Him who had called them out of darkness into His
marvelous light. In their wonderful deliverance were
displayed, before that vast assembly, the power and
majesty of God. Jesus placed Himself by their side
in the fiery furnace, and by the glory of His presence convinced the proud king of Babylon that it
could be no other than the Son of God. The light of
Heaven had been shining forth from Daniel and his
companions, until all their associates understood the
faith which ennobled their lives and beautified their
characters. By the deliverance of His faithful servants, the Lord declares that He will take His stand
with the oppressed and overthrow all earthly powers that would trample upon the authority of the
God of heaven.” Sanctified Life, 39,40.

Lesson of Freedom of Religion.—
“Here, then, is the situation: The Lord had
brought all nations in subjection to the king of Babylon. By messages of His own prophet He had commanded His people, the Jews, and these three young
men among them, to ‘serve the king of Babylon.’ Yet
these three had explicitly refused to serve the king of
Babylon in this thing which he had personally and directly commanded them; and in this refusal the Lord
himself had most signally stood by them and delivered them.
“Therefore it would be impossible more plainly to
show that the Lord, in commanding the people to be
subject to the king of Babylon and to serve him, had
never either commanded or intended that they
should be subject to him or serve him in the realm of
religion.
“By this unmistakable approval of the course of
the three men, and this signal deliverance of them, the
Lord made perfectly plain to the king that this command in this matter was wrong: that he had demanded
a service that he had no right to require: that in making

“The gaping lions’ den could not keep Daniel

99

GEMS FROM DANIEL
from his daily prayers, nor could the fiery furnace induce Shadrach and his companions to fall down before
the idol which Nebuchadnezzar set up. Young men
who have firm principles will eschew pleasure, defy
pain, and brave even the lions’ den and the heated
fiery furnace rather than be found untrue to God.
“Such firmness and untarnished principle shines
brightest in contrast with the feebleness and inefficiency of the youth of this age. With but few exceptions,
they are vacillating, varying with every change of circumstance and surroundings, one thing today and another tomorrow. Let the attractions of pleasure or selfish gratification be presented, and conscience will be
sacrificed to gain the coveted indulgence. Can such
a person be trusted? Never!” 5 Testimonies, 43.

known, when the judgment shall sit and the books
be opened.” Sanctified Life, 40.
Lessons For Today.—
“The Children of God today must not expect to
meet less of persecution and trial than did these ancient
worthies. Just as long as we are followers of Christ we
must be witnesses for him. Tribulation will assuredly
come; for Satan knows that Christ has purchased salvation for the whole world, and he is determined to wrest
every soul possible out of his hand.
“Christ forewarned his disciples of this, saying:
‘These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should
not be offended. They shall put you out of the synagogues; yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth
you will think that he doeth God service. And these
things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the Father, nor me. But these things have I told
you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember
that I told you of them.’ It is not the world, who make
no profession, from whom the persecution comes. It is
those who profess to be doing God service who manifest the most bitter hatred.
“But though man may have power to harm the
bodies of those who exalt the law of God above all
human enactments, he cannot harm their souls. God’s
grace will be given in every way proportionate to the
trial suffered to come upon us. Christ has promised, I
‘will manifest myself to him;’ ‘I will not leave you
comfortless; I will come to you.’ And again he comforts us with the words: ‘These things I have spoken
unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world
ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world.’
“Our victory as believers is obtained through the
grace of Christ, which he can and will bestow upon all
who will put their trust in him. This is the good news
with which Christ would have us comforted. In all the
tribulation which the child of God must receive, whatever his position in the world, he may be of good cheer
in contemplation of the truth that Christ has overcome
the world.
“It is a great thing to be right with God, the soul
in harmony with its Maker. Amid the contagion of evil
example, which by its deceitful appearance would lure
the soul from duty, angels will be sent to our rescue.
But if we invite temptation, we cannot have divine aid
to keep us from being overcome. The three worthies
endured the fiery furnace, for Jesus walked with
them amid the flames. If they had, of themselves,
walked into the fire, they would have been consumed. Thus it will be with us. If we do not deliberately go into temptation, God will sustain us when
the temptation comes.
“But let no one think that an entirely new set of
energies are to be communicated when we are brought
into trying circumstances. We are to seek daily for the
converting power of God. We should daily seek to
recover in ourselves the moral image of God. Every

“In the history of Joseph, Daniel, and his fellows,
we see how the golden chain of truth may bind the
youth to the throne of God. They could not be
tempted to turn aside from their course of integrity.
They valued the favor of God above the favor and
praise of princes, and God loved them and spread His
shield over them. Because of their faithful integrity,
because of their determination to honor God above
every human power, the Lord signally honored them
before men. They were honored by the Lord God of
hosts, whose power is over all the works of His hand in
heaven above and the earth beneath. These youth
were not ashamed to display their true colors. Even
in the court of the king, in their words, their habits,
their practices, they confessed their faith in the Lord
God of heaven. They refused to bow to any earthly
mandate that detracted from the honor of God. They
had strength from heaven to confess their allegiance to
God.
“You should be prepared to follow the example of
these noble youth. Never be ashamed of your colors;
put them on, unfurl them to the gaze of men and
angels. Do not be controlled by false modesty, by
false prudence which suggests to you a course of action
contrary to this advice. By your choice words and a
consistent course of action, by your propriety, your
earnest piety, make a telling confession of your faith,
determined that Christ shall occupy the throne in the
soul temple; and lay your talents without reserve at His
feet to be employed in His service.” Messages to
Young People, 27,28.
Lessons to the Faint-Hearted.—
“What a lesson is here given to the fainthearted,
the vacillating, the cowardly in the cause of God!
What encouragement to those who will not be turned
aside from duty by threats or peril! These faithful,
steadfast characters exemplify sanctification, while
they have no thought of claiming the high honor. The
amount of good which may be accomplished by
comparatively obscure but devoted Christians cannot be estimated until the life records shall be made

100

DANIEL 3
affection, every attribute that has been perverted, must
be restored by the grace of Christ. Lesser trials nobly
borne under the control of God, will purify, refine,
and ennoble us for endurance when the time shall
come for greater test and greater trials.
“Then let us look the future decidedly in the
face, and say, ‘I can do all things through Christ
which strengtheneth me.’ We must cherish the presence of Christ, for we need him in the less as well as
the greater trials. By a willingness for his sake to endure shame and reproach, by learning the meekness
and lowliness of Christ, we shall prove the sincerity of
our Christianity. When we are called to imprisonment
and shame, when degraded by our fellow-beings, who
are inspired by the spirit of Satan, God will give his
grace to sustain us. His promise is, ‘As thy days, so
shall thy strength be.’
“The righteous have ever obtained help from
above. How often have the enemies of God combined
to destroy the character and influence of a few simple
persons who trusted in God! But because the Lord was
for them, none could prevail against them. Only let the
followers of Christ be united, and they will prevail.
Let them be separated from their idols and from the
world, and the world will not separate them from God.
Christ is our present, all-sufficient Saviour. In him all
fulness dwells. It is the privilege of Christians to know
that Christ is in them of a truth. ‘This is the victory
that overcometh the world, even our faith.’ All
things are possible to him that believeth; and whatsoever things we desire when we pray, if we believe that
we receive them, we shall have them. This faith will
penetrate the darkest cloud, and bring hope to the
drooping, desponding soul. It is the absence of this
faith and trust which brings perplexity, distressing
fears, and surmisings of evil. God will do great things
for his people when they will put their entire trust in
him. Christ will prove a never-failing source of
strength, a present help in every time of trouble.”
Signs, 9/2/2897.

commandment; and at last a universal decree will denounce these as deserving of death.
“The season of distress before God’s people will
call for a faith that will not falter. His children must
make it manifest that He is the only object of their worship, and that no consideration, not even that of life
itself, can induce them to make the least concession to
false worship. To the loyal heart the commands of
sinful, finite men will sink into insignificance beside
the word of the eternal God. Truth will be obeyed
though the result be imprisonment or exile or death.
“As in the days of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, so in the closing period of earth’s history
the Lord will work mightily in behalf of those who
stand steadfastly for the right. He who walked with
the Hebrew worthies in the fiery furnace will be with
His followers wherever they are. His abiding presence
will comfort and sustain. In the midst of the time of
trouble—trouble such as has not been since there was a
nation—His chosen ones will stand unmoved. Satan
with all the hosts of evil cannot destroy the weakest
of God’s saints. Angels that excel in strength will
protect them, and in their behalf Jehovah will reveal Himself as a ‘God of gods,’ able to save to the
uttermost those who have put their trust in Him.”
Prophets and Kings, 512,513.
Experience of Three Hebrews Encouraged Luther.—
“Luther was anxious to appear before the emperor. His health was at this time much impaired; yet he
wrote to the elector: ‘If I cannot go to Worms in good
health, I will be carried there, sick as I am. For if the
emperor calls me, I cannot doubt that it is the call of
God Himself. If they desire to use violence against me,
and that is very probable (for it is not for their instruction that they order me to appear), I place the matter in
the Lord’s hands. He still lives and reigns who preserved the three young men in the burning fiery
furnace. If He will not save me, my life is of little
consequence. Let us only prevent the gospel from
being exposed to the scorn of the wicked, and let us
shed our blood for it, for fear they should triumph. It is
not for me to decide whether my life or my death will
contribute most to the salvation of all.... You may expect everything from me... except flight and recantation. Fly I cannot, and still less retract.’” Great Controversy, 146.

“Important are the lessons to be learned from the
experience of the Hebrew youth on the plain of Dura.
In this our day, many of God’s servants, though
innocent of wrongdoing, will be given over to suffer
humiliation and abuse at the hands of those who,
inspired by Satan, are filled with envy and religious
bigotry. Especially will the wrath of man be aroused
against those who hallow the Sabbath of the fourth

101

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER FOUR
1 Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations,
and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.
2 I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that
the high God hath wrought toward me.
3 How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation.
4 I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and
flourishing in my palace:
5 I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the
thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.
6 Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men
of Babylon before me, that they might make known unto
me the interpretation of the dream.
7 Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the
Chaldeans, and the soothsayers: and I told the dream
before them; but they did not make known unto me the
interpretation thereof.
8 But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name
was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my God, and
in whom is the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I
told the dream, saying,
9 O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I
know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no
secret troubleth thee, tell me the visions of my dream that
I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.
10 Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw,
and behold a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height
thereof was great.
11 The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of
all the earth:
12 The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof
much, and in it was meat for all: the beasts of the field
had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in
the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.
13 I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and,
behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven;
14 He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree,
and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter
his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the
fowls from his branches:
15 Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth,
even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of
the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let
his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth:
16 Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a
beast's heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass
over him.
17 This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the
demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that
the living may know that the most High ruleth in the
kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and
setteth up over it the basest of men.
18 This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now
thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof,
forasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able

to make known unto me the interpretation: but thou art
able; for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.
19 Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The
king spake, and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or
the interpretation thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate
thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.
20 The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was
strong, whose height reached unto the heaven, and the
sight thereof to all the earth;
21 Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much,
and in it was meat for all; under which the beasts of the
field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of the
heaven had their habitation:
22 It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong:
for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and
thy dominion to the end of the earth.
23 And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one
coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree
down, and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots
thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass,
in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the
dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of
the field, till seven times pass over him;
24 This is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decree of the most High, which is come upon my lord the
king:
25 That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall
make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee
with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over
thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.
26 And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of
the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after
that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule.
27 Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a
lengthening of thy tranquillity.
28 All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.
29 At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace
of the kingdom of Babylon.
30 The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon,
that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the
might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?
31 While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a
voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to
thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee.
32 And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling
shall be with the beasts of the field: they shall make thee
to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee,
until thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom
of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.
33 The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from men, and did eat
grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers, and his
nails like birds' claws.

102

DANIEL 4
34 And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted
up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I
praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose
dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is
from generation to generation:
35 And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as
nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of
heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?

36 At the same time my reason returned unto me; and
for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness
returned unto me; and my counsellors and my lords
sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom,
and excellent majesty was added unto me.
37 Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour
the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his
ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to
abase.

DANIEL 4:1
Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all
people, nations, and languages, that dwell
in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto
you.

“This chapter, says Adam Clarke, ‘is a regular
decree, and is one of the most ancient on record;
and no doubt was copied from the state papers of
Babylon. Daniel has preserved it in the original language.’ [Adam Clarke, Commentary on the Old Testament, Vol. IV, p. 582 note on Daniel 4: 1.]

Nebuchadnezzar the king.—
“Nebuchadnezzar was the greatest ruler of the
age in which he lived. Ezekiel spoke of him as ‘a
king of kings’ and prophesied that God would allow
him to complete the destruction of Jerusalem, and
that because the inhabitants of ‘the renowned city’ of
Tyre would say against Jerusalem, ‘Aha, she is broken
that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me:
I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste,’ God
would ‘bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon,’ ‘the terrible of the nations’ who would make
this place ‘in the midst of the seas’ ‘a desolate city’
that should be’ built no more.’ The prophet further
declared: ‘Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon caused his
army to serve a great service against Tyrus:... yet he
had no wages, nor his army;... therefore thus saith the
Lord God:... I have given him the land of Egypt for
his labor wherewith he served against it, because they
wrought for me.’” Youth Instructor, 10/11/1904.

Peace Be Multiplied Unto You.—
“Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations,
and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be
multiplied unto you.” Daniel 6:25.
“Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace
unto you, and peace, be multiplied.” 1Peter 1:2.
“Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through
the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord.” 2Peter
1:2.
“Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied.” Jude 1:2.
“He courageously proclaimed his experience and
new-found faith to the whole world. The joy and
peace that had flooded his own soul he recommended to all men. ‘Peace be multiplied unto you,’ he
wrote. ‘Perfect peace.’—Fenton. All who experience
the ‘peace of god which passeth all understanding’ are
anxious to share with others that which has meant so
much to them.” Bunch, BOD, 48.

“In his thirty-seventh year of reign Nebuchadnezzar conquered Egypt, in 568 BC. His death took place
in 562. That would be seven years inclusive reckoning, and it is probable that this is the period covered by
the experiences of Daniel four. In his conquest of
Egypt Nebuchadnezzar reached the height of his
reign, and it is no doubt that at that time he looked
with great satisfaction upon his attainments in
building and conquest.” Thiele, OSID, 43.

DANIEL 4:2,3
I thought it good to shew the signs and
wonders that the high God hath wrought
toward me.
How great are his signs! and how
mighty are his wonders! his kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is
from generation to generation.

Unto all People, Nations, and Languages.—
“The fourth chapter of Daniel is, in some respects,
the most wonderful chapter in the Bible. It is a public
document written by Nebuchadnezzar, king of
Babylon, after his humiliation by the God of heaven.
It was sent ‘unto all people, nations, and languages,
that dwell in all the earth.’ It therefore comes to us
with as much freshness and vitality as though it were
issued to the generation in which we live.” Haskell,
SDP, 50

Signs & Wonders God Hath Wrought Toward Me.—
“All kings and empires are accountable to
God. God means what He says, and willful disobedience results in dire consequences for Israelites
and pagans, individuals and nations. It was Israel’s
deliberate disobedience to Yahweh’s law given through

103

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Moses and passed on in the instructions of the prophets
which brought about the demise of Jerusalem (9:9-13).
Ultimately, no individual or kingdom escapes the divine judgment (4:5; 7:9-14; 12:1,2).
“God not only knows but also acts. He who determines history also intervenes in history. The experiences of both Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar
(chaps. 4 and 5) disclose that the God of Daniel both
reveals His plan and carries it out in a most dramatic fashion. ...The fact that God not only reveals but
also intervenes is significant in that it challenges the
idea held by some that the God of ‘apocalyptic’ is
wholly remote and transcendent.” BRI, 2SOD, 55.

teronomy 8:15. He brought them forth water out of
‘the rock of flint,’ and fed them with ‘the corn of heaven.’” Psalm 78:24.” Christ Object Lessons, 286.
His Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom.—
“Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.”
Psalms 145:13.
“And there was given him dominion, and glory,
and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages,
should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed.” Daniel 7:14
“And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be
given to the people of the saints of the most High,
whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions shall serve and obey him.” Daniel 7:27.

The King Magnifies the True God.—
“This decree of Nebuchadnezzar was promulgated in the usual way. He wished to make known, not to
a few men only, but to all peoples, and nations, God’s
wonderful dealings with him. People are ever ready to
tell what God has done for them in the way of benefits
and blessings. We ought to be no less ready to tell
what God has done for us in the way of humiliation
and chastisements. Nebuchadnezzar set us a good
example in this respect, as we shall see from the subsequent parts of this chapter. He frankly confessed the
vanity and pride of his heart, and freely told the methods God used to humble him. With a genuine spirit
of repentance and humiliation, he thought it good to
show these things, that the sovereignty of God might
be extolled and His name adored. Nebuchadnezzar
no longer claimed immutability for his own kingdom,
but made a full surrender to God, acknowledging His
kingdom alone to be everlastings, and His dominion
from generation to generation.” Smith, DR, 79.

“For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ.” 2 Peter 1:11.
Daniel’s First Convert.—
“As far as we know Nebuchadnezzar was Daniel’s first convert in the wicked court of Babylon. How
happy Daniel and his three companions must have been
to witness such marvelous results of their loyalty to
their God. How far-reaching was the influence of their
godly lives. What a great missionary Nebuchadnezzar
became as the result of his conversion.” Bunch, BOD,
48.

DANIEL 4:4
I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine
house, and flourishing in my palace:

God’s Great Signs and Mighty Wonders.—
“He sent Moses His servant; and Aaron whom He
had chosen. They showed His signs among them,
and wonders in the land of Ham.” “He rebuked the
Red Sea also, and it was dried up: so He led them
through the depths.” Psalm 105:26, 27; 106:9.

I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest and flourishing.—
“Exalted to the pinnacle of worldly honor, and
acknowledged even by Inspiration as ‘a king of kings’
(Ezekiel 26:7). Nebuchadnezzar nevertheless at times
had ascribed to the favor of Jehovah the glory of his
kingdom and the splendor of his reign. Such had been
the case after his dream of the great image. His mind
had been profoundly influenced by this vision and by
the thought that the Babylonian Empire, universal
though it was, was finally to fall, and other kingdoms
were to bear sway, until at last all earthly powers were
to be superseded by a kingdom set up by the God of
heaven, which kingdom was never to be destroyed.
“Nebuchadnezzar’s noble conception of God’s
purpose concerning the nations was lost sight of later in
his experience; yet when his proud spirit was humbled
before the multitude on the plain of Dura, he once more
had acknowledged that God’s kingdom is ‘an everlasting kingdom, and His dominion is from generation to

“In bringing forth Israel from Egypt, the Lord
again manifested His power and His mercy. His wonderful works in their deliverance from bondage and
His dealings with them in their travels through the
wilderness were not for their benefit alone. These
were to be as an object lesson to the surrounding
nations. The Lord revealed Himself as a God above
all human authority and greatness. The signs and
wonders He wrought in behalf of His people showed
His power over nature and over the greatest of
those who worshiped nature. God went through the
proud land of Egypt as He will go through the earth
in the last days. With fire and tempest, earthquake
and death, the great I AM redeemed His people. He
took them out of the land of bondage. He led them
through the ‘great and terrible wilderness, wherein
were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought.’ Deu-

104

DANIEL 4
generation.’ An idolater by birth and training, and at
the head of an idolatrous people, he had nevertheless
an innate sense of justice and right, and God was
able to use him as an instrument for the punishment
of the rebellious and for the fulfillment of the divine
purpose. ‘The terrible of the nations’ (Ezekiel 28:7), it
was given Nebuchadnezzar, after years of patient and
wearing labor, to conquer Tyre; Egypt also fell a prey
to his victorious armies; and as he added nation after
nation to the Babylonian realm, he added more and
more to his fame as the greatest ruler of the age.
“It is not surprising that the successful monarch,
so ambitious and so proud-spirited, should be tempted
to turn aside from the path of humility, which alone
leads to true greatness. In the intervals between his
wars of conquest he gave much thought to the
strengthening and beautifying of his capital, until at
length the city of Babylon became the chief glory of
his kingdom, ‘the golden city,’ ‘the praise of the whole
earth.’ His passion as a builder, and his signal success
in making Babylon one of the wonders of the world,
ministered to his pride, until he was in grave danger of
spoiling his record as a wise ruler whom God could
continue to use as an instrument for the carrying out of
the divine purpose.” Prophets & Kings, 514,515.

ty—at this time God chose to trouble him with fears
and forebodings.” Smith, DR, 80.

DANIEL 4:5
I saw a dream which made me afraid,
and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.
I Saw a Dream Which Made Me Afraid.—
“Because Nebuchadnezzar did not continue to
walk in the light he had received from heaven, he lost
the holy impressions that had been made upon his
mind. But God, in his mercy, gave the king another
dream, to save him, if possible, from appropriating
to himself the glory that belonged to the Supreme
Ruler.” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1904.
“In mercy God gave the king another dream,
to warn him of his peril and of the snare that had
been laid for his ruin.” Prophets & Kings ,515.
“But what could strike fear to the heart of such a
monarch as Nebuchadnezzar? He had been a warrior
from his youth. He had often faced the perils of battle,
the terrors of slaughter and carnage, and in the midst of
such scenes he had been unmoved. What could make
him afraid now? No foe threatened, no hostile cloud
was visible! His own thought and visions were used
to teach him what nothing else could—a salutary
lesson of dependence and humility. He who had terrified others, but whom no other could terrify, was made
a terror to himself.” Smith, DR, 80,81.

“Thinking that his kingdom should be more extensive and powerful than any that would follow, he
made great additions to the city of Babylon, and
gave himself up to a life of pleasure and selfglorification. Of this time he himself says: ‘I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing
in my palace.’” Youth Instructor, 10/11/1904.
“Having conquered the world, Nebuchadnezzar
was at rest in his house, when one night he dreamed a
dream. Success had followed him wherever he turned.
At his feet bowed the representatives of all nations.
Into his coffers flowed the wealth of the east and the
west, and the north and the south. About him was clustered the wit and the learning of the age. Libraries
were at his command, and art flourished. Why should
not King Nebuchadnezzar flourish in his kingdom?”
Haskell, SDP 51.

Date of the Dream.-“The date for this dream is credibly placed at
about 568 BC, after Nebuchadnezzar had been king for
36 years.” Maxwell, 1GC, 57.

DANIEL 4:6,7
Therefore made I a decree to bring in
all the wise men of Babylon before me, that
they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream.
Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but
they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof.

“The king was ‘flourishing’ in his palace in Babylon, and like the foolish rich man in the parable,
whose fields had produced abundantly (Luke 12:1621), forgot his responsibility to the One to whom he
owed his greatness.” 4SDABC, 788.
“This part of the narrative opens with Nebuchadnezzar as a victor over his foes. He had accomplished
successfully all his military enterprises. He had subdued Assyria, Phoenicia, Judea, Egypt, and Arabia.
These great conquests probably betrayed him into vanity and self-confidence. At this very time, when he felt
most secure, when it was most unlikely that anything
would occur to disturb his self-complacent tranquili-

I Made a Decree To Bring in All the Wise Men.—
“Greatly troubled by the dream, which was evidently a prediction of adversity, the king repeated it
to ‘the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and
the soothsayers…’” Prophets & Kings, 516.

105

GEMS FROM DANIEL
was to be borne to the fact that only those who love
and fear God can understand the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven. The king in his perplexity sent
for his servant Daniel, a man esteemed for his integrity
and constancy and for his unrivaled wisdom.”
Prophets & Kings, 516.

But They Did Not Make Known the Interpretation.—
“The dream given him was very explicit, but the
magicians, the astrologers, the soothsayers, and the
Chaldeans could not make known to the king his dream
or tell the interpretation thereof. Those who do not
love and fear God cannot understand the mysteries
of the kingdom of heaven. They cannot approach
unto the throne of Him who dwelleth in light unapproachable; and the things of God are to them mysteries of mysteries. But the king bears testimony to
the fact that the servants of God understand the things
of God. Daniel told the dream and the interpretation
thereof before the king.” 13 Manuscript Releases, 63.

Whose Name Was Belteshazzar.—
“Daniel’s name had been changed when he first
entered the Babylonian court, and to the king and his
associates he was known as Belteshazzar, a son of the
heathen god Bel, but Daniel himself always retained
his own Hebrew name.” Haskell, SDP, 52.
In Whom is the Spirit of the Holy Gods.—
“The expression reveals what it was that had inspired the king with confidence in Daniel’s superior
power and understanding. It also reveals that Nebuchadnezzar possessed a conception of the nature of that
Deity to whom Daniel owed such power and wisdom.
“…Instead of ‘in whom is the spirit of the holy
gods,’ the Theodotion version reads, ‘who has in him
the holy spirit of God.’” 4SDABC, 789.

“A still greater humiliation than that narrated in
the second chapter was brought upon the magicians.
At that time they boasted that if they only knew the
dream they could make known the interpretation.
Upon this occasion Nebuchadnezzar distinctly remembered the dream and related it to them, but his magicians ignominiously failed him again. They could not
make known the interpretation, and once again the king
turned to the prophet of God.” Smith, DR,

“He who receives Christ by living faith has a living connection with God, and is a vessel unto honor.
He carries with him the atmosphere of heaven,
which is the grace of God, a treasure that the world
cannot buy. He who is in living connection with God
may be in humble stations, yet his moral worth is as
precious as was that of Joseph and Daniel, who were
recognized by heathen kings as men with whom was
the Spirit of God.” 1BC, 1097,1098.

DANIEL 4:8,9
But at the last Daniel came in before
me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my God, and in whom is
the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I
told the dream, saying,
O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the
holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth
thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I
have seen, and the interpretation thereof.

DANIEL 4:10-12
Thus were the visions of mine head in
my bed; I saw, and behold a tree in the
midst of the earth, and the height thereof
was great.
The tree grew, and was strong, and the
height thereof reached unto heaven, and
the sight thereof to the end of all the earth:
The leaves thereof were fair, and the
fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for
all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in
the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of
it.

But At the Last Daniel Came In Before Me.—
“In this idolatrous nation testimony was again
borne to the fact that only the servants of God can
understand the mysteries of God. In the early days
of the king’s acquaintance with Daniel, he had found
that this man was the only one who could relieve him
from perplexity; and now, in this later period of his
reign, the king remembers his faithful servant of old—a
servant esteemed because of his unswerving integrity
and constant faithfulness. Nebuchadnezzar knew
that Daniel’s wisdom was unexcelled, and that neither he nor his three fellow captives ever compromised principle in order to secure position in the
court, or even to preserve life itself. The skill of his
wise men proving ineffectual, the king sent for Daniel
to interpret the dream.” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1904.

I Saw and Behold a Tree.—
“In a vision of the night, Nebuchadnezzar saw
a great tree growing in the midst of the earth,
its top towering to the heavens and
its branches stretching to the ends of the earth.
Flocks and herds from the mountains and hills enjoyed

“Once more in this idolatrous nation, testimony

106

DANIEL 4
shelter beneath its shadow, and the birds of the air built
their nests in its boughs. ‘The leaves thereof were fair,
and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all: . .
. and all flesh was fed of it.’” Prophets & Kings, 515.

“Throughout the Scriptures the tree is used as the
symbol of men and nations. Great men and princes are
symbolized by trees. The righteous are called ‘trees of
righteousness’ who are said to ‘grow as the vine’ and
‘flourish like the palm tree’ and ‘grow like the cedar of
Lebanon.’ The man who refuses to walk in the counsel
of the ungodly, and stand in the way of sinners, and sit
in the seat of the scornful, is said to be ‘like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth fruit
in his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.’ Ps. 92:12; 1:1-3. Israel
as a nation was represented by Christ as a fruitless fig
tree. Luke 13:6-9. The Assyrian empire had been
symbolized by the beautiful spreading cedar of
Lebanon by the prophet Ezekiel only two years before this dream was given to the king of Babylon. Eze.
31:3-9.” Bunch, BOD, 50.

Behold A Tree in the Midst of the Earth.—

The Symbol Given Before.—
“The prophet Ezekiel, one of the Hebrew captives, was given a view of the capture of Egypt by
Nebuchadnezzar, and was told to send the testimony to
Pharaoh, king of Egypt. In this prophecy Egypt is represented as a mighty tree towering above all the trees
of the earth. Even the trees of Eden envied the splendor of this one. All the fowls of heaven nested in its
boughs; the hosts of earth dwelt beneath its branches.
But this tree of Egypt was lifted up because of its
greatness, and God sent Babylon to hew it to the
ground. The crash of its fall shook the earth.
“This prophecy must have been known to Nebuchadnezzar, if not before, at least after his victory over
Egypt, for it was familiar to the Jews and there were
Hebrews in the Babylonian court. This throws light
on the fourth chapter of Daniel.” Haskell, SDP, 51.

“The reign of Nebuchadnezzar is symbolized by a tree
in the midst of the earth. Babylon, the city where
Nebuchadnezzar reigned, was approximately in the
center of the then-known world. The tree reached
unto heaven, and the leaves thereof were fair. Its external glory and splendor were great. Its fruit was
abundant, and it had food for all. The beasts of the
field had shadow under it, and the fowls of heaven
dwelt in its branches. What could more plainly and
forcibly represent the fact that Nebuchadnezzar ruled
his kingdom in such a way as to afford the fullest protection, support, and prosperity to all his subjects?”
Smith, DR,

“Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt,
and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy
greatness?
3 Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon
with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud,
and of an high stature; and his top was among the
thick boughs. 4 The waters made him great, the deep
set him up on high with her rivers running round about
his plants, and sent her little rivers unto all the trees of
the field.
5 Therefore his height was exalted above all the
trees of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and
his branches became long because of the multitude of
waters, when he shot forth. 6 All the fowls of heaven
made their nests in his boughs, and under his branches
did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young,
and under his shadow dwelt all great nations. 7
Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his
branches: for his root was by great waters. 8 The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir
trees were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees
were not like his branches; nor any tree in the garden of
God was like unto him in his beauty. 9 I have made

“Study Nebuchadnezzar’s dream as recorded in
the fourth chapter of Daniel. The king saw a lofty tree
planted in the earth. Flocks and herds from the mountains and hills enjoyed its shelter, and the birds of the
air built their nests in its branches. Thus were represented Nebuchadnezzar’s greatness and prosperity.
Nations were gathered under his sovereignty. His
kingdom was firmly established in the hearts of his
loyal subjects.” 8 Testimonies, 126.
“To Nebuchadnezzar the king the true object
of national government was represented under the
figure of a great tree…. This representation shows
the character of a government that fulfills God’s purpose—a government that protects and upbuilds the
nation. God exalted Babylon that it might fulfill this
purpose. Prosperity attended the nation until it
reached a height of wealth and power that has never
since been equaled—fitly represented in the Scriptures
by the inspired symbol, a ‘head of gold.’ Daniel 2:38.”
Education, 175.

107

GEMS FROM DANIEL
him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that all the
trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied
him.
10 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because
thou hast lifted up thyself in height, and he hath shot
up his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is
lifted up in his height; 11 I have therefore delivered
him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he
shall surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his
wickedness. 12 And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off, and have left him: upon the
mountains and in all the valleys his branches are fallen,
and his boughs are broken by all the rivers of the land;
and all the people of the earth are gone down from his
shadow, and have left him.” Ezekiel 31:2-12.

only detrimental to all within the sphere of their action,
but will lead to a development of character so objectionable that its possessor cannot find a place among
the redeemed. He that sitteth in the heavens requires
that a different spirit shall control his workers.” R&H,
9/8/1896.
“In this council, assembled to plan the death of
Christ, the Witness was present who heard the
boastful words of Nebuchadnezzar, who witnessed
the idolatrous feast of Belshazzar, who was present
when Christ in Nazareth announced Himself the
Anointed One. This Witness was now impressing the
rulers with the work they were doing. Events in the
life of Christ rose up before them with a distinctness
that alarmed them. They remembered the scene in the
temple, when Jesus, then a child of twelve, stood before the learned doctors of the law, asking them questions at which they wondered. The miracle just performed bore witness that Jesus was none other than the
Son of God. In their true significance, the Old Testament Scriptures regarding Christ flashed before their
minds. Perplexed and troubled, the rulers asked, ‘What
do we?’ There was a division in the council. Under
the impression of the Holy Spirit, the priests and
rulers could not banish the conviction that they were
fighting against God.
“... At this council Christ’s enemies had been
deeply convicted. The Holy Spirit had impressed
their minds.” Desire of Ages, 539,540.

“I have seen the wicked in great power, and
spreading himself like a green bay tree.” Psalm
37:35.
The Beasts of the Field Had Shadow Under It.—
“And now have I given all these lands into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also
to serve him.” Jeremiah 27:6.

DANIEL 4:13
I saw in the visions of my head upon
my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy
one came down from heaven;

“For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature that
is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked
and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we
have to do.” Hebrews 4:12,13.

A Watcher and an Holy One—the Holy Spirit.—
“O lord, thou hast searched me, and known me. 2
Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou
understandest my thought afar off. 3 Thou compassest
my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with
all my ways. 4 For there is not a word in my tongue,
but, lo, O LORD, thou knowest it altogether. 5 Thou
hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand
upon me. 6 Such knowledge is too wonderful for me;
it is high, I cannot attain unto it. 7 Whither shall I go
from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?” Psalm 139:1-7.

“For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro
throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong
in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward
him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from
henceforth thou shalt have wars.” 2Chronicles 16:9.

“Today there is a Watchman taking cognizance of the children of men, and in a special sense of
those who are to represent God by receiving his sacred
truth into the heart and revealing it to the world. That
Watcher is guarding the interests of all. Every individual is before him. There is not a thought of the
heart that is unnoted. Nothing can be hidden from
him. His ear hears the secret whisperings, and every
secret thing is to be brought into judgment. All need
to learn that the heavenly Watcher is acquainted
with the children of men. If men forget this, there is
danger of a spirit of selfishness and self-exaltation entering their work. These principles practiced are not

“Could the curtain be rolled back before the youth
who have never given their hearts to God, with others
who are Christians in name, but who are unrenewed in
heart and unsanctified in temper, they would see that
God’s eye is ever upon them, and they would feel as
disturbed as did the king of Babylon. They would
realize that in every place, at every hour in the day,
there is a holy Watcher, who balances every account,
whose eye takes in the whole situation, whether it is
one of fidelity, or one of disloyalty and deception.
“…We are never alone. We have a Companion,
whether we choose him or not. Remember, young men
and young women, that wherever you are, whatever

108

DANIEL 4
you are doing, God is there. To your every word and
action you have a witness—the holy, sin-hating God.
Nothing that is said or done or thought can escape his
infinite eye. Your words may not be heard by human
ears, but they are heard by the Ruler of the universe.
He reads the inward anger of the soul when the will is
crossed. He hears the expression of profanity. In the
deepest darkness and solitude he is there. No one can
deceive God; none can escape from their accountability
to him.” Youth Instructor, 5/26/1898.

ness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye have
light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of
light.’ Some men in the Battle Creek College have a
false idea as to what constitutes duty. The Lord God of
heaven has caused his Holy Spirit from time to time
to move upon the students in the school, that they
might acknowledge him in all their ways, so that he
might direct their paths. At times the manifestation
of the Holy Spirit has been so decided that studies
were forgotten, and the greatest Teacher the world
ever knew made his voice heard, saying, ‘Come unto
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find
rest unto your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.’ The Lord knocked at the door of hearts,
and I saw that angels of God were present. There
seemed to be no special effort on the part of the teachers to influence the students to give their attention to
the things of God, but God had a Watcher in the
school, and though his presence was unseen, yet his
influence was discernible. Again and again there have
been manifest tokens of the presence of the holy
Watchman in the school. Again and again the voice
of Jesus has spoken to the students, saying, ‘Behold, I
stand at the door, and knock; if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me.’
“The Lord has been waiting long to impart the
greatest, truest joys to the heart. All those who look to
him with undivided hearts, he will greatly bless. Those
who have thus looked to him have caught more distinct
views of Jesus as their sin-bearer, their all-sufficient
sacrifice, and have been hid in the cleft of the rock, to
behold the Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of
the world. When we have a sense of his all-sufficient
sacrifice, our lips are tuned to the highest, loftiest
themes of praise. When the students thus beheld Jesus,
the suspension of their studies was counted as no loss.
They were catching glimpses of Him who is invisible.
They earnestly sought the living God, and the live coal
of pardon was placed upon their lips. The Holy Spirit
wrought not only for those who had lost their first
love, but also for souls who had never placed themselves on the Lord's side. The holy Watcher drew
these souls, that there might be an ingathering to
Jesus Christ. The Holy Spirit wrought so that the
Lord's presence could be distinguished, and his
work acknowledged. Tokens of his grace and favor
called forth rejoicing from the hearts of those who were
thus blessed, and it was known that the salvation of
God was among his people. The bright beams of the
Sun of Righteousness were shining into the chambers
of the heart and mind.
“The manifestation of the Holy Spirit was similar
to its manifestation in the days of Samuel and Saul in
the school of the prophets.
“Be careful never to lose a sense of the presence
of the divine Watcher. Remember that you are speak-

“It was not the hand of the priest that rent from
top to bottom the gorgeous veil that divided the holy
from the most holy place. It was the hand of God.
When Christ cried out, ‘It is finished,’ the Holy
Watcher that was an unseen guest at Belshazzar’s
feast pronounced the Jewish nation to be a nation unchurched. The same hand that traced on the wall the
characters that recorded Belshazzar's doom and the
end of the Babylonian kingdom, rent the veil of the
temple from top to bottom, opening a new and living
way for all, high and low, rich and poor, Jew and Gentile. From henceforth people might come to God without priest or ruler (MS 101, 1897).” 5BC 1109.
“When Christ ascended on high, he sent his representative as a Comforter. This representative is
by our side wherever we may be—a watcher and a
witness to all that is said and done—standing ready to
protect us from the assaults of the enemy if we will but
place ourselves under his protection. But we must act
our part, and then God will act his part. When we are
brought into trial and affliction for his sake, the Comforter will stand by our side, bringing to our remembrance the words and teachings of Christ.” Youth Instructor, 8/20/96.
“When Caiaphas rent his garment, his act was
significant of the place that the Jewish nation as a nation would thereafter occupy toward God. The once
favored people of God were separating themselves
from Him, and were fast becoming a people disowned
by Jehovah. When Christ upon the cross cried out, "It
is finished’ (John 19:30), and the veil of the temple was
rent in twain, the Holy Watcher declared that the Jewish people had rejected Him who was the antitype of all
their types, the substance of all their shadows. Israel
was divorced from God. Well might Caiaphas then
rend his official robes, which signified that he claimed
to be a representative of the great High Priest; for no
longer had they any meaning for him or for the people.
Well might the high priest rend his robes in horror for
himself and for the nation.” Desire of Ages, 709.
“The Manifest Working of the Holy Spirit at Battle Creek College.
“‘Then Jesus said unto them, yet a little while is
the light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest
darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in dark-

109

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ing, not only before an assembly of men, but before
One whom you should ever recognize. Speak as if the
whole heavenly universe were before you.” 6 Testimonies, 56.

Releases, 272.
The ‘Watcher and an Holy One’ The Same Being.—
“As the king gazed upon the lofty tree, he beheld
‘a Watcher,’ even ‘an Holy One,’ who approached
the tree and in a loud voice cried:” Prophets & Kings,
516.

“Could our eyes be opened, could we see the
heavenly Watcher by our side, listening to the words
we utter, we would strive to control our tongues.”
R&H, 2/16/1897.

“He cried aloud…” Dan. 4:14. [Note: He, not
they. See also Daniel 4:23 for further comment.]

“The holy Watcher from heaven is present at
this season [foot-washing] to make it one of soul
searching, of conviction of sin, and of the blessed assurance of sins forgiven. Christ in the fullness of His
grace is there to change the current of the thoughts
that have been running in selfish channels. The Holy
Spirit quickens the sensibilities of those who follow
the example of their Lord. As the Saviour’s humiliation for us is remembered, thought links with thought;
a chain of memories is called up, memories of God’s
great goodness and of the favor and tenderness of
earthly friends. Blessings forgotten, mercies abused,
kindnesses slighted, are called to mind. Roots of bitterness that have crowded out the precious plant of love
are made manifest. Defects of character, neglect of
duties, ingratitude to God, coldness toward our brethren, are called to remembrance. Sin is seen in the
light in which God views it. Our thoughts are not
thoughts of self-complacency, but of severe selfcensure and humiliation. The mind is energized to
break down every barrier that has caused alienation.
Evil thinking and evil-speaking are put away. Sins are
confessed, they are forgiven. The subduing grace of
Christ comes into the soul, and the love of Christ
draws hearts together in a blessed unity.” Desire of
Ages, 650,651.

The Watcher Looks Like Jesus.—
“As the king gazed upon that lofty tree, he beheld
‘a Watcher,’ even ‘an Holy One’—a divine Messenger, similar in appearance to the One who walked
with the Hebrews in the fiery furnace. This heavenly Being approached the tree, and in a loud voice
cried:…” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1904.
“Friday, March 20, I arose early, about half past
three o'clock in the morning. While writing upon the
fifteenth chapter of John suddenly a wonderful peace
came upon me. The whole room seemed to be filled
with the atmosphere of heaven. A holy, sacred presence seemed to be in my room. I laid down my pen and
was in a waiting attitude to see what the Spirit would
say unto me. I saw no person. I heard no audible voice,
but a heavenly watcher seemed close beside me; I
felt that I was in the presence of Jesus.” 3 Selected
Messages, 35.

DANIEL 4:14,15
He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew
down the tree, and cut off his branches,
shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit:
let the beasts get away from under it, and
the fowls from his branches:
Nevertheless leave the stump of his
roots in the earth, even with a band of iron
and brass, in the tender grass of the field;
and let it be wet with the dew of heaven,
and let his portion be with the beasts in the
grass of the earth:

“The power exercised by every ruler on the earth
is Heaven-imparted; and upon his use of the power thus
bestowed, his success depends. To each the word of
the divine Watcher is, ‘I girded thee, though thou
hast not known Me.’ Isaiah 45:5. And to each the
words spoken to Nebuchadnezzar of old are the lesson
of life: ‘Break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if it
may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.’ Daniel
4:27.” Education, 174.

Hew down the tree.—
“The tree was a symbol of not only Nebuchadnezzar himself, but also of the kingdom of Babylon
that he represented. ‘Thou art this head of gold.’” PJ

“An interpretation has been given to me of the
sinking of The Morning Star. This boat was unsafe.
There were in it unperceived defects. In His mercy the
Lord permitted the boat to sink while no one was on
board. If these defects had not been discovered, lives
might sometime have been lost. While the Lord could
see and understand the unsafe condition of the boat,
human agencies knew not the danger. You have great
reason for rejoicing that the heavenly Watcher permitted the boat to sink without loss of life. (To Elder
James Edson White, Sept. 26, 1905.)” 3 Manuscript

Cut Off His Branches, Shake Off His Leaves.—
“The change from ‘it’ to ‘him’ and ‘his’ in verses
[14-16] shows that the tree symbolizes a person.”
Bunch, BOD, 50.
Nevertheless.—

110

DANIEL 4
“The pronounced judgment ends with ‘nevertheless’ followed by a gleam of hope and an offer of mercy. In all the trials and vicissitudes of life, rays of hope
and mercy guide our pathway.” Bunch, BOD, 50.

day, ignorant of their origin, they practice Babylon’s
customs.” Burnside, DPUF, 82.
“And I will break the pride of your power; and I
will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as
brass.” Leviticus 26:19.

Leave the Stump of His Roots in the Earth.—
“In government it [Babylon] was the most rigid
monarchy; the king held the lives of his subjects in his
hand. Slaves bowed before him in abject subjugation;
exorbitant taxes were forced from subject provinces;
crowned heads were laid low and men enslaved that the
king of Babylon might revel in the wealth of the world.
The seeds of that form of government were sown
wherever Babylon established her power, and as she
sowed, so she, as well as others, have reaped. When
Babylon fell, the principles by which she had controlled others were in turn applied to her. Wherever
there is tyranny in government in any nation of earth
today, it is an offshoot of that root which filled the
earth, the stump of which was allowed to remain until
the end of time.
“Wherever Babylon laid her hand in conquest, the
principles of her religion were implanted. The vilest
forms of worship were practiced in that kingdom with
all its outward glory. The heart was rotten. The mystery of iniquity held full sway, hidden by the outward
glitter of gold. The mysteries of Greece in a later day
were but a repetition of the Babylonian mysteries.
From the golden cup which she held in her hand, and
which was a familiar symbol in Babylonian secret societies, she made all nations drunk with the wine of her
fornication.
“Nations and peoples today, unconscious of
their origin, are perpetuating Babylonian religious
customs when they celebrate Christmas with feasting, lighted candles, holly and mistletoe. It is in
commemoration of Babylonian heathen gods that
they eat eggs on Easter, and even the wild capers of
Hallowe’en repeat the mysteries of Babylon. The
root was not destroyed; her religious principles have
sprung up afresh in every generation and borne fruit in
every country.” Haskell, SDP, 54,55.

“Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus,
whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open
before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not
be shut; I will go before thee, and make the crooked
places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of
brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron.” Isaiah
45:1,2.
“For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the
bars of iron in sunder.” Psalm 107:16
“Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy
neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass.” Isaiah
48:4. Spirit of obstinate pride in Nebuchadnezzar.
“They are all grievous revolters, walking with
slanders: they are brass and iron; they are all corrupters.” Jeremiah 6:28.
“Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast,
which was diverse from all the others, exceeding
dreadful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of
brass; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped
the residue with his feet.” Daniel 7:19.
The spirit of Babylon would last through the
Greek and Roman kingdoms.
“Twenty-seven years after Nebuchadnezzar died,
the empire of Babylon passed away forever. The Babylonian principles, however, were not uprooted when
the empire fell, but were preserved by the Greeks
and the Romans.” Anderson, UDP, 75.

DANIEL 4:16
Let his heart be changed from man’s,
and let a beast’s heart be given unto him;
and let seven times pass over him.

A Band of Iron and Brass.—
“When the order was given that this tree should
be cut down, it was commanded that the stump should
be left in the earth. It was to be protected with a band
of iron and brass, that it might not decay, but that the
source of future growth and greatness might be left.
“The day is coming when the wicked shall be cut
down, and no hope will be left them. No mercy will be
mingled with their punishment. They shall be destroyed both root and branch.” Smith, DR,

Let His Heart Be Changed; A Beast’s Heart Given.—
The transition from the figure of the tree to the actual object symbolized by the tree has now clearly been
made. The term ‘heart’ here seems to indicate nature.
The king would take on the nature of a beast.”
4SDABC, 790.

“The mysteries of Greece were but a revival of
Babylon. Today, ignorant of their origin, they practice
Babylon’s customs. Feasting on December 25, candles, Eggs at Easter. The root was not destroyed. To-

Let Seven Times Pass Over Him.—
“ ‘Let seven times pass over him,’ was the decree. This simple expression is evidently to be understood literally. But how long a period is denoted by

111

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the words ‘seven times’? This may be determined by
ascertaining how long Nebuchadnezzar, in fulfillment
of this prediction, was driven out to have his dwelling
with the beasts of the field. This, Josephus informs
us, was seven years. [See Flavius Josephus, ‘Antiquities of the Jews,’ book 10, chap.10, sec. 6, Works of
Flavius Josephus, p.316.] A ‘Time,’ here, then, denotes one year.” Smith, DR, 81,82.

That the Living May Know.—
“This sentence reveals the divine purpose in
the execution of the order. God’s dealings with Babylon and its king were to be an illustration to other
nations and their kings of the results of accepting or
rejecting the divine plan with respect to nations.”
4SDABC, 790.

“So it has been understood since pre-Christian
times. The Greek Old Testament of Daniel chapter 4
translates this word as ‘years.’” Shea, DARG, 53.

The Most High Ruleth in the Kingdom of Men.—
“The earth is God’s, and He has committed all
things to His Son. Adam was to reign subject to
Christ. When Adam betrayed his sovereignty into Satan’s hands, Christ still remained the rightful King.
Thus the Lord had said to King Nebuchadnezzar,
‘The Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and
giveth it to whomsoever He will.’ Daniel 4:17. Satan
can exercise his usurped authority only as God permits.” Desire of Ages, 129,130.

DANIEL 4:17,18
This matter is by the decree of the
watchers, and the demand by the word of
the holy ones: to the intent that the living
may know that the most High ruleth in the
kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.
This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar
have seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch
as all the wise men of my kingdom are not
able to make known unto me the interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of
the holy gods is in thee.

“The Lord God omnipotent reigneth. All kings,
all nations, are His, under His rule and government.
His resources are infinite. The wise man declares,
‘The king’s heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the
rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will.’
“Those upon whose actions hang the destinies
of nations, are watched over with a vigilance that
knows no relaxation by Him who ‘giveth salvation
unto kings,’ to whom belong ‘the shields of the
earth.’ R&H, 3/28/1897.
“…God’s people learn not only that the physical
forces of the earth are under the control of the Creator, but also that under His control are the religious movements of the nations. Especially is this
true with reference to the enforcement of Sunday observance. He who gave His people, through His servant Moses, instruction in regard to the sanctity of the
Sabbath—as recorded in Exodus 31:11-18—will in the
hour of trial preserve those who keep this day as a sign
of loyalty to Him. God’s commandment-keeping people believe that He will fulfill His promise to protect
them.” 19 Manuscript Releases, 281.

This Matter is by the Decree of the Watchers, and the
Demand of the Holy Ones.—
“For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles
last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a
spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.”
1Corinthians 4:9.
“What an interest the holy ones, or angels, take
in human affairs! They see, as mortals never can,
how unseemly a thing is pride in the human heart. As
ministers of God they cheerfully execute His decrees
for the correction of evil. Man must know that he is
not the architect of his own fortune, for there is One
who ruleth in the kingdom of men on whom his dependence should be humbly placed. A man may be a
successful monarch, but he should not pride himself
upon that; for unless the Lord had permitted him to
rule, he would never have reached this position of
honor.” Smith, DR, 82.

“And cried with a loud voice, and said, What
have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most
high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me
not.” Mark 5:7.
“That men may know that thou, whose name
alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high over all the
earth.” Psa 83:18

“God has determined it, as a righteous Judge, and
the angels in heaven applaud. Not that the great God
needs the counsel or concurrence of the angels, but it
denotes the solemnity of this sentence. The demand is
by the word of the holy ones, God’s suffering people: when the oppressed cry to God, he will hear.”
Matthew Henry, Commentary on Daniel 4.

Now, O Belteshazzar, Declare the Interpretation.—
“The king does not even ask Daniel if he can
explain the dream. His ability is not even questioned.
‘Wise men of my kingdom’ are not able. ‘But thou art
able.’

112

DANIEL 4
‘I thank Thee Father …because Thou hast hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.’” Burnside, DPUF, 83.

would attempt to interpret it. The faithful Daniel
stood before the king, not to flatter, not to misinterpret in order to secure favor. A solemn duty rested
upon him to tell the king of Babylon the truth.”
R&H, 9/8/1896.

Thou Art Able; For the Spirit of the Holy Gods is in
Thee.—
“Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged the supremacy
of the true God over the heathen oracles. He appealed
to Daniel to solve the mystery. ‘Thou art able,’ he
said; ‘for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.’
As remarked on Daniel 3:25, Nebuchadnezzar
here again used his accustomed way of mentioning
‘gods’ in the plural, though the Septuagint renders the
phrase ‘the Holy Spirit of God is in thee.’ Smith, DR,
82.

“The hesitation of Daniel, who sat astonished for
one hour, did not arise from any difficulty he had in
interpreting the dream, but from the delicate matter of
making known its meaning to the king. Daniel had
received favor from the king—nothing but favor, so far
as we know—and it was hard for him to be the bearer
of so terrible a threatening of judgment against him as
was involved in this dream. The prophet was troubled to determine in what way he could best make it
known. It seems the king had anticipated something of
this kind, for he assured the prophet by telling him not
to let the dream or the interpretation trouble him. It
was as if he had said, Do not hesitate to make it known,
whatever bearing it may have upon me.” Smith, DR,
83.

DANIEL 4:19
Then Daniel, whose name was
Belteshazzar, was astonied for one hour,
and his thoughts troubled him. The king
spake, and said, Belteshazzar, let not the
dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said,
My lord, the dream be to them that hate
thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine
enemies.

DANIEL 4:20-23
The tree that thou sawest, which grew,
and was strong, whose height reached unto
the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the
earth;
Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit
thereof much, and in it was meat for all;
under which the beasts of the field dwelt,
and upon whose branches the fowls of the
heaven had their habitation:
It is thou, O king, that art grown and
become strong: for thy greatness is grown,
and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.
And whereas the king saw a watcher
and an holy one coming down from heaven,
and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots
thereof in the earth, even with a band of
iron and brass, in the tender grass of the
field; and let it be wet with the dew of
heaven, and let his portion be with the
beasts of the field, till seven times pass over
him;

The Daniel Was Astonied for One Hour.—
“To Daniel the meaning of the dream was
plain, and its significance startled him. He ‘was
astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him.’
Seeing Daniel’s hesitation and distress, the king expressed sympathy for his servant. ‘Belteshazzar,’ he
said, ‘let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof,
trouble thee.’” Prophets & Kings, 517.
My Lord, the Dream Be to Them That Hate Thee,
And the Interpretation to Thine Enemies.—
“[Verse 19 last part quoted.] The prophet realized
that upon him God had laid the solemn duty of revealing to Nebuchadnezzar the judgment that was
about to fall upon him because of his pride and arrogance. Daniel must interpret the dream in language
the king could understand; and although its dreadful
import had made him hesitate in dumb amazement, yet
he must state the truth, whatever the consequences
to himself. Then Daniel made known the mandate of
the Almighty. [Verses 20-26 quoted.]” Prophets &
Kings, 517.

Daniel Interprets the Dream.—
“Thus assured, Daniel spoke with forceful and
delicate language: ‘The dream be to them that hate
thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.’
A calamity is set forth in this dream, which Daniel

“The last dream which God gave to Nebuchadnezzar, and the experience of the king in connection
with it, contain lessons of vital importance to all
those who are connected with the work of God. The
king was troubled with his dream; for it was evidently
a prediction of adversity, and none of his wise men

113

GEMS FROM DANIEL
wished might come upon the king’s enemies rather
than upon him.
“Nebuchadnezzar had given a minute statement of
his dream, and as soon as Daniel informed him that the
dream applied to him, it was evident that the king had
pronounced his own sentence. The interpretation
which follows is so plain that it needs no explanation.”
Smith, DR, 83.

true God, a bloodless hand traced upon the wall in
living characters, ‘Thou are weighed in the balances
and art found wanting.’ At the sacrilegious feast of
Belshazzar, there was a Watcher whom he had not
invited, and whose presence he had not discerned or
welcomed. The doom of his kingdom was written in
an unchangeable decree, ‘God hath numbered thy
kingdom, and finished it.’
“The eye of the Lord is upon every scene. His
eye beholds every transaction in business. He hears
every word that is spoken. He is a silent witness to
every slanderous statement, and every falsehood is
faithfully recorded in the books of Heaven. We have
an attendant in public and private life. We have a
companion in our private chamber. To every word
and action of our lives, the holy, sin-hating God
stands as a witness. We cannot escape our accountability to him, for God is everywhere. Why should
we not live in such a manner that we may render up our
account with joy, and not with grief. God has given us
our appointed work, and we are to do it under his direction. If we place our powers under the control of Satan, we are rebels against God, and there will be found
in our life-records, as there was found in Belshazzar’s,
a fatal deficiency when the accounts are balanced.”
Signs, 9/14/1888.

It is Thou.—
“Without holding the king in suspense for any
length of time, Daniel plainly and clearly announced to
him—though he no doubt already surmised it—that the
tree represented the king himself.” 4SDABC, 792.
Thou, O King, That Art Grown & Become Strong.-“Under King Nebuchadnezzar, Babylon was the
richest and most powerful kingdom on the earth. Its
riches and splendor have been faintly portrayed by Inspiration. But it did not fulfill God’s purpose; and
when his time had come, this kingdom of pride and
power, ruled by men of the highest intellect, was broken, shattered, helpless. Christ has declared, ‘Without
me ye can do nothing.’ The illustrious statesmen of
Babylon did not regard themselves as dependent on
God. They thought that they had created all their
grandeur and exaltation. But when God spoke, they
were as the grass that withereth, and the flower of
the grass that fadeth away. The word and will of
God alone endure forever.”
Youth Instructor,
9/29/1903.

DANIEL 4:24-26
This is the interpretation, O king, and
this is the decree of the most High, which is
come upon my lord the king:
That they shall drive thee from men,
and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of
the field, and they shall make thee to eat
grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with
the dew of heaven, and seven times shall
pass over thee, till thou know that the most
High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and
giveth it to whomsoever he will.
And whereas they commanded to leave
the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom
shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt
have known that the heavens do rule.

“The members of our churches need to be converted, that they may understand what the love of Jesus
means—the love that He revealed in His life of meekness and lowliness. Profession without practice is of
no value. Position can not gain for us salvation. Nebuchadnezzar was the ruler of the greatest of earth’s
kingdoms, but his greatness did not give him acceptance with God. In a moment his power was
taken from him.” Australian Union Conference Record, 11/15/1903.
A Watcher and an Holy One.—
“There was a Watcher who was marking the motives, the words, and the actions of King Saul. The
Lord was an unseen witness to every secret design,
every open plan, and every murderous movement.
When Nebuchadnezzar took his proud survey of the
works of his hands, and boasted of his power and glory, saying, ‘Is not this great Babylon, that I have built
for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty’? the Watcher’s
voice came to the king, saying, ‘O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken: The kingdom is departed from
thee.’ When Belshazzar lifted himself up against the
God of Heaven, and made a great feast, and, in his intoxication and pleasure, deemed nothing too sacred for
his use, making merriment against the living and the

Thy Dwelling Shall Be With the Beasts.—
“The meaning was explained to him. The person
signified, was to be put down from honour, and to be
deprived of the use of his reason seven years. This is
surely the sorest of all temporal judgments. Whatever
outward affliction God is pleased to lay upon us, we
have cause to bear it patiently, and to be thankful that
he continues the use of our reason, and the peace of
our consciences. Yet if the Lord should see fit by such
means to keep a sinner from multiplying crimes, or a
believer from dishonoring his name, even the dreadful

114

DANIEL 4
“As the wheellike complications were under the
guidance of the hand beneath the wings of the cherubim, so the complicated play of human events is under divine control. Amidst the strife and tumult of
nations, He that sitteth above the cherubim still
guides the affairs of the earth.” Education 177,178.

prevention would be far preferable to the evil conduct.” Matthew Henry, Commentary on Daniel 4.
Eat Grass as Oxen.—
“His dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed
him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with
the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God
ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he appointeth
over it whomsoever he will.” Daniel 5:21.

“In the annals of human history, the growth of nations, the rise and fall of empires, appear as if dependent on the will and prowess of man; the shaping of
events seems, to a great degree, to be determined by his
power, ambition, or caprice. But in the word of God
the curtain is drawn aside, and we behold, above, behind, and through all the play and counterplay of human interest and power and passions, the agencies of
the All-merciful One, silently, patiently working out
the counsels of His own will.” Prophets & Kings,
499,500.

The Most High Ruleth in the Kingdom of Men.—
“Nations have a time of probation, as do individuals. A record is kept of national events, and when the
cup of iniquity is full, destruction comes, and another
power more vigorous, because less corrupt, takes its
place. ‘The Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men,’
whether He is recognized or not, and things which, to
human eyes, appear to have happened by chance, are
directly under the control of the Holy Watcher.”
Haskell, SDP, 62.

Thy Kingdom Shall Be Sure.—
“Many have wondered why the insane king was
not killed, or why his subjects and ministers of state did
not place someone else on the vacant throne during the
time Nebuchadnezzar was incapacitated. The following explanation has been offered: Superstitious ancients thought that all mental disturbances were caused
by evil spirits who took control of their victim: that if
someone should kill the insane man, the spirit would
take hold of the murdered or instigator of the crime:
and that if his property should be confiscated or his
office filled, a grievous revenge would be inflicted
upon those responsible for the injustice. For this reason insane persons were removed from the society
of men, but otherwise not molested.” 4SDABC, 792.

“The power exercised by every ruler on the
earth is Heaven-imparted; and upon his use of the
power thus bestowed, his success depends. To each the
word of the divine Watcher is, ‘I girded thee, though
thou hast not known Me.’ Isaiah 45:5. And to each the
words spoken to Nebuchadnezzar of old are the lesson
of life: ‘Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if it may be a
lengthening of thy tranquility.’” Education, 174.
Thou Shalt Have Known that the Heavens Rule.—
“Ezekiel was weighed down with sorrowful
memories and troubled forebodings. The land of his
fathers was desolate. Jerusalem was depopulated. The
prophet himself was a stranger in a land where ambition and cruelty reigned supreme. As on every hand he
beheld tyranny and wrong, his soul was distressed, and
he mourned day and night. But the symbols presented
to him revealed a power above that of earthly rulers.
“Upon the banks of the river Chebar, Ezekiel beheld a whirlwind seeming to come from the north, ‘a
great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness
was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the color
of amber.’ A number of wheels, intersecting one another, were moved by four living beings. High above
all these ‘was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the
throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man
above upon it.’ ‘And there appeared in the cherubims
the form of a man’s hand under their wings.’ Ezekiel
1:4, 26; 10:8. The wheels were so complicated in arrangement that at first sight they appeared to be in confusion; but they moved in perfect harmony. Heavenly
beings, sustained and guided by the hand beneath
the wings of the cherubim, were impelling these
wheels; above them, upon the sapphire throne, was
the Eternal One; and round about the throne a
rainbow, the emblem of divine mercy.

DANIEL 4:27
Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be
acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins
by righteousness, and thine iniquities by
shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a
lengthening of thy tranquillity.
Break Off Thy Sins By Righteousness.—
“Having faithfully interpreted the dream, Daniel
urged the proud monarch to repent and turn to God,
that by rightdoing he might avert the threatened
calamity.” Prophets & Kings, 518.
“When God makes a promise concerning good
and evil it is always given on condition. This point is
extremely important to those who would understand
Bible prophecy.
“At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation,
and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull
down, and to destroy it; If that nation, against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them.

115

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“And at what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant
it; If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice,
then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I would
benefit them.” Jeremiah 18:7-10. Cox, Daniel, 57.

Shewing Mercy to the Poor.—
“ ‘Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain
mercy,’ is one of heaven’s unchanging laws. If the
king would show mercy to the poor, God would show
mercy to him. Nebuchadnezzar had grown careless in
the administering of justice. During his vast building
enterprises he had enslaved and oppressed the poor,
many of whom were captives including Daniel’s
fellow captives, the Jews. The Babylonian taskmasters had been as cruel as were the slave-drivers of
Pharaoh in Egypt. The very royal palace in which
the king rested and flourished had been built and
luxuriously furnished by slave labor. There must be
a repentance and reformation or Heaven must speak
through judgments. When God’s warnings go by unheeded He speaks through judgments and to such a
message the proud king would be compelled to listen.”
Bunch, BOD, 52.

“The threatened judgments were conditional.
They were to teach the king ‘that the Heavens do
rule,’ the word ‘heavens’ here being put for God, the
ruler of the heavens. Hence Daniel took occasion to
give the king counsel in view of the threatened judgment. But he did not denounce him in a harsh and censorious spirit. Kindness and persuasion were the weapons he chose to wield: ‘Let my counsel be acceptable
unto thee.’ In like manner the apostle Paul beseeches
men to suffer the word of exhortation. (Hebrews
13:22.) If the king would break off his sins ‘by
righteousness,’ and his iniquities ‘by showing mercy
to the poor,’ it might result in a lengthening of his
tranquility, or, as the margin reads, ‘an healing of
thine error.’ By repentance he might even have
averted the judgment the Lord designed to bring
upon him.” Smith, DR, 83,84.

“God exalted Babylon that it might fulfill this
purpose. Prosperity attended the nation until it reached
a height of wealth and power that has never since been
equaled—fitly represented in the Scriptures by the inspired symbol, a ‘head of gold.’ Daniel 2:38.
“But the king failed of recognizing the power that
had exalted him. Nebuchadnezzar in the pride of his
heart said: ‘Is not this great Babylon, that I have built
for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?’ Daniel 4:30.
“Instead of being a protector of men, Babylon
became a proud and cruel oppressor. The words of
Inspiration picturing the cruelty and greed of rulers
in Israel reveal the secret of Babylon’s fall and of
the fall of many another kingdom since the world
began: ‘Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the
wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the
flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither
have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye
bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and
with cruelty have ye ruled them.’ Ezekiel 34:3, 4.”
Education, 175,176.

“Here a divine principle is communicated to the
proud monarch. God’s judgments against men may
be averted by repentance and conversion (see Isa.
38:1,2,5; Jer. 18:7-10; Jonah 3:1-20). the impending
judgment upon Nebuchadnezzar but gave him a full
year in which to repent, and thus avert the threatened
calamity (see Dan. 4:29). However, the king did not
change his way of life, and accordingly brought upon
himself the execution of the judgment. By contract, the
Ninevites, given 40 days of respite, took advantage of
the opportunity, and they and their city were spared
(Jonah 3:4-10). ‘Surely the Lord God will do nothing,
but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets’ (Amos 3:7). God forewarns peoples and nations of
their impending doom. He sends a message to the
world today, warning of its rapidly approaching doom.
Few may heed such warnings, but because adequate
warning has been given them men will be without excuse in the day of calamity.” 4SDABC, 792.

“Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;
Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.” Isa 1:16,17.

“There was yet time for repentance, and had the
king heeded this counsel, it would have saved him
from the great humiliation which came upon him. But
when men’s hearts are set, the message to change,
though given by an angel from heaven, remains unheeded. Consequently, ‘all this came upon the king
Nebuchadnezzar.’ A year of probation was granted the
king after this solemn warning had been given.”
Haskell, SDP, 57.

It May Be a Lengthening of thy Tranquility.—
“The threatened judgments were conditional. The
king might escape his terrible fate if he would voluntarily humble himself, confess his sins, and bring forth
fruit meat for repentance. The only hope was to repent
and break with sin. Daniel pled with him to make restitution and escape the fate that was otherwise inevitable.” Bunch, BOD, 52.

“Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men
is fully set in them to do evil.” Ecclesiastes 8:11.

“And I gave her space to repent of her fornica-

116

DANIEL 4
tion; and she repented not.” Revelation 2:21.

Its conclusion rested with the generation that heard His
words….
“The warning sounds down along the line to us in
this generation. Are you, O careless heart, a fruitless
tree in the Lord's vineyard? Shall the words of doom
erelong be spoken of you? How long have you received
His gifts? How long has He watched and waited for a
return of love?” Christ’s Object Lessons, 215, 216.

DANIEL 4:28-30
All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.
At the end of twelve months he walked
in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon.
The king spake, and said, Is not this
great Babylon, that I have built for the
house of the kingdom by the might of my
power, and for the honour of my majesty?

“For a time the impression of the warning and the
counsel of the prophet was strong upon Nebuchadnezzar; but the heart that is not transformed by the
grace of God soon loses the impressions of the Holy
Spirit. Self-indulgence and ambition had not yet been
eradicated from the king’s heart, and later on these
traits reappeared. Notwithstanding the instruction so
graciously given him, and the warnings of past experience, Nebuchadnezzar again allowed himself to be
controlled by a spirit of jealousy against the kingdoms that were to follow. His rule, which heretofore
had been to a great degree just and merciful, became
oppressive. Hardening his heart, he used his Godgiven talents for self-glorification, exalting himself
above the God who had given him life and power.
“For months the judgment of God lingered. But
instead of being led to repentance by this forbearance, the king indulged his pride until he lost confidence in the interpretation of the dream, and jested
at his former fears.” Prophets & Kings, 519.

All This Came Upon King Nebuchadnezzar.—
“Verses 28-33 were inserted by Daniel in order to make the story complete by telling how the
dream was fulfilled.” Bunch, BOD, 53.
The Palace.—
“The royal palace is called ‘the palace of the
kingdom of Babylon.’ The kingly residence was to the
city what the capital city was to the whole kingdom. It
was a city within a city. The whole world-kingdom
revolved around the city of Babylon and the city
centered in the royal palace the enclosure of whose
walls was six miles square and ornamented with
towers and battlements. The spacious grounds surrounding the palace was a very fairyland of groves and
gardens intermingled with pools, fountains and artificial streams.” Bunch, BOD, 53

“The king did not heed the message of Daniel.
For twelve months he was tested and proved of God,
to see if he would humble his proud heart, and the
witness was with him when he came in and when he
went out; and at the end of the twelve months he
walked in his palace in the kingdom of Babylon. ‘The
king spake, and said, [verses 30-32 quoted.].” Youth
Instructor,, 11/9/1893.

At The End of Twelve Months.—
“He spake also this parable; A certain man had a
fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came and
sought fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he
unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three
years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find
none: cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?
“And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it
alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung
it: And if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that
thou shalt cut it down.” Luke 13:6-9.

This Great Babylon.—
“Because Babylon contained the sanctuary of the
god Marduk, considered to be the lord of heaven and
earth, the chief of all the gods, the ancient Babylonians
considered their city the ‘navel’ of the world. Hence,
Babylon was a religious center without rival on
earth. A cuneiform tablet of Nebuchadnezzar’s
time lists 53 temples dedicated to important gods,
955 small sanctuaries, and 384 street altars—all of
them within the city confines. In comparison, Asshur, one of the chief cities of Assyria, with its 34 temples and chapels, made a comparatively poor impression. One can well understand why the Babylonians
were proud of their city, saying, ‘Babylon is the origin
and center of all lands.’
“…The center of Babylon’s glory was the
famous temple tower Etemenanki, ‘the foundation
stone of heaven and earth,’ which was 300 ft. square
at the base and more than 300 ft. high. This tremendous edifice was surpassed in height in ancient times

“The gardener does not refuse to minister to so
unpromising a plant. He stands ready to give it still
greater care. He will make its surroundings most favorable, and will lavish upon it every attention.
“The owner and the dresser of the vineyard are
one in their interest in the fig tree. So the Father and
the Son were one in their love for the chosen people.
Christ was saying to His hearers that increased opportunities would be given them. Every means that the
love of God could devise would be put in operation
that they might become trees of righteousness,
bringing forth fruit for the blessing of the world.
“Jesus did not in the parable tell the result of the
gardener's work. At that point His story was cut short.

117

GEMS FROM DANIEL
only by the two great pyramids at Giza in Egypt. The
tower may have been built at the site where the Tower
of Babel once stood. The brick structure consisted of
seven stages, of which the smallest and uppermost was
a shrine dedicated to Marduk, the chief god of Babylon.” 4SDABC, 797.

tion Nebuchadnezzar claimed, ‘The fortifications of
Esagila [Marduk’s temple] and Babylon I strengthened, and established the reign of my name forever.’
“…Since the later ancient historians apparently
had no knowledge of Nebuchadnezzar’s building
achievements, the contemporary cuneiform evidence is
of first-rate importance for the date of Daniel as well as
for the book’s historical accuracy.” BRI, 2SOD,
101,102.

Is Not This Great Babylon that I Have Built.—
“The reference is to the great work of rebuilding
which his father, Nabopolassar, began, and which
Nebuchadnezzar completed.
Nebuchadnezzar’s
building activities were so extensive as to eclipse all
previous accomplishments. It has been said that little
could be seen that had not been erected in his time.”
4SDABC, 793.

“Archeologists have found an inscription of Nebuchadnezzar expressing his pride in this his most monumental work: ‘The temple-tower of Babylon. I made
it, I completed it, I reared its head. I made it glorious
as the stars of heaven.’ The Septuagint translation indicates that the king had just completed a general
survey of the entire city which was mostly his work:
‘And after twelve months the king walked upon the
walls of the city, and went about its towers, and answered and said, This is Babylon the Great that I have
built.’” Bunch, BOD, 53.

“Nebuchadnezzar was not only the greatest king
of Babylon, but one of the greatest who ever sat on
an earthly throne. His rule covered almost half of
the period of Babylon’s existence as a universal
kingdom. The nation’s military and political glory
was chiefly due to his success as a general, organizer,
builder, and ruler. ‘It is scarcely too much to say that
but for Nebuchadnezzar the Babylonians would have
had no place in history. At any rate their actual place is
owing almost entirely to this prince, who to the military talents of an able general added grandeur of artistic
conception and skill in construction which place him
on a par with the greatest builders of antiquity.’—
Rawlinson.
“When Nebuchadnezzar came to the throne the
city of Babylon was far from being the magnificent city
it became as the result of his building genius. In fact
he completely rebuilt it. He transformed the narrow
streets into magnificent boulevards, and the miserable
huts of sun-dried brick into fine houses and palaces
made of well-shaped bricks backed in kilns and each
stamped with his own name. Nine out of every ten
bricks found in the ruins of Babylon bear the name
of Nebuchadnezzar as the builder. A black basalt
cylinder has been found on which the king recounts his
vast building enterprises. Daniel describes him as
boastingly saying: [vs.30 quoted].” Bunch, BOD, 4,5.

“His accomplishments have a darker side. If Assyrian practices are any example, much of the construction of the city of Babylon was carried out by slave
laborers captured in various military campaigns.
The extension of Nebuchadnezzar’s empire exacted a
high cost in human lives—both of the defeated and of
his own soldiers who died in battle.” Shea, DARG, 52.
Pride Goeth Before a Fall.—
“The king saw his prosperity, and because of it he
was lifted up. Notwithstanding the warnings that God
had given him, he did the very things which the Lord
had told him not to do. He looked upon his kingdom
with pride and exclaimed: ‘Is not this great Babylon,
that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?’
Dan. 4:30. The instant that the words were uttered,
the sentence of judgment was pronounced. The
king’s reason was taken away. The judgment that he
had thought so perfect, the wisdom that he had prided
himself on possessing, were removed. The jewel of
the mind, that which elevates man above the beasts,
he no longer retained.” 8 Testimonies, 127.

“Contemporary records discovered by archaeologists now provide information that confirms the reliability of the statement in the book of Daniel. For example, the Grotefend Cylinder states, ‘Then built I [Nebuchadnezzar] the palace the seat of my royalty, the bond
of the race of men, the dwelling of joy and rejoicing.’
J. A. Montgomery concludes that ‘the very language of
the story [of Daniel] is reminiscent of the Akkadian’ in
this striking instance. The depiction of the king’s selfglorification is remarkably true to history.
“…The excavations of ancient Babylon begun in
1899 by the German excavator Robert Koldeway
brought to light thousands of sunbaked mud bricks,
containing an inscription that claims that Nebuchadnezzar was the builder of Babylon. In another inscrip-

“He [Nebuchadnezzar] was repeating the
thoughts, almost the exact words, of Satan, when he
sought to exalt his throne above God. When proud
thoughts were entertained, and these words were uttered, the sentence was pronounced which blasted the
tree, and degraded the monarch whom the tree symbolized. It was God who had given the king his reason
and ability to establish a kingdom like this. The same
God could take away the judgment and wisdom upon
which the king prided himself. And God did so. It is
the mind which elevates man above the beasts. When
the power of the mind is removed, he sinks to the low-

118

DANIEL 4
est level. Nebuchadnezzar became as the beasts.”
Haskell, SDP, 37.

God?” Micah 6:8.
By the Might of My Power.—
“When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt
bless the LORD thy God for the good land which he
hath given thee.
11 Beware that thou forget not the LORD thy
God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day:
12 Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built
goodly houses, and dwelt therein; 13 And when thy
herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy
gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;
14 Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the
LORD thy God, which brought thee forth out of the
land of Egypt, from the house of bondage; 15 Who led
thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein
were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where
there was no water; who brought thee forth water out
of the rock of flint; 16 Who fed thee in the wilderness
with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might
humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee
good at thy latter end; 17 And thou say in thine
heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath
gotten me this wealth.
18 But thou shalt remember the LORD thy
God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get
wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he
sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.” Deuteronomy 8:10-18.

“Nebuchadnezzar gave himself up to pleasure,
and to the glorification of himself. He built a great
city, and walked about his palaces, and said, in the
pride of his heart, ‘Is not this great Babylon, that I have
built for the house of the kingdom of the might of my
power, and for the honor of my majesty?’ He did not
know that there was a watcher at his side who inscribed his words on the records of heaven. God
took away his reason, and he went forth from men to
be with the beasts of the field. Why should men glory
in their successes? Who gives them success? Who
gives the talents with which to attain it? Did God give
men talents to glorify themselves? God gives his precious gifts, that they may be used in his service. Every
particle of the glory of success belongs to God. It is
God’s manifold wisdom that is displayed in the works
of men, and to him belongs the praise. It is Satan’s
work to lead men to glorify themselves with their entrusted talents. While men praised the gods of silver
and gold, and extolled themselves at Belshazzar’s feast,
there was a watcher looking on. A bloodless hand
traced mysterious characters on the walls of the palace.
Belshazzar had not humbled his heart before God, but
had lifted up his heart against the God of heaven. And
it was written against him, ‘Thou art weighed in the
balances, and art found wanting.’” Review & Herald,
4/30/1889.
“Why should we not have a solemn realization of
the truth at this time? What place have we for jesting
and levity right here on the borders of the eternal
world? We are to live to the glory of God. There are
angels measuring the temple of God and those who
worship therein; but how much there is of self. It is
self, all self. When Nebuchadnezzar glorified himself, and did not give praise to God, he was made an
example before the world of how God regards this
spirit of self-exaltation.” R&H, 6/18/1889.

For the Honor of My Majesty.—
“Pride goeth before destruction and an haughty
spirit before a fall.” Prov. 16:18.
“For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased.”
Luke 14:11.
All Praise Belongs to God.—
“The custom of offering praise to men is one that
results in great evil. One praises another, and thus
men are led to feel that glory and honor belong to
them. They begin to feel as did Nebuchadnezzar
when he walked around the palaces of his kingdom,
exclaiming, ‘Is not this great Babylon, that I have
built for the house of the kingdom by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my majesty?’ God
had warned the king of his danger in thus taking the
glory to himself, but he did not heed the warning, and
God sent his threatened judgment upon him, and Nebuchadnezzar was humbled. After he had learned his
lesson, and had given honor to God, he was restored to
his kingly state and power. Giving praise to men lifts
them up in their own estimation, and they forget that
their ability is of God, an entrusted capital put in their
charge to be used for the glory of the Giver. Men are
tested in the use of this earthly capital to see if they
may be entrusted with the heavenly riches. When we
are in a right condition before God, we shall realize
that a great sacrifice has been made in our behalf, and

“In spite of the warning he received, Nebuchadnezzar went on in his own strength, till God took from
him the talent of wisdom, that he might be led to see
and acknowledge that the God of Israel was able to
create and to destroy. The kings who succeeded him
failed to profit by his experience, and the kingdom of
Babylon passed away because, in their prosperity, her
rulers forgot God, and ascribed her honor and glory to
human achievement. So today, when men forget God
and refuse to obey his law, they are humiliated. God
tests them, and if they do not humble their hearts and
confess their sins, they receive the penalty of transgression.” R&H, 2/6/1900.
“He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and
what doth the LORD require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy

119

GEMS FROM DANIEL
we shall see our own human frailty and weakness, and
offer praise to God, instead of to man. All the praise
belongs to God.” R&H, 6/9/1891.

his branches.’ Daniel 4:13,14.” PJ.
“To the ruler of Babylon came the sentence of the
divine Watcher: O king, "to thee it is spoken; The
kingdom is departed from thee." Daniel 4:31.” Education, 176.

Similar Warning Given For Our Day.—
“It is necessary in the cause of God and in the
world, that men bear responsibility. But when men are
lifted up in pride and depend upon worldly wisdom,
God can no longer sustain them and they fall. Nations
and individuals alike have this experience. Even the
professed church of Christ which departs from the
humility of her Master, loses its power, and will certainly be brought low. The people who glory in
wealth, or intellect, or knowledge, or in anything save
Jesus Christ, will be brought to confusion. In Christ
alone ‘are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge.’ Every brilliant thought, every intellectual idea, which in any way brings greatness, originates with our Lord. It is God who is dealing with
humanity. He rules.” Haskell, SDP, 58.

“In this council, assembled to plan the death
of Christ, the Witness was present who heard the
boastful words of Nebuchadnezzar, who witnessed
the idolatrous feast of Belshazzar, who was present
when Christ in Nazareth announced Himself the
Anointed One. This Witness was now impressing
the rulers with the work they were doing. Events in
the life of Christ rose up before them with a distinctness that alarmed them. They remembered the scene in
the temple, when Jesus, then a child of twelve, stood
before the learned doctors of the law, asking them
questions at which they wondered. The miracle just
performed bore witness that Jesus was none other than
the Son of God. In their true significance, the Old Testament Scriptures regarding Christ flashed before their
minds. Perplexed and troubled, the rulers asked, ‘What
do we?’ There was a division in the council. Under
the impression of the Holy Spirit, the priests and
rulers could not banish the conviction that they
were fighting against God.” Desire of Ages, 539.

“Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth
take heed lest he fall.” 1Corinthians 10:12.

DANIEL 4:31-33
While the word was in the king’s
mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is
spoken; The kingdom is departed from
thee.
And they shall drive thee from men,
and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of
the field: they shall make thee to eat grass
as oxen, and seven times shall pass over
thee, until thou know that the most High
ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it
to whomsoever he will.
The same hour was the thing fulfilled
upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven
from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and
his body was wet with the dew of heaven,
till his hairs were grown like eagles’ feathers, and his nails like birds’ claws.

“Men who, like Enoch, are walking in the light of
Christ, will exercise self-control, even under temptation and provocation. Although tried by the perversity
and obstinacy of others, they dare not let impulse bear
sway. If you are walking in the light, you will give
evidence of divine power combined with human effort, and others will see that you are led and taught by
God. You will feel that the Holy Watcher is by your
side taking knowledge of your words.” Medical Ministry, 206.
Israel Suffered a Similar Experience.—
“The prophet’s fearful answer was that the Chaldeans would return and destroy the city. The fiat had
gone forth; no longer could the impenitent nation avert
the divine judgments. ‘Deceive not yourselves,’ the
Lord warned His people. ‘The Chaldeans... shall not
depart. For though ye had smitten the whole army of
the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should they
rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with
fire.’ Jeremiah 37:9, 10. The remnant of Judah were
to go into captivity, to learn through adversity the
lessons they had refused to learn under circumstances more favorable. From this decree of the holy
Watcher there could be no appeal.” Prophets &
Kings, 453.

There Fell a Voice From Heaven.—
“The ‘Voice from heaven’ would be the same as
the ‘Watcher and an Holy One.’ This was a fulfillment
of the dream as it was told: ‘I saw in the visions of my
head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an
holy one came down from heaven. He cried aloud,
and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his
branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let
the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from

The Kingdom is Departed From Thee.—
“ ‘Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin
daughter of Babylon,

120

DANIEL 4
‘Sit on the ground: there is no throne. . . .
‘Sit thou silent,
‘And get thee into darkness, O daughter of the
Chaldeans;
‘For thou shalt no more be called, The lady of
kingdoms.” Isaiah 47:1-5.

stripped the proud boaster of all that his Creator
had given him.
“Nebuchadnezzar did not profit by the warnings
he received. Only through severest discipline did he
learn the lesson that the Lord, and not man, is ruler,
and that God’s kingdom endures forever. Only after
passing through long years of humiliation did the king
of Babylon learn that it was not his scepter, but the
scepter of him whose kingdom is everlasting, that held
supreme sway over the affairs of the nations.
“Man may lift himself up in pride and boast of his
power, but in an instant God can bring him to nothingness. It is Satan’s work to lead men to glorify themselves with their entrusted talents. Every man through
whom God works will have to learn that the living,
ever-present, ever-acting God is supreme, and has lent
him talents to use—an intellect to originate; a heart to
be the seat of his throne; affections to flow out in blessing to all with whom he shall come in contact; a conscience through which the Holy Spirit can convict him
of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.
“God is infinitely holy, and he hates every species
of iniquity. He is great in power, and he will punish
the mightiest with the most depraved. He first gives to
transgressors oft-repeated warnings. If the heart is
hardened, if it refuses to heed the warnings given,
and to accept the means of salvation, God will make
men feel that as he has exalted and favored them, so
he has to do with their casting down. When God has
forsaken those whom he has highly favored, no earthly
power can avail.” Youth Instructor, 3/28/1905.

“Many are suffering with spiritual insanity
and do not know it. Sin unbalances the mind so that
men and women act more like animals than human
beings. They renounce the duties and privileges of the
higher spiritual nature and live as if there was nothing
in them above the animal. They were created in the
image of God but they live and act and die like brutes.
Their spiritual faculties are completely deadened by
uncontrolled animal passions. Matthew Henry said:
‘Those may justly be reckoned void of understanding who do not bless and praise God: nor do men
ever rightly use their reason till they begin to be religious, nor live as men till they live to the glory of God.
As reason is the substratum or subject of religion (so
that creatures which have no reason are not capable of
religion), so religion is the crown and glory of reason;
and we have our reason in vain, and shall one day wish
we had never had it, if we do not glorify God with it.’”
Bunch, BOD 56.
“God’s object in punishing pride is not vengeance, but salvation.” Burnside, DPUF, 84.
Like Belshazzar, the Last King of Babylon.—
“To the last ruler of Babylon, as in type to its
first, had come the sentence of the divine Watcher: “O
king… to thee it is spoken: The kingdom is departed
from thee.’” Prophets & Kings, 533.

They Shall Make Thee Eat Grass As Oxen.—
“And the cow and the bear shall feed; their
young ones shall lie down together: and the lion [Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, the lion] shall eat straw
[grass] like the ox.” Isaiah 11:7.

Nebuchadnezzar, a Symbol of the End of Nations.—
“Babylon is a symbol of the world at large.
When its doom was made certain, its kings and officers seemed to be as men insane, and their own course
hastened its destiny. When the doom of a nation is
fixed, it seems that all the energy, wisdom, and discretion of its former time of prosperity, deserts its
men of position, and they hasten the evil they would
avert. Outside enemies are not the greatest peril to an
individual or a nation. The overthrow of a nation results, under the providence of God, from some unwise
or evil course of its own.” Signs, 12/29/1890.

Until.—
“Trials last no longer than is needed.” Burnside,
DPUF, 84.

Thy Dwelling Shall Be With the Beasts.—
“As the beasts have no knowledge of God, and
therefore do not acknowledge his sovereignty, so
Nebuchadnezzar had been unmindful of God and
his mercies. Prosperity and popularity had led him to
feel independent of God, and to use for his own glory
the talent of reason that God had entrusted to him.
Messages of warning were sent to him, but he heeded
them not. The heavenly Watcher took cognizance of
the king’s spirit and actions, and in a moment

Every Rational Thought is From God.
The King’s Self-exaltation and Humiliation.—

121

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“In a moment the reason that God had given him
was taken away; the judgment that the king thought
perfect, the wisdom on which he prided himself, was
removed, and the once mighty ruler was a maniac.
His hand could no longer sway the scepter. The messages of warning had been unheeded; now, stripped of
the power his Creator had given him, and driven from
men, Nebuchadnezzar ‘did eat grass as oxen, and his
body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs
were grown like eagles’ feathers, and his nails like
birds’ claws.’” Prophets & Kings, 520.

Seven Times Shall Pass Over Thee.—
“During the years when Nebuchadnezzar was not
able to carry on the affairs of state, they would be conducted by other officials. Such was the case in modern times when kings were stricken with insanity.
Concerning this dean Farrar makes the following observation, ‘Alike in ancient days as in modern—
witness the cases of Charles VI of France, Christian
VII of Denmark, George III of England, and Otto of
Bavaria—a king’s madness is not allowed to interfere
with the normal administration of the kingdom.’ The
Expositor’s Bible, 4, 402.” Thiele, OSID, 43.

“The scepter is no longer held in the hand of a
proud and powerful monarch. The mighty ruler is a
maniac. He now herds with the cattle to eat as they eat.
He is a companion of the beasts of the field. The brow
that once wore a coronet is disfigured by the absence of
reason and intellect. The mandate has gone forth: ‘Hew
down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his
leaves, and scatter his fruit.’ Verse 14.
“So the Lord magnifies Himself as the true and
living God. Well might David exclaim: ‘I have seen
the wicked in great power, and spreading himself
like a green bay tree. Yet he passed away, and, lo, he
was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.’
Psalm 37:35, 36. Let men become lifted up in pride,
and the Lord will not sustain them and keep them from
falling. Let a church become proud and boastful,
not depending on God, not exalting His power, and
that church will surely be left by the Lord, to be
brought down to the ground. Let a people glory in
wealth, intellect, knowledge, or in anything but Christ,
and they will soon be brought to confusion.” 8 Testimonies, 127.

Nebuchadnezzar’s Experience Repeated.—
“We are living in the last days of this earth’s history, and we may be surprised at nothing in the line of
apostasies and denials of the truth. Unbelief has now
come to be a fine art, which men work at to the destruction of their souls. There is constant danger of
there being shams in pulpit preachers, whose lives contradict the words they speak; but the voice of warning
and of admonition will be heard as long as time shall
last; and those who are guilty of transactions that
should never be entered into, when reproved or counseled through the Lord’s appointed agencies, will resist
the message and refuse to be corrected. They will go
on as did Pharaoh, and Nebuchadnezzar, until the
Lord takes away their reason, and their hearts become unimpressible. The Lord’s Word will come to
them; but if they choose not to hear it, the Lord will
make them responsible for their own ruin.” 4BC,
1170.
“Man may have brilliant intellect; he may be rich
in the possession of natural endowments. But these
are all given him by God, his Maker. God can remove the gift of reason, and in a moment man will
become as Nebuchadnezzar, degraded to the level of
the beasts of the field. This God does because man acts
as though his wisdom and power had been gotten independently of Him.
“Man is only mortal, and while he feels himself
too wise to accept Jesus, he will remain only mortal.
Men have done wonderful things in the intellectual
world, but who gave them power to do this?—The
Lord God of hosts.” 1 Selected Messages, 298.

“Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the
rich man glory in his riches; but let him that glorieth
glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth
me, that I am the Lord which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth; for
in these things I delight, saith the Lord.” Jer. 9:23,24.
“The time had come for Nebuchadnezzar’s humiliation. A voice from heaven again announced the
threatened judgment, and divine providence proceeded immediately to execute it. His reason departed. No longer the pomp and glory of his great city
charmed him. God with a touch of His finger took
away his capability to appreciate and enjoy it. He forsook the dwellings of men, and sought a home and
companionship among the beasts of the field.” Smith,
DR, 85.

“All our powers are the gift of God. He has endowed us with reason, and he intends that we shall use
this power that we may understand our situation and
glorify him. If we use our abilities simply for the glorification of self, we are not fulfilling the will of God.
God gave Nebuchadnezzar his reason, but the king
used his ability to exalt himself. He walked about in
the great city, and said, ‘Is not this great Babylon, that I
have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my majesty?’ He forgot the honor of God, and God removed his reason, and
he was sent out to dwell with the beasts of the field, to

“It should be remembered that in all of God’s
dealing with the king Nebuchadnezzar, God was
working for the salvation of the ruler and those affected by his influence.” Haskell, SDP, 58,59.

122

DANIEL 4
eat grass as an ox. The relation of this experience of
Nebuchadnezzar is to show us what a man will become if God removes his precious endowment of
reason. God can take away the powers of the mind,
and leave nothing in the breast of a man but the
instinct of a beast of the field.” Signs, 9/9/1889.

among the inhabitants of the earth: and
none can stay his hand, or say unto him,
What doest thou?
At the same time my reason returned
unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom,
mine honour and brightness returned unto
me; and my counsellors and my lords
sought unto me; and I was established in
my kingdom, and excellent majesty was
added unto me.
Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven, all
whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is
able to abase.

“Reason was never given man to lead him to
suppose that he can climb higher than the Source
from which that reason flows. God gave man his
reasoning powers, and he can remove them, as in the
case of Nebuchadnezzar, when they are not used to his
glory. In Noah’s day the inhabitants of the earth
sought out many inventions. They were wise to do
evil. The imaginations of their hearts were only evil
continually, and God swept them from the face of the
earth.” Signs, 1/28/1897.
“But let us consider, What reason has man to be
puffed up? What reason has he to be proud of his religion? He has nothing but that which he has received from God the Redeemer. Learning of the very
highest order cannot purchase heaven for any of us.
The man possessing large estates and lofty mansions, who walks the earth with all the independence
of Nebuchadnezzar as he walked in the palace of the
king of Babylon, can claim the right to heaven only
through humble obedience to all of God's commandments. …Neither riches nor honor can purchase
one of the rich graces of the Spirit of God, or secure for
man by all his wisdom a mansion in the heavens. The
proud monarch of Babylon was made to feel that there
was a power behind and above all his boasted wisdom.
God simply removed from the proud boaster his reason, which was the gift of God, and he became degraded to the society of the beasts for seven years.” R&H,
9/19,1887.

At the End of the Days.—
“For seven years Nebuchadnezzar was an astonishment to all his subjects; for seven years he was
humbled before all the world. Then his reason was restored and, looking up in humility to the God of heaven, he recognized the divine hand in his chastisement.”
Prophets & Kings, 521.
I Lifted Up Mine Eyes Unto Heaven.—
“It is significant to notice that the return of
reason is said to have come to the king with his recognition of the true God. When the humbled king
prayerfully looked up to heaven, he was elevated
from the condition of a brute beast to that of a king
bearing the image of God. …The essential feature of
the miracle is still repeated—even if in a less spectacular manner—in the conversion of every sinner.”
4SDABC, 793.

Eagles’ Feathers.—
“The word ‘feathers’ is supplied. Hair, when unkempt and long exposed to the influences of rough
weather and to the rays of the sun, becomes hard and
unruly.” 4SDABC, 793.

“And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I
thank thee that thou hast heard me.” John 11:41.
Mine Understanding Returned Unto Me.—
“Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy
law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart.
“I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation.
“I understand more than the ancients, because I
keep thy precepts.” Psalm 119:99,100.

DANIEL 4:34-37
And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto
me, and I blessed the most High, and I
praised and honoured him that liveth for
ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation:
And all the inhabitants of the earth are
reputed as nothing: and he doeth according
to his will in the army of heaven, and

“When those who have received the false interpretation of the word search the Scriptures with determined effort to know what is truth, the Holy Spirit
opens the eyes of their understanding, and the word
is to them a new revelation. Their hearts are quickened with a new and living faith, and they behold wondrous things out of His law. The teachings of Christ
have a breadth and meaning to them that they have
never before understood..” Counsels to Parents,
Teachers, Students, 430.

123

GEMS FROM DANIEL
king. He who had defied and blasphemed the God of
heaven, now acknowledged the power of the Most
High and earnestly sought to promote the fear of Jehovah and the happiness of his subjects. Under the rebuke of Him who is King of kings and Lord of lords,
Nebuchadnezzar had learned at last the lesson
which all rulers need to learn—that true greatness
consists in true goodness. … God’s purpose that the
greatest kingdom in the world should show forth His
praise was now fulfilled. This public proclamation, in
which Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged the mercy
and goodness and authority of God, was the last act
of his life recorded in Sacred history.” Prophets &
Kings, 521.

And I Blessed, Praised, & Honored the Most High.—
“I will bless the LORD, who hath given me
counsel: my reins also instruct me in the night seasons.
Psalm 16:7.
“Bless the LORD, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Bless the LORD, O my
soul, and forget not all his benefits.” Psalm 103:1,2.
All the Inhabitants of the Earth as Nothing.—
“All nations before him are as nothing; and
they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity.” Isa 40:17.
None Can Stay His Hand.—
“The second half of this verse has a close parallel
in Isa. 43:13. Some have suggested the possibility that
in his association with Daniel the king had become
acquainted with the words of Isaiah, and that they came
suddenly back to his mind. The confession was a marvelous one, coming, as it did, from the mouth of the
once proud monarch. It is the testimony of a penitent
convert, a statement from the heart of a man who had
learned by experience to know and to revere God.”
4SDABC, 793.

“At the end of seven years God removed the hand
of affliction, and reason and understanding of the king
returned to him. His first act was to bless the Most
High. On this Matthew Henry makes the following
appropriate remark: ‘Those may justly be reckoned
void of understanding that do not bless and praise
God; nor do men ever rightly use their reason till
they begin to be religious, nor live as men till they
live to the glory of God.’ [Matthew Henry, Commentary, Vol. II, p.965.]
“His honor and brightness returned to him, his
counselors sought him, and he was once more established in the kingdom. The promise was that the kingdom should be sure to him. (Verse 26.) During his
insanity, his son Evil-Merodach is said to have reigned
in his stead. Daniel’s interpretation of the dream was
doubtless well understood in the palace, and was probably more or less the subject of conversation. Hence
the return of Nebuchadnezzar to his kingdom must
have been anticipated, with interest. Why he was permitted to make his home in the open field in so forlorn
a condition instead of being comfortably cared for by
the attendants of the palace, we are not informed.
“The affliction had its designed effect. The lesson of humility was learned. The king did not forget it
with returning prosperity.
He was ready to
acknowledge that the Most High rules in the kingdom
of men, and gives it to whomsoever He will. He sent
forth through all his realm a royal proclamation containing an acknowledgment of his pride, and a manifesto of praise and adoration to the King of heaven.
“This is the last Scripture record we have of Nebuchadnezzar. This decree is dated 563 BC, in the Authorized Version, says Adam Clarke [Adam Clarke,
Commentary on the Old Testament, Vol. IV, p. 585,
note on Daniel 4: 37], one year before Nebuchadnezzar’s death…. There is no record that the king ever
lapsed again into idolatry. We may therefore conclude
that he died a believer in the God of Israel. Thus
closed the life of this remarkable man.” Smith, DR, 8587.

“Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is
none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work,
and who shall let it?” Isaiah 43:13.
Nebuchadnezzar Extols the “King of Heaven."—
“King Nebuchadnezzar, before whom Daniel so
often honored the name of God, was finally thoroughly converted, and learned to ‘praise and extol and honour the King of heaven’” R&H, 1/11/1906.
“The chastening that came upon the king of
Babylon wrought reformation in his heart, and transformed him in character. He now understands God’s
purpose in humiliating him. In this chastisement he
recognizes the divine hand. Before his humiliation he
was tyrannical in his dealings with others, but now
the fierce, over-bearing monarch is changed into a
wise and compassionate ruler. Before his humiliation he defied and blasphemed the God of heaven,
but now he humbly acknowledges the power of the
Most High, and earnestly seeks to promote the happiness of his subjects.” Youth Instructor, 12/12/1904.
“At last the king had received his lesson. ‘Come
and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will make known
to you what he hath done for my soul’ [Psalms 66:16].
The Lord designed that the greatest kingdom in the
world should know and show forth His praise.” 13
Manuscript Releases, 67.
“[Verses 34-36 quoted.] The once proud monarch had become a humble child of God; the tyrannical, overbearing ruler, a wise and compassionate

Those That Walk in Pride He is Able to Abase.—

124

DANIEL 4
“Read the book of Daniel. Call up, point by
point, the history of the kingdoms there represented.
Behold statesmen, councils, powerful armies, and see
how God wrought to abase the pride of men, and
lay human glory in the dust. God alone is represented as great. In the vision of the prophet He is seen
casting down one mighty ruler, and setting up another.
He is revealed as the monarch of the universe, about to
set up His everlasting kingdom—the Ancient of days,
the living God, the Source of all wisdom, the Ruler of
the present, the Revealer of the future. Read, and understand how poor, how frail, how short-lived, how
erring, how guilty is man in lifting up his soul unto
vanity....” 4BC 1166.

tice that when the silence is broken, it is to relate a
deed of kindness. In the first year of his reign he took
from prison Jehoiachin, the former king of Jerusalem, a
man now fifty years of age, who had languished in
bonds since a boy of eighteen. The Jewish ex-ruler
was given clothing and a king’s provisions, and exalted
above other kings in Babylon all the remainder of his
days.
“Evil-Merodach had been reared in the Babylonian court, and had known of the Jews and their history
from his youth up. It would not be an impossible thing
that Daniel, made chief of the Chaldean wise men by
Nebuchadnezzar, had been the instructor of the prince.
While details are omitted, true it is that for some reason
the destruction of Babylon was delayed beyond the
reign of Evil-Merodach. His brief reign of two years
was followed by an unsettled period, a most dangerous
experience in a monarchy.
“Finally Nabonidus, the son-in-law of Nebuchadnezzar, was seated on the throne, and about the year
541 he associated with him his son Belshazzar. The
two reigned conjointly until the destruction of the
kingdom in 538 BC. This youth, the grandson of the
great Nebuchadnezzar, soon proved himself to be
headstrong, wayward, cruel, and dissolute.
“Daniel was no longer retained in the court. The
time of his dismissal is not stated, but in the third year
of Belshazzar’s reign, he was living at Shushan, the
capital of Elam, some distance east of Babylon, and it
was at that place that he saw the vision which the
eighth chapter of the book of Daniel relates.
“During the reign of Nabonidus and Belshazzar,
events of the greatest importance occurred. To the
Jews who accepted the words of the prophets whom
God sent, rising up early and sending, the downfall of
the kingdom in the near future was well known. In
spite of their own oppression there was a world to be
warned, and as the host of the redeemed gather about
the throne of God, made up, as it will be, of representatives of every nation, kindred, tongue and people, there
will be some souls from ancient Babylon, who, having
heard the proclamation of the message, separated from
her sins, and were saved.
“As the knowledge of God was lost by the ruling
monarchs, and God-fearing men were no longer among
the counselors, the oppression of the Jews became almost unbearable.” Haskell, SDP, 62-65.

“Although we don’t have the personal power and
authority Nebuchadnezzar wielded as ruler of Babylon,
we still can learn from his experience. Like him, we
probably tend to think better of ourselves than we
should. Like him, we praise our own achievements,
large or small. ‘Is this not great Babylon which I have
built,’ still echoes in our experience today.” Shea,
DARG, 54.
Nebuchadnezzar’s Last Days.—
“Nebuchadnezzar ruled Babylon for 43 years,
from 605 to 561 BC. His last dream [Dan. 4] was given in 570 BC. Twelve months’ probation and seven
years of insanity would make his conversion occur in
the year 562 BC. He therefore lived about a year as a
worshiper of Jehovah and what a happy year that must
have been. …The king died desiring ‘a better country,
that is, an heavenly,’ and looking ‘for a city which hath
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.’”
Bunch, BOD, 57.
Babylonian History After Nebuchadnezzar.—
“The reign of Nebuchadnezzar closed shortly after the restoration of his reason as related in the fourth
chapter of Daniel. From a world point of view, his had
been a long and prosperous reign, and at its close there
were no signs of weakening in the empire. Nebuchadnezzar had a son of age to fill the place of his father.
“…Evil-Merodach, the son of Nebuchadnezzar, is
mentioned but twice in the Scriptures, and in each case
reference is made to one act of his life. It seems
strange that such a father should be followed by a son
of whom so little is recorded, but it is gratifying to no-

125

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER FIVE
1 Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his
lords, and drank wine before the thousand.
2 Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring
the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar
had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the
king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink
therein.
3 Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of
the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the
king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in
them.
4 They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver,
of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.
5 In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and
wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of
the king's palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that
wrote.
6 Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts
troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another.
7 The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to the wise
men of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me
the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and have
a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the
kingdom.
8 Then came in all the king's wise men: but they could not read
the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation
thereof.
9 Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were astonied.
10 Now the queen by reason of the words of the king and his
lords came into the banquet house: and the queen spake and
said, O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor
let thy countenance be changed:
11 There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the
holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding
and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him;
whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy
father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans,
and soothsayers;
12 Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel,
whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called,
and he will shew the interpretation.
13 Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king
spake and said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the
children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father
brought out of Jewry?
14 I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in
thee, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is
found in thee.
15 And now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought

in before me, that they should read this writing, and make
known unto me the interpretation thereof: but they could not
shew the interpretation of the thing:
16 And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing,
and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be
clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and
shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.
17 Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy
gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read
the writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.
18 O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy
father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:
19 And for the majesty that he gave him, all people, nations,
and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would
he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would
he set up; and whom he would he put down.
20 But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in
pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his
glory from him:
21 And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was
made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses:
they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the
dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the
kingdom of men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoever he
will.
22 And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine
heart, though thou knewest all this;
23 But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and
they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou,
and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in
them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass,
iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and
the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways,
hast thou not glorified:
24 Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was written.
25 And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE,
TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
26 This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE; God hath
numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.
27 TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found
wanting.
28 PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes
and Persians.
29 Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with
scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the
kingdom.
30 In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans
slain.
31 And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about
threescore and two years old.

DANIEL 5:1
Belshazzar the king made a great feast
to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine
before the thousand.

“A period of about twenty-five years intervenes
between the close of the fourth and the opening of the
fifty chapter.” Haskell, SDP, 62.
“If the entire book [of Daniel] were put together
in its chronological order, chapters seven, eight and
nine would appear between chapters four and five.”
Bunch, BOD, 1.

Introduction.—

126

DANIEL 5
“This chapter describes the closing scenes of the
Babylonian Empire, the transition from the gold to the
silver of the great image of Daniel 2, and from the lion
to the bear of Daniel’s vision in chapter 7.” Smith, DR,
89.

the One who is above all rulers, the General of all the
armies of heaven.” Youth Instructor, May 19, 1898.
Made a Great Feast.—
“In his pride and arrogancy, with a reckless feeling of security Belshazzar ‘made a great feast to a
thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.’ All the attractions that wealth and power could
command, added splendor to the scene. Beautiful
women with their enchantments were among the guests
in attendance at the royal banquet. Men of genius and
education were there. Princes and statesmen drank
wine like water and reveled under its maddening
influence.” Prophets & Kings, 523.

Belshazzar the king.—
“Toward the close of Daniel’s life great changes
were taking place in the land to which, over threescore
years before, he and his Hebrew companions had been
carried captive. Nebuchadnezzar, ‘the terrible of the
nations" (Ezekiel 28:7), had died, and Babylon, ‘the
praise of the whole earth’ (Jeremiah 51:41), had passed
under the unwise rule of his successors, and gradual
but sure dissolution was resulting.
“Through the folly and weakness of Belshazzar,
the grandson of Nebuchadnezzar, proud Babylon was
soon to fall. Admitted in his youth to a share in
kingly authority, Belshazzar gloried in his power
and lifted up his heart against the God of heaven.
Many had been his opportunities to know the divine
will and to understand his responsibility of rendering
obedience thereto. He had known of his grandfather’s
banishment, by the decree of God, from the society of
men; and he was familiar with Nebuchadnezzar’s conversion and miraculous restoration. But Belshazzar
allowed the love of pleasure and self-glorification to
efface the lessons that he should never have forgotten. He wasted the opportunities graciously granted
him, and neglected to use the means within his
reach for becoming more fully acquainted with
truth. That which Nebuchadnezzar had finally gained
at the cost of untold suffering and humiliation, Belshazzar passed by with indifference.
“It was not long before reverses came. Babylon
was besieged by Cyrus, nephew of Darius the Mede,
and commanding general of the combined armies of
the Medes and Persians. But within the seemingly impregnable fortress, with its massive walls and its gates
of brass, protected by the river Euphrates, and stocked
with provision in abundance, the voluptuous monarch
felt safe and passed his time in mirth and revelry.”
Prophets & Kings, 522,523.

“This was the last feast of boasting held by the
Chaldean king; for he who bears long with man’s
perversity had passed the irrevocable sentence. Belshazzar had greatly dishonored the One who had exalted him as king, and his probation was taken from
him.” Youth Instructor, 5/26,1898.
“The gratification of unnatural appetite led to the
sins that caused the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. God ascribes the fall of Babylon to her gluttony
and drunkenness. Indulgence of appetite and passion
was the foundation of all their sins.” Counsels on
Health, 110.
“According to Xenophon ‘a certain festival had
come round in Babylon, during which all Babylon
was accustomed to drink and revel all night long.’
(Cyropaedia, vii.5.15).
“In the excavation Nebuchadnezzar’s southern
palace, a great hall was found, 173 feet long and 57
feet wide. There was a niche in one of the walls where
the throne may have stood. The walls were coated with
a white plaster. In all probability this is the throne
room where the great festival took place on the night of
Babylon’s fall.” Thiele, OSID, 46.
“It is a well-known fact that it was common for
ancient monarchs to give feasts for their courtiers.
A stele discovered recently at Nimrud, the ancient Calah, makes mention of the fact that King Ashurnasirpal
II made a great festival at the opening of a new palace.
He is stated to have fed, wined, and housed 69,574
people for 10 days.” 4SDABC, 801

“This monarch had everything to flatter his pride
and indulge his passions. He was a great king, presiding over what was then the greatest kingdom on earth.
His provinces were cultivated by captives, and his
capital was enriched by the spoil of nations. He held
the life and property of his subjects in his hand. To
those who ministered to his pride and vanity, he was
indulgent; they were his chosen favorites; but if at any
moment they crossed his will, he was at once a cruel
tyrant. His anger blazed forth against them without
restraint.
“Admitted to a share in kingly authority at fifteen
years of age, Belshazzar gloried in his power, and lifted
up his heart against the God of heaven. He despised

Belshazzar’s Feast in Our Day.—
“In my travels I have witnessed scenes of feasting
and revelry; and as I have marked the effects of unrestrained indulgence, as I have listened to the blasphemous mirth, and seen the indifference and even contempt for all things sacred, I have thought of the sacrilegious feast of Belshazzar, to which were invited a
thousand of his lords, his princes, his wives, and his
concubines—that feast where wine was freely drunk
from the sacred vessels of the temple of God, while the

127

GEMS FROM DANIEL
revelers sang the praises of their gods of silver and
gold. They knew not that an unseen Watcher heard
every word of blasphemy, beheld every impious action.
… Just as surely as there was a Witness at the feast
of Belshazzar, there is also a Witness in every scene
of sacrilegious mirth, and just as surely is the recording angel writing, ‘Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.’” Christian Temperance
& Bible Hygiene, 20.

Reason no longer controlled him; his lower impulses
and passions were in the ascendency. His kingdom
was strong and apparently invincible, and he would
show that he thought nothing too sacred for his hands
to handle and profane. To show his contempt for
sacred things, he desecrated the holy vessels taken
from the temple of the Lord at its destruction.”
Youth Instructor, 5/19/1898
“That this festival had some reference to former victories over the Jews may be inferred from
the fact that when the king began to be heated with
his wine, he called for the sacred vessels which had
been taken from Jerusalem. He would most likely
use them to celebrate the victory by which they were
obtained. Probably no other king had carried his impiety to such length as this. And while they drank wine
from vessels dedicated to the true God, they praised
their gods of gold, silver, brass, iron, wood, and
stone. Perhaps, as we have noted in comments on
Daniel 3:29, they celebrated the superior power of their
gods over the God of the Jews, from whose vessels
they now drank to their heathen deities.” Smith, DR,
89,90.

Drank Wine Before the Thousand.—
“This feast is supposed by some to have been an
appointed annual festival in honor of one of the heathen deities. Cyrus, who was then besieging Babylon,
learned of the celebration, and laid his plans for the
overthrow of the city. Our translation reads that Belshazzar, having invited a thousand of his lords,
‘drank... before the thousand.’ Some translate it
‘drank ...against the thousand,’ showing that in addition to whatever other weaknesses he may have
had, he was also a heavy drinker.” Smith, DR, 89.
“Modern statistics for crimes and auto accidents demonstrate that alcohol is involved in a large
percentage of such situations—with disastrous results. Alcohol is a drug that affects the faculties of
judgment in the human mind and its higher, moral
thought patterns. Belshazzar was no exception to this
effect.” Shea, DARG, 56.

“He [Belshazzar] ordered that the sacred vessels
be brought from the temple to show that no being, human or divine, could raise a hand against him, the king
of Babylon. The golden cup filled with wine was
raised and the blessing of Bel invoked, but it never
reached the lips of the half-intoxicated king. His
hand was stayed.” Haskell, SDP, 68.

“Because of the wickedness that follows largely
as the result of the use of liquor, the judgments of
God are falling upon our earth today.” Counsels on
Health, 432.

“Intoxicants dethrone the reason and unbalance
the judgment and under their influence the king did
things he would never have done while sober. Even
though his capital city was surrounded by the conquering armies of Cyrus and his kingdom on the verge of
disaster, he ignores the peril of the situation and becomes reckless in his conduct.” Bunch, BOD, 59.

DANIEL 5:2-4
Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine,
commanded to bring the golden and silver
vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar
had taken out of the temple which was in
Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes,
his wives, and his concubines, might drink
therein.
Then they brought the golden vessels
that were taken out of the temple of the
house of God which was at Jerusalem; and
the king, and his princes, his wives, and his
concubines, drank in them.
They drank wine, and praised the gods
of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of
wood, and of stone.

The Golden and Silver Vessels.—
“Yea, thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in the house
of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah and
of Jerusalem; They shall be carried to Babylon, and
there shall they be until the day that I visit them,
saith the LORD; then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.” Jeremiah 27:21,22.
The King and Princes Might Drink Wine in Them.—
“In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will
make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and
sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the
LORD.” Jeremiah 51:39.
“And I will make drunk her princes, and her
wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her
mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep,
and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the LORD

Belshazzar Calls For God’s Sacred Golden Vessels.-“Exalted by wine and blinded by delusion, the
king himself took the lead in the riotous blasphemy.

128

DANIEL 5
of hosts.” Jeremiah 51:57.

“According to Babylonian theology, many gods
existed in heaven. These gods acted on earth through
their representatives so that when a particular event
took place on earth it meant that the same action had
also taken place in the realm of the gods. For example,
when Babylon scored a victory over one of its enemies
this indicated that in the heavens, Marduk, the god of
Babylon, had defeated the god of that country. Thus
earthly events reflected what had happened as well
among the gods. So for Belshazzar to drink from the
vessels that had come from Yahweh’s temple was an
expression, for him, of the superiority of his god over
that of the Jews. Unfortunately for Belshazzar, his
theology was false; he was actually engaged in an act
of blasphemy against the true God.
“…If Belshazzar had taken Nebuchadnezzar’s
experience into account, he would never have committed the sacrilege of drinking from the vessels from
Yahweh’s temple.
Nebuchadnezzar’s experience
should have taught him to respect the true God whose
might and power could humble the greatest ruler of
the kingdom.” Shea, DARG, 57, 59.

Sabbath Treated Like Belshazzar Treated Vessels.—
“On every page of God’s word the injunction to
obedience is plainly written, and yet how often his
commands are lightly regarded or wholly set aside!
The command for the observance of the holy Sabbath
of the Lord is placed in the very bosom of the Decalogue, and is so plain that none need err as to its import, and yet it is treated with as great profanation
as were the sacred vessels at the feast of Belshazzar.
God sanctified and blessed the seventh day, setting it
apart to be observed as holy time. Yet the Sabbath of
the Lord has been used as a common working day,
while a day which possesses no sanctity whatever
has been put in the place of God’s sanctified day.
The religious world has accepted error for truth, and
many who claim to be the children of the light are the
children of darkness. The condemnation of those
who trample upon God’s holy Sabbath, and exalt a
Sabbath instituted by the man of sin, will not come
because they have conscientiously observed the first
day of the week, but because they neglected opportunities for searching the Scriptures and learning,
not what man has said, not what the ministers say,
not what the fathers have said, but what saith the
infinite God? What day has God specified as his holy
day? What did he command men to honor when he
spoke with an audible voice from Sinai? That voice is
to be obeyed above every other; the edicts of kings
and nations are void before a command of God.
The Lord of hosts commands our obedience.” Signs,
7/27/1891.
“If the foundations be destroyed, what can the
righteous do? The LORD is in his holy temple, the
LORD’s throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.” Psalm 11:3.

It was an ecumenical religious festival
“The revelers were drinking their wine, and partaking of their luxurious feast, and praising the gods
of silver and gold, extolling their own wisdom, magnifying their deeds, and dishonoring God….” Signs,
12/29/1887.

They Drank Wine, [and Tea and Coffee].—
“When these tea and coffee users meet together
for social entertainment, the effects of their pernicious
habit are manifest. All partake freely of the favorite
beverages, and as the stimulating influence is felt, their
tongues are loosened, and they begin the wicked work
of talking against others. Their words are not few or
well chosen. The tidbits of gossip are passed around,
too often the poison of scandal as well. These thoughtless gossipers forget that they have a witness. An unseen Watcher is writing their words in the books of
heaven. All these unkind criticisms, these exaggerated
reports, these envious feelings, expressed under the
excitement of the cup of tea, Jesus registers as against
himself. "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."
[MATT. 25:40.] Christian Temperance and Bible Hygiene, 36.

A Religious Festival.—
“All the gods were supposed to gather in Babylon
during great feasts, and especially the feast of Tammuz.” Bunch, BOD, 61.
“According to the Nabonidus Chronicle the gods
of the surrounding area had been brought to Babylon.
In this period of national crisis, with Cyrus making
every effort to bring about Babylon’s fall, it was felt
that the city should have the protection of the gods
that had been so instrumental in bringing the nation so
much of glory and fame.” Thiele, OSID, 46.
Idol gods.-“Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass

They Praised the gods.—

129

GEMS FROM DANIEL
over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his
god. Hab. 1:11.
“Nebuchadnezzar had lost his mind till he learned
the lesson that only the true creator God is worthy to be
praised. Belshazzar and his princes, representing the
whole kingdom, now lost their minds and praised the
gods who cannot see or hear. A man’s heart was given
to them. See the Scripture below.” PJ

another.’” Testimonies to Ministers, 435,436.
“Little did Belshazzar think that there was a
heavenly Witness to his idolatrous revelry; that a divine Watcher, unrecognized, looked upon the scene
of profanation, heard the sacrilegious mirth, beheld
the idolatry. But soon the uninvited Guest made
His presence felt. When the revelry was at its height a
bloodless hand came forth and traced upon the walls of
the palace characters that gleamed like fire—words
which, though unknown to the vast throng, were a portent of doom to the now conscience-stricken king and
his guests.
“Hushed was the boisterous mirth, while men and
women, seized with nameless terror, watched the
hand slowly tracing the mysterious characters. Before
them passed, as in panoramic view, the deeds of their
evil lives; they seemed to be arraigned before the
judgment bar of the eternal God, whose power they had
just defied. Where but a few moments before had
been hilarity and blasphemous witticism, were pallid faces and cries of fear. When God makes men
fear, they cannot hide the intensity of their terror.”
Prophets & Kings, 524.

“Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy
name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth’s sake. 2 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now
their God? 3 But our God is in the heavens: he hath
done whatsoever he hath pleased. 4 Their idols are
silver and gold, the work of men’s hands. 5 They have
mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they
see not: 6 They have ears, but they hear not: noses
have they, but they smell not: 7 They have hands,
but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not:
neither speak they through their throat. 8 They that
make them are like unto them; so is every one that
trusteth in them. 9 O Israel, trust thou in the LORD:
he is their help and their shield.” Ps. 115:1-9.
“No misfortune is so great as to become the
worshiper of a false god. No man is in such miserable darkness as he who has lost his way to heaven.
It seems that an infatuation is upon him, for he has a
false god. To turn this worship of the human, fallen,
corrupt beings of earth to the only true object of worship seems a hopeless task. There are in our time
continual repetitions of Belshazzar’s feast and Belshazzar’s worship; and Belshazzar’s sin is repeated
when the heart, which God requires to be given to Him
in pure and holy devotion, is turned away from Him to
worship a human being, and the lips are made to utter
words of praise and adoration which belong alone to
the Lord God of heaven.” Testimonies to Ministers,
435.

DANIEL 5:5
In the same hour came forth fingers of
a man’s hand, and wrote over against the
candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of
the king’s palace: and the king saw the
part of the hand that wrote.

“In that last night of mad folly, Belshazzar and
his lords had filled up the measure of their guilt and
the guilt of the Chaldean kingdom. No longer could
God’s restraining hand ward off the impending evil.”
Prophets & Kings, 531.
“Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to
pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine
heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall not sit as a
widow, neither shall I know the loss of children: 9 But
these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one
day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall
come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of
thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments. 10 For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and
thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast
said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. 11

In the Same Hour.—
“When in the very midst of their revelry, when
God was forgotten, when the carnal senses were inflamed, a thrill of terror rushed through every soul.
The cup that was being praised and idolized by the
king fell from his nerveless hand, and in the language
of the Spirit of God, his ‘countenance was changed,
and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his
loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against

130

DANIEL 5
“See how God struck terror upon Belshazzar and
his lords. God’s written word is enough to put the
proudest, boldest sinner in a fright. What we see of
God, the part of the hand that writes in the book of the
creatures, and in the book of the Scriptures, should fill
us with awful thoughts concerning that part which we
do not see. If this be the finger of God, what is his arm
when made bare?” Matthew Henry Commentary.

Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not
know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall
upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt
not know.” Isa 47:8-11
Fingers of a Man’s Hand Wrote.—
“But if I with the finger of God cast out devils,
no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you.”
Luke 11:20.
“But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God,
then the kingdom of God is come unto you.” Matt.
12:28.
“And he put forth the form of an hand, and
took me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit lifted
me up between the earth and the heaven, and
brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the
door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north;
where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which
provoketh to jealousy.” Ezekiel 8:3.

Wrote.—
“And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an
end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two
tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the
finger of God.” Exodus 31:18.
“These words the LORD spake unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of
the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice:
and he added no more. And he wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.” Deut. 5:22.

“A Watcher, who was unrecognized, but whose
presence was a power of condemnation, looked on
this scene of profanation. Soon the unseen and uninvited Guest made his presence felt. At the moment
when the sacrilegious revelry was at its height, a
bloodless hand came forth, and wrote words of doom
on the wall of the banqueting hall. Burning words
followed the movements of the hand. ‘Mene, Mene,
Tekel, Upharsin,’ was written in letters of flame.
Few were the characters traced by that hand on the wall
facing the king, but they showed that the power of God
was there.” Youth Instructor, 5/19/1898.

Over Against the Candlestick.—
“And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and
the candlestick over against the table on the side of
the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the
table on the north side.” Ex. 26:35.
“ ‘Opposite the lamp stand.’—Moffatt. It must
have required many candles, lamps and torches to light
up a banquet hall for thousands of diners. ‘The candlestick,’ indicates a definite one. It was the sevenbranched golden candlestick from the temple at Jerusalem which had been brought to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar when he depleted the temple of all its costly
furnishings. See Jer. 27:17-22; 2 Kings 25:13-18. This
candlestick was made of beaten gold and was five feet
high and three and a half feet wide and its standard was
engraved and ornamented with figures and flowers.
…It was being used to help light up the banquet hall
and it especially illuminated the wall opposite the king.
That was the most appropriate place for the message to
be written so that it could be clearly seen by all.”
Bunch, BOD, 62.

“A mysterious, bloodless hand was seen tracing
characters on the wall. These mysterious fingers belonging to and guided by an unseen power wrote the
fully as mysterious characters, which were unintelligible to the awe-stricken revelers. A light like the
lightning followed the forming of every letter, and
lingered there, making them living characters of
awful and terrible significance to all who looked
upon them. ‘Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.’ Their very
ignorance of those letters traced upon the wall, standing there flashing with light, sent terror to their sinful
hearts. Their aroused consciences interpreted these
letters to be a denunciation against them. Suspicion,
fear, and alarm took hold upon king and princes.” Testimonies to Ministers, 436.

“The words ‘Over against the candlestick’ remind
us of the sanctuary. Perhaps, Belshazzar brought out
the 7 branched candlestick as well. Over against the
candlestick was the table of shewbread, the bread of
the presence. The bread on the table symbolized the
presence of God, the bread of life, the Word. All
Scripture is inspired by the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit wrote these words Himself as a lesson for all nations,
and all individuals, for all time.” PJ.

“The mighty men and the lords of the kingdom
were assembled, and they ate and drank, and had a jovial time, but the True Witness was there, and their
profanity was recorded in the books of heaven. In
the midst of their revelry, a bloodless hand appeared, tracing mysterious characters upon the wall of
the palace, and their godless mirth was checked, and
terror and despair took its place.” R&H, 3/29/1892.

The Same Hand at the Crucifixion.—
“It was not the hand of the priest that rent from
top to bottom the gorgeous veil that divided the holy
from the most holy place. It was the hand of God.
When Christ cried out, ‘It is finished,’ the Holy

131

GEMS FROM DANIEL

that the joints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smote one against another.

Watcher that was an unseen guest at Belshazzar’s
feast pronounced the Jewish nation to be a nation
unchurched. The same hand that traced on the wall
the characters that recorded Belshazzar’s doom and
the end of the Babylonian kingdom, rent the veil of
the temple from top to bottom, opening a new and
living way for all, high and low, rich and poor, Jew and
Gentile.” 5BC, 1109.

The King’s Countenance Was Changed.—
“Belshazzar was the most terrified of them all.
He it was who above all others had been responsible
for the rebellion against God which that night had
reached its height in the Babylonian realm. In the
presence of the unseen Watcher, the representative
of Him whose power had been challenged and
whose name had been blasphemed, the king was
paralyzed with fear. Conscience was awakened.
‘The joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees
smote one against another.’ Belshazzar had impiously
lifted himself up against the God of heaven and had
trusted in his own might, not supposing that any would
dare say, ‘Why doest thou thus?’ but now he realized
that he must render an account of the stewardship entrusted him, and that for his wasted opportunities and
his defiant attitude he could offer no excuse.” Prophets & Kings, 524,527.

Lesson For the Youth.—
“Could the curtain be rolled back before the youth
who have never given their hearts to God, with others
who are Christians in name, but who are unrenewed in
heart and unsanctified in temper, they would see that
God’s eye is ever upon them, and they would feel as
disturbed as did the king of Babylon. They would realize that in every place, at every hour in the day, there
is a holy Watcher, who balances every account, whose
eye takes in the whole situation, whether it is one of
fidelity, or one of disloyalty and deception.
“We are never alone. We have a Companion,
whether we choose him or not. Remember, young men
and young women, that wherever you are, whatever
you are doing, God is there. To your every word and
action you have a witness—the holy, sin-hating God.
Nothing that is said or done or thought can escape
his infinite eye. Your words may not be heard by human ears, but they are heard by the Ruler of the universe. He reads the inward anger of the soul when the
will is crossed. He hears the expression of profanity.
In the deepest darkness and solitude he is there. No
one can deceive God; none can escape from their accountability to him.” Youth Instructor, 5/26/1898.

“Belshazzar was afraid. His conscience was
awakened. The fear and suspicion that always follow
the course of the guilty seized him. When God makes
men fear, they can not hide the intensity of their
terror. Alarm seized the great men of the kingdom.
Their blasphemous disrespect of sacred things was
changed in a moment. A frantic terror overcame all
self-control.
“…Belshazzar was awed and silenced. In a moment he was completely shorn of his strength, and
humbled as a child. He realized that he was at the
mercy of One greater than himself. He had been
making sport of sacred things. Now his conscience
was awakened. He realized that he had had the privilege of knowing and doing the will of God. The history of his grandfather stood out as vividly before him
as the writing on the wall.” Youth Instructor,
5/19/1898.

“In all the gatherings of young and old, there is
present an uninvited guest, a witness from heaven,
as there was a witness at the sacrilegious feast of
Belshazzar. Could those who dishonor God by their
words and actions, behold the writing in the record,
their countenances would change, as surely as did
the countenance of the king when he saw the part of
the bloodless hand that wrote on the wall of his palace. You may think that you are sinning in secret, or
you may be entirely indifferent to the matter; but for all
that, every dishonoring word spoken against God will
bring its sure reward.” Youth Instructor, 11/9/1893.

His Knees Smote One Against Another.—
“My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the
night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto
me.” Isaiah 21:4.

“The angels that were present at Belshazzar’s
idolatrous revelry stand beside you as you dishonor
your Redeemer. Sadly they turn away, grieved that
you should thus crucify him afresh, and put him to
open shame.” R&H, 11/24/1904.

DANIEL 5:7-9
The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to the
wise men of Babylon, Whosoever shall read
this writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet,
and have a chain of gold about his neck,
and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.

DANIEL 5:6
Then the king’s countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so
132

DANIEL 5
“The custom of honoring favorite public servants
of the crown by the granting of gold chains, decorations, or collars existed in Egypt many centuries earlier
(see on Gen. 41:42). The custom was common among
ancient nations.” 4SDABC, 803.

Then came in all the king’s wise men:
but they could not read the writing, nor
make known to the king the interpretation
thereof.
Then was king Belshazzar greatly
troubled, and his countenance was changed
in him, and his lords were astonied.

“And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand,
and put it upon Joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in
vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his
neck.” Genesis 41:42.

None Could Read the Handwriting on the Wall.—
“In vain the king tried to read the burning letters. But here was a secret he could not fathom, a
power he could neither understand nor gainsay. In
despair he turned to the wise men of his realm for help.
His wild cry rang out in the assembly, calling upon the
astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers to read
the writing. ‘Whosoever shall read this writing,’ he
promised, ‘and show me the interpretation thereof,
shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold
about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.’ But of no avail was his appeal to his trusted
advisers, with offers of rich awards. Heavenly wisdom cannot be bought or sold. ‘All the king’s wise
men ...could not read the writing, nor make known to
the king the interpretation thereof.’ They were no
more able to read the mysterious characters than had
been the wise men of a former generation to interpret
the dreams of Nebuchadnezzar.” Prophets & Kings,
527.

His Thoughts Trouble Him.—
“The king’s guilty conscience told him that he
had no reason to expect any good news from heaven.
God can, in a moment, make the heart of the stoutest
sinner to tremble; and there needs no more than to let
loose his own thoughts upon him; they will give him
trouble enough. No bodily pain can equal the inward
agony which sometimes seizes the sinner in the
midst of mirth, carnal pleasures, and worldly pomp.
Sometimes terrors cause a man to flee to Christ for
pardon and peace; but many cry out for fear of wrath,
who are not humbled for their sins, and who seek relief
by lying vanities. The ignorance and uncertainty concerning the Holy Scriptures, shown by many who call
themselves wise, only tend to drive sinners to despair,
as the ignorance of these wise men did.” Matthew
Henry Commentary.
“His hand grew stiff, for on the opposite wall
over against the lights was a bloodless hand, writing
words of an unknown language. The winecup fell to
the floor; the king’s countenance grew pale; he trembled violently, and his knees smote together until the
gorgeous girdle of his loins loosened and fell aside.
The loud laughter ceased, and the music died away.
Terror-stricken, a thousand guests looked from the face
of the king to the writing on the wall.” Haskell, SDP,
69.

“No flashes of supernatural light, no deafening
peals of thunder, announced the interference of God
in their impious revelries. A hand silently appeared, tracing mystic characters upon the wall. It
wrote over against the candlestick. Terror seized the
king, for his conscience accused him. Although he
could not read the writing, he knew it was no message
of peace and blessing that was traced in glittering characters upon his palace wall. The description the prophet gives of the effect of the king’s fear cannot be excelled in any particular. The king’s countenance was
changed, his heart failed him, pain seized upon him,
and so violent was his trembling that his knees smote
one against another. He forgot his boasting and revelry. He forgot his dignity, and he cried aloud for his
astrologers and soothsayers to solve the meaning of the
mysterious inscription.” Smith, DR, 90.

Wise Men of Babylon Could Not Help.—
“[Babylon] would make a desperate effort to save
herself by turning to her educators and wise men. ‘Let
now the astrologer, the star-gazers, the monthly
prognosticators, stand up and save thee from these
things, …Behold, they shall be as stubble.’ [Isaiah
47:23,24.] When the trial came, there was nothing in
all the realms of Babylon that could save her.”
Haskell, SDP, 34.

“As the words written in Aramaic now appear in
the Bible they can be read without difficulty. On that
night, however, the letters may have appeared in such
dazzling brightness that the Babylonian wise men
could not make out the individual letters. But even
though the words had been read, they were so cryptic
and so few that the exact meaning may not have been
clear.” Thiele, OSID, 46.

DANIEL 5:10,11
Now the queen by reason of the words
of the king and his lords came into the
banquet house: and the queen spake and
said, O king, live for ever: let not thy
thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed:

Clothed in Scarlet, Chain of Gold.—

133

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“The case of Daniel was presented before me.
Although he was a man of like passions with ourselves,
the pen of inspiration presents him as a faultless character. His life is given us as a bright example of what
man may become, even in this life, if he will make God
his strength and wisely improve the opportunities and
privileges within his reach. Daniel was an intellectual
giant; yet he was continually seeking for greater
knowledge, for higher attainments. Other young
men had the same advantages; but they did not, like
him, bend all their energies to seek wisdom—the
knowledge of God as revealed in His word and in His
works. Although Daniel was one of the world’s great
men, he was not proud nor self-sufficient. He felt the
need of refreshing his soul with prayer, and each day
found him in earnest supplication before God. He
would not be deprived of this privilege even when a
den of lions was opened to receive him if he continued
to pray.
“Daniel loved, feared, and obeyed God. Yet he
did not flee away from the world to avoid its corrupting
influence. In the providence of God he was to be in the
world yet not of the world. With all the temptations
and fascinations of court life surrounding him, he stood
in the integrity of his soul, firm as a rock in his adherence to principle. He made God his strength and was
not forsaken of Him in his time of greatest need.
“Daniel was true, noble, and generous. While
he was anxious to be at peace with all men, he
would not permit any power to turn him aside from
the path of duty. He was willing to obey those who
had rule over him, as far as he could do so consistently
with truth and righteousness; but kings and decrees
could not make him swerve from his allegiance to the
King of kings.” 4 Testimonies, 569,570.

There is a man in thy kingdom, in
whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in
the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of
the gods, was found in him; whom the king
Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say,
thy father, made master of the magicians,
astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers;
The Queen.—
“There was in the palace a woman who was wiser than them all—the queen of Belshazzar’s grandfather. In this emergency she addressed the king in
language that sent a ray of light into the darkness.”
Youth Instructor, 5/26/2898.
There is a Man in Thy Kingdom.—
“The queen mother remembered Daniel, who,
over half a century before, had made known to King
Nebuchadnezzar the dream of the great image and its
interpretation.” Prophets & Kings, 527,528.
“It appears from the circumstance here narrated,
that Daniel as a prophet of God had been lost sight of
at the court and palace. This was doubtless because he
had been absent at Shushan, in the province of Elam,
whither he had gone on the business of the kingdom.
(Daniel 8: 1, 2, 27.) Probably the invasion of the country by the Persian army compelled him to return to
Babylon at this time. The queen, who made known to
the king that there was such a person to whom appeal
could be made for knowledge in supernatural things, is
supposed to have been the queen mother, the daughter
of Nebuchadnezzar. She must have remembered the
wonderful counsel Daniel had given in her father’s
reign.” Smith, DR, 91.

Dissolving of Doubts.—
“But what is the reason of these doubts, this
darkness and unbelief? I answer, These men are not
right with God. They are not dealing honestly and
truly with their own souls. They have neglected to cultivate personal piety. They have not separated themselves from all selfishness, and from sin and sinners.
They have failed to study the self-denying, selfsacrificing life of our Lord, and have failed to imitate
his example of purity, devotion, and self-sacrifice. The
sin which easily besets has been strengthened by indulgence. By their own negligence and sin, they have
separated themselves from the company of the Divine
Teacher, and he is a day’s journey in advance of them.
They have for their company, the indolent, slothful,
backsliding, unbelieving, irreverent, unthankful, unholy, and their attendants, the evil angels. What marvel
that such are in darkness, or that they have doubts
of doctrine? “If any man will do His will, he shall
know of the doctrine.” [John 7:17.] He shall know
of a certainty in regard to this matter. This promise
should put to flight all doubts and questionings. It
is separation from Christ that brings doubts. He is

Nebuchadnezzar, thy Father.—
“Nebuchadnezzar is here called Belshazzar’s father, according to the then common custom of calling
any paternal ancestor father, and any male descendant son. Nebuchadnezzar was in reality his
grandfather.” Smith, DR, 91.

DANIEL 5:12
Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and
knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were
found in the same Daniel, whom the king
named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be
called, and he will shew the interpretation.
Daniel’s Character and Abilities Remembered.—

134

DANIEL 5
followed by the earnest, honest, true, faithful, humble,
meek, and pure, whom holy angels, clothed with the
panoply of heaven, are sanctifying, enlightening, purifying, and guarding; for they are heaven-bound.
“No greater evidence need be asked that a person is at a great distance from Jesus, and living in
neglect of secret prayer, neglecting personal piety,
than the fact that he thus talks doubts and unbelief
because his surroundings are not favorable. Such
persons have not the pure, true, undefiled religion of
Christ. They have a spurious article, which the refining
process will utterly consume as dross.” Gospel Workers(1892), 115.

“Aramaic, qitrin, literally, ‘knots.’ The word was
later used as a magical term in Syria and Arabia. Here,
the meaning seems to be ‘difficult tasks,’ or ‘problems’
(RSV).” 4SDABC, 804.

“He related his experience with such simplicity
and candor that many who had been greatly prejudiced
were affected to tears. The Spirit of God was felt in his
words and seen upon his countenance. With a holy
exaltation he boldly declared that he had taken the
word of God as his counselor; that his doubts had
been swept away and his faith confirmed. With earnestness he invited his brother ministers, church members, sinners, and infidels to examine the Bible for
themselves, and charged them to let no man turn them
from the purpose of ascertaining what was the truth.”
Life Sketches, 55.

DANIEL 5:13-16
Then was Daniel brought in before the
king. And the king spake and said unto
Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of
the children of the captivity of Judah,
whom the king my father brought out of
Jewry?
I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light and
understanding and excellent wisdom is
found in thee.
And now the wise men, the astrologers,
have been brought in before me, that they
should read this writing, and make known
unto me the interpretation thereof: but
they could not shew the interpretation of
the thing:
And I have heard of thee, that thou
canst make interpretations, and dissolve
doubts: now if thou canst read the writing,
and make known to me the interpretation
thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet,
and have a chain of gold about thy neck,
and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.

“There are many who complain of their doubts,
who lament that they have no assurance of their connection with God. This is often attributable to the fact
that they are doing nothing in God’s cause. Let them
seek earnestly to help and bless others, and their
doubts and despondency will disappear.”
5Testimonies, 395.

Then Daniel Was Brought In.—
“Daniel is remembered, and brought to the
banqueting hall. The servant of God sees the evidences of the degradation and idolatry of the feast, so
suddenly brought to an end; but Daniel was not disconcerted in the presence of the king and his lords.” Signs,
7/20/1891.

“There is but one course for those to pursue who
honestly desire to be freed from doubts. Instead of
questioning and caviling concerning that which they do
not understand, let them give heed to the light which
already shines upon them, and they will receive greater
light. Let them do every duty which has been made
plain to their understanding, and they will be enabled to understand and perform those of which they
are now in doubt.” Great Controversy, 528.

Art Thou That Daniel?—
“Making an effort to brace himself, and to show
his authority, Belshazzar said: [Verses 13-16 quoted].
Daniel was not awed by the king’s appearance, nor
confused or intimidated by his words.” Youth Instructor, 5/26/1898.

“You need to bring your soul into close communion with God by earnest prayer mixed with living faith.
Every prayer offered in faith lifts the suppliant
above discouraging doubts and human passions.
Prayer gives strength to renew the conflict with the
powers of darkness, to bear trials patiently, and to endure hardness as good soldiers of Christ.” Gospel
Workers, 320

“When Daniel came in, the king inquired if the
prophet was of the children of the captivity of Judah.
Thus it seems to have been ordered that, while the
princes were holding impious revelry in honor of their
false gods, a servant of the true God, one whom they
were holding in captivity, was called in to pronounce
the merited judgment upon their wicked course.”
Smith, DR, 91.

“Daniel had God’s D.D. degree. Daniel was not a
‘Doctor of Doubts.’ Doubts never come by truth, but
always by its lack.” Burnside, DPUF, 89.

135

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Let Thy Gifts Be to Thyself.—
“Daniel slighted the offer of reward. He spoke to
Belshazzar as to a condemned criminal. We should
despise all the gifts and rewards this world can give,
did we see, as we may by faith, its end hastening on;
but let us do our duty in the world, and do it all the real
service we can.” Matthew Henry Commentary.

“Daniel = ‘God is my judge’ ” Strong’s Lexicon,
Hebrew #1840.
“Before that terror-stricken throng, Daniel, unmoved by the promises of the king, stood in the quiet
dignity of a servant of the Most High, not to speak
words of flattery, but to interpret a message of
doom.” Prophets & Kings, 527.

“Daniel first disclaimed the idea of being influenced by such motives as governed the soothsayers and
astrologers. He said, ‘Let thy rewards be to another.’
He wished it distinctly understood that he did not
enter upon the work of interpreting this matter on
account of the offer of gifts and rewards.” Smith,
DR, 93.

Experience of Daniel Like Joseph.—
“And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we
find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit
of God is? 39 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none
so discreet and wise as thou art: 40 Thou shalt be
over my house, and according unto thy word shall all
my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater
than thou. 41 And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I
have set thee over all the land of Egypt. 42 And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
Joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine
linen, and put a gold chain about his neck.” Genesis
41:38-42.

“Daniel sees Babylon in its last gasp. Therefore
he despises its gifts. As we see modern Babylon is its
last gasp let its gifts be to others. We must keep our
eyes on better gifts.” Burnside, DPUF, 89.
“It was also a refusal to have a prominent part
in such a corrupt nation that it had insulted God
and sinned away its day of grace. He had gladly
served under Nebuchadnezzar, but refused the same
position under Belshazzar, his grandson. He told the
king that his obedience to duty was not in the least affected by the offer of reward.” Bunch, BOD, 66.

Thou Shalt Be the Third Ruler in the Kingdom.—
“Why the ‘third’ position? It all becomes clear
when we understand the political situation in Babylon
at the time. …The official king was Nabonidus, Belshazzar’s father. But because of his extended absence
from the kingdom he had made Belshazzar coregent.” Shea, DARG, 58.

“That night Daniel refused to receive the third position in Babylon. But the next day, he did accept
the second position in Medo-Persia. See Daniel 6:13.” PJ

“Since Nabonidus was king of Babylon from
556 to 539, among the years mentioned in the Nabonidus chronicle when he was at Tema and absent from
Babylon were his 7th year, 549; his 9th year, 547; his
10th year, 546; and his 11th year, 545. In his 17th year,
however, 539 BC, the king according to the Nabonidus
chronicle was back in Babylon. That was the year
when Cyrus captured Babylon, and that would be the
year of Belshazzar’s feast. The Chronicle, however,
reports the interesting detail that in the month of Tishri
(October) Nabonidus fled from Babylon. That was
only a few weeks before the troops of Cyrus entered
the city. That would leave Belshazzar on the throne in
Babylon the night that the city fell. Nabonidus was
the first ruler, Belshazzar the second, and Daniel
would be the third.” Thiele, OSID, 45.

DANIEL 5:18-23
O thou king, the most high God gave
Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and
majesty, and glory, and honour:
And for the majesty that he gave him,
all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he
would he slew; and whom he would he kept
alive; and whom he would he set up; and
whom he would he put down.
But when his heart was lifted up, and
his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they
took his glory from him:
And he was driven from the sons of
men; and his heart was made like the
beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild
asses: they fed him with grass like oxen,
and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God

DANIEL 5:17
Then Daniel answered and said before
the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and
give thy rewards to another; yet I will read
the writing unto the king, and make known
to him the interpretation.
136

DANIEL 5
against the God of heaven and earth. He had trusted in
his own arm, not supposing that any would dare to say,
‘Why doest thou this?’ But as the mysterious hand
traced letters on the wall of his palace, Belshazzar was
awed and silenced. In a moment he was completely
shorn of his strength, and humbled as a child. He realized that he was at the mercy of One greater than himself. He had been making sport of sacred things.
Now -his conscience was awakened. He realized that
he had had the privilege of knowing and doing the will
of God. The history of his grandfather stood out as
vividly before him as the writing on the wall.” Youth
Instructor, May 19, 1898.

ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he
appointeth over it whomsoever he will.
And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast
not humbled thine heart, though thou
knewest all this;
But hast lifted up thyself against the
Lord of heaven; and they have brought the
vessels of his house before thee, and thou,
and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou
hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of
brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not,
nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose
hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, hast thou not glorified:
Then was the part of the hand sent
from him; and this writing was written.
Daniel Rebukes Belshazzar.—
“The prophet first reminded Belshazzar of
matters with which he was familiar, but which had
not taught him the lesson of humility that might
have saved him. He spoke of Nebuchadnezzar’s sin
and fall, and of the Lord’s dealings with him—the dominion and glory bestowed upon him, the divine judgment for his pride, and his subsequent acknowledgment
of the power and mercy of the God of Israel; and then
in bold and emphatic words he rebuked Belshazzar
for his great wickedness. He held the king’s sin up
before him, showing him the lessons he might have
learned but did not. Belshazzar had not read aright
the experience of his grandfather, nor heeded the warning of events so significant to himself. The opportunity
of knowing and obeying the true God had been given
him, but had not been taken to heart, and he was about
to reap the consequence of his rebellion. [Verses 22-24
quoted.]” Prophets & Kings, 529,530.

Daniel Interprets the Words of the Holy Spirit.

“Daniel reviewed the past, bringing before Belshazzar the light which he had received from the history and judgment of Nebuchadnezzar. God had given
his grandfather a kingdom, majesty, glory, and honor;
but instead of feeling gratitude to God, Nebuchadnezzar had taken the glory to himself, and his mind was
lifted up and his heart hardened. God deposed him
from his throne, and took his glory from him. Daniel
faithfully repeated the story of Nebuchadnezzar’s renown and degradation, and set forth the mercy of God
in granting him another opportunity of acknowledging
God as the Supreme Ruler in heaven and earth, the One
to whom kings and nations owed allegiance. [Verses
22,23 quoted.]
“…The hand of God will awaken the sinner as it
did Belshazzar, but with many it will be too late to repent. The ruler of Babylon had riches and honor, and
in his haughty self-indulgence he had lifted himself up

God Gave Nebuchadnezzar.—
“All our powers are the gift of God. He has endowed us with reason, and he intends that we shall use
this power that we may understand our situation and
glorify him. If we use our abilities simply for the glorification of self, we are not fulfilling the will of God.
God gave Nebuchadnezzar his reason, but the king
used his ability to exalt himself. He walked about in
the great city, and said, ‘Is not this great Babylon, that I
have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my majesty?’ He forgot the honor of God, and God removed his reason, and
he was sent out to dwell with the beasts of the field, to
eat grass as an ox. The relation of this experience of
Nebuchadnezzar is to show us what a man will become if God removes his precious endowment of
reason. God can take away the powers of the mind,

137

GEMS FROM DANIEL
shall be upon him.” Numbers 15:27-31.

and leave nothing in the breast of a man but the
instinct of a beast of the field.” Signs, 9/9/1889.

“Through the folly and weakness of Belshazzar,
the grandson of Nebuchadnezzar, proud Babylon was
soon to fall. Admitted in his youth to a share in kingly
authority, Belshazzar gloried in his power and lifted up
his heart against the God of heaven. Many had been
his opportunities to know the divine will and to understand his responsibility of rendering obedience thereto.
He had known of his grandfather’s banishment, by
the decree of God, from the society of men; and he
was familiar with Nebuchadnezzar’s conversion and
miraculous restoration. But Belshazzar allowed the
love of pleasure and self-glorification to efface the lessons that he should never have forgotten. He wasted
the opportunities graciously granted him, and neglected to use the means within his reach for becoming
more fully acquainted with truth. That which Nebuchadnezzar had finally gained at the cost of untold
suffering and humiliation, Belshazzar passed by
with indifference.” Prophets & Kings, 522,523.

“Reason was never given man to lead him to
suppose that he can climb higher than the Source
from which that reason flows. God gave man his
reasoning powers, and he can remove them, as in the
case of Nebuchadnezzar, when they are not used to his
glory. In Noah’s day the inhabitants of the earth
sought out many inventions. They were wise to do
evil. The imaginations of their hearts were only evil
continually, and God swept them from the face of the
earth.” Signs, 1/28/1897.
Nebuchadnezzar Thy Father.—
“Sometimes the book of Daniel refers to Nebuchadnezzar as the ‘father’ of Belshazzar. This is not an
inaccuracy inasmuch as in Semitic thought the term
‘father’ could also denote a grandfather or some
more distant male ancestor, or even a predecessor in
office.” BRI,2SOD,85.

“Nebuchadnezzar was insane for seven years, at
the end of which he lifted up his eyes to heaven and
praised the true Creator God. His few remaining days
were totally opposite in character from what they had
previous been in Nebuchadnezzar’s life. He no longer
partied, played sports, gambled, drank alcohol, joined
in idol worship or heathen festivals. In the minds of
many onlookers—those with whom Belshazzar surrounded himself, Nebuchadnezzar had gone off the
deep end. Now they thought he was really insane.
And so Belshazzar plunged the nation back into its
original customs of idol worship and riotous feasting, thinking that this was normal and sane, when
really, drunk with wine that came to his lips from holy
vessels, and drunk with the more powerful liquors of
Babylonian teachings, he was insane.
“Another lesson: The tree in Nebuchadnezzar’s
dream represented not only Nebuchadnezzar, but also
the kingdom of Babylon itself, and now it was experiencing the broader fulfillment of that dream.
“ ‘Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin
daughter of Babylon,
‘Sit on the ground: there is no throne. . . .
‘Sit thou silent,
‘And get thee into darkness, O daughter of the
Chaldeans;
‘For thou shalt no more be called, The lady of
kingdoms.” Isaiah 47:1-5.” PJ.

Though Thou Knewest All This.—
“Nebuchadnezzar had recorded the experience
that humbled his pride and placed it in the archives of
the empire for the very purpose of preventing his
successors from repeating his mistake. Belshazzar
had read Nebuchadnezzar’s own story of his humiliation and conversion or at least knew about it. His sin
therefore was not one of ignorance; it was the sin or
presumption. With bold design and rash confidence
he had defiantly violated known duty, and for him
there was no excuse. His sin is incurable and therefore
no appeal is made for him to seek to remedy the disease. Judgments mingled with mercy brought repentance and victory to Nebuchadnezzar because his was a
sin of ignorance, but Belshazzar’s high-handed rebellion had gone too far to be corrected with judgments.
The sin of presumption leads to fatal results. See
Numbers 15:27-30. The former king had an honest
heart and he repented when he saw the light. Belshazzar had the light but stubbornly refused to heed its
warning.” Bunch, BOD, 66,67.
“And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he
shall bring a she goat of the first year for a sin offering.
28 And the priest shall make an atonement for the
soul that sinneth ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the LORD, to make an atonement for
him; and it shall be forgiven him. 29 Ye shall have
one law for him that sinneth through ignorance, both
for him that is born among the children of Israel, and
for the stranger that sojourneth among them. 30 But
the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether
he be born in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the LORD; and that soul shall be cut off
from among his people. 31 Because he hath despised
the word of the LORD, and hath broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity

But Hath Lifted Up Thyself Against the Lord.—
“Daniel is before the king and his princes as the
prosecuting attorney for the kingdom of heaven and
arraigns them before the supreme tribunal of men and
nations. There is no counsel for the defense, because
there is no defense to make. Their very terror and consternation witness to an acknowledge guilt. It is not a
trial. The nation and its rulers had been on trial since

138

DANIEL 5
the death of Nebuchadnezzar. Now they are brought
before the judgment-seat of the Arbiter of nations
to receive sentence.” Bunch, BOD, 67.

who will listen to his advances, and whose ears will be
pleased with the outpouring of lavish words of affection, of adoration, of endearment, is an adulteress and a
harlot.
“No misfortune is so great as to become the
worshiper of a false god. No man is in such miserable
darkness as he who has lost his way to heaven. It
seems that an infatuation is upon him, for he has a false
god. To turn this worship of the human, fallen, corrupt
beings of earth to the only true object of worship seems
a hopeless task. There are in our time continual repetitions of Belshazzar’s feast and Belshazzar’s worship;
and Belshazzar's sin is repeated when the heart,
which God requires to be given to Him in pure and
holy devotion, is turned away from Him to worship
a human being, and the lips are made to utter words
of praise and adoration which belong alone to the
Lord God of heaven. When the affections God claims
to cluster about Him are made to center upon earthly
objects—a woman, a man, or any earthly things—God
is superseded by the object which enchains the senses
and affections, and the powers which were solemnly
dedicated to God are bestowed upon a human being
who is defiled with sin. Men and women who once
bore the image of God, but are lost by disobedience
and sin, He means to restore again through their becoming partakers of the divine nature, having escaped
the corruption which is in the world through lust. And
when men and women devote their God-given powers
to unholy purposes, to minister to lust, God is dishonored, and the actors are ruined.
“When engaged in man-and-woman worship, remember that there is the same witness present as at the
feast of Belshazzar. On that occasion, when in the very
midst of their revelry, when God was forgotten, when
the carnal senses were inflamed, a thrill of terror
rushed through every soul. The cup that was being
praised and idolized by the king fell from his nerveless
hand, and in the language of the Spirit of God, his
‘countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed,
and his knees smote one against another.’ A mysterious, bloodless hand was seen tracing characters on
the wall. These mysterious fingers belonging to and
guided by an unseen power wrote the fully as mysterious characters, which were unintelligible to the awestricken revelers. A light like the lightning followed
the forming of every letter, and lingered there, making
them living characters of awful and terrible significance to all who looked upon them. ‘Mene, mene,
tekel, upharsin.’ Their very ignorance of those letters
traced upon the wall, standing there flashing with light,
sent terror to their sinful hearts. Their aroused consciences interpreted these letters to be a denunciation
against them. Suspicion, fear, and alarm took hold
upon king and princes.
“Belshazzar, awed by this representation of God’s
power, showing that they had a witness, though they
knew it not, had had great opportunities of knowing the

Then Was the Part of the Hand Sent.-“Little did Belshazzar think that an unseen
Watcher beheld his idolatrous revelry. But there is
nothing said or done that is not recorded on the books
of heaven. The mystic characters traced by the
bloodless hand testify that God is a witness to all we
do, and that He is dishonored by feasting and reveling. We cannot hide anything from God. We cannot
escape from our accountability to Him. Wherever we
are and whatever we do, we are responsible to Him
whose we are by creation and by redemption.” (Manuscript 50, 1893). Temperance, 49.
“The fascination of the club room, the suppers,
and the world-loving associates, has led, as did Belshazzar’s feast, to forgetfulness of God and dishonoring of His name.
“There is a blindness upon human minds that
is willful. Jesus said, ‘This people’s heart is waxed
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes
they have closed; lest at any time they should see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I
should heal them’ (Matthew 13:15).” 2 Selected Messages, 135.
Belshazzar’s Sin Repeated.—
“Belshazzar, while engaged in his sacrilegious
feast, was not aware that he had guests he had not invited. The God of heaven heard the praises bestowed
upon vessels of gold and silver. He saw the desecration of that which had been dedicated to Him by
holy consecration applied to profane and licentious
purposes. It is a truth which should make every one
of us weep, that those living in these last days, upon
whom the ends of the world are come, are far more
guilty than was Belshazzar. This is possible in many
ways. When men have taken upon themselves the
vows of consecration, to devote all their powers to the
sacred service of God; when they occupy the position
of expositors of Bible truth, and have received the solemn charge; when God and angels are summoned as
witnesses to the solemn dedication of soul, body, and
spirit to God’s service—then shall these men who minister in a most holy office desecrate their God-given
powers to unholy purposes? Shall the sacred vessel,
whom God is to use for a high and holy work, be
dragged from its lofty, controlling sphere to administer
to debasing lust? Is not this idol worship of the most
degrading kind?—the lips uttering praises and adoring
a sinful human being, pouring forth expressions of ravishing tenderness and adulation which belong alone to
God—the powers given to God in solemn consecration
administering to a harlot; for any woman who will allow the addresses of another man than her husband,

139

GEMS FROM DANIEL
works of the living God, and His power, and of doing
His will. He had been privileged with much light. His
grandfather, Nebuchadnezzar, had been warned of his
danger in forgetting God and glorifying himself. Belshazzar had a knowledge of his banishment from the
society of men, and his association with the beasts of
the field; and these facts, which ought to have been a
lesson to him, he disregarded, as if they had never occurred; and he went on repeating the sins of his grandfather. He dared to commit the crimes which brought
God’s judgments upon Nebuchadnezzar. He was condemned, not alone that he himself was doing wickedly, but that he had not availed himself of opportunities and capabilities, if cultivated, of being right.
“God will not condemn any at the judgment because they honestly believed a lie, or conscientiously
cherished error; but it will be because they neglected
the opportunities of making themselves acquainted
with truth. The infidel will be condemned, not because
he was an infidel, but because he did not take advantage of the means God has placed within his reach
to enable him to become a Christian.
“So it will be found in the judgment. God’s reproof has been plainly uttered against men and women
who have sinned by corrupting their bodies and defiling their souls by licentiousness. They have the warnings to others placed in similar circumstances, who
have been overcome by the tempter, and they know
that the displeasure of God rested upon them. They
have the example of Joseph and Daniel, who feared
God. Joseph, when tempted, looked up to heaven, and
realized that God’s eye was upon him, and he exclaimed, ‘How can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God?’ He also urged his duty to his master,
who trusted him so fully, as a reason against it.
“God has flashed light upon the pathway of all.
Reproofs and warnings and cautions are given to individuals in similar circumstances, and God has expressed condemnation of sin in all its forms. The sin of
licentiousness is plainly rebuked and condemned. Men
and women will be judged according to the light given
them of God. Lessons that have been neglected, become awful judgments. The warnings of God, neglected, from which men turn to a course of their own
choosing, will afford no practical lessons of instruction.
These warnings will prove their condemnation in the
judgment. The only safety for anyone is to turn to a
practical account for himself every lesson that is given
to another. When the message is given, then his individual duty begins.” Testimonies to Ministers, 434438.

message—that doctrine that differed from their ideas
of truth; and I was told there was a witness in every
room as surely as the witness was in Belshazzar’s
palace at that festival, mingled with the praise of
idols and of wine. The angel on that occasion traced
the characters over against the walls of the palace; so
there was a witness writing in the books of heaven the
unkind speeches of those who knew not what manner
of spirit they were of.” 1888 Materials, 517.
Gods That See, Hear Not.—
“Sinners are pleased with gods that neither see,
nor hear, nor know; [no judgment] but they will be
judged by One to whom all things are open.” Matthew
Henry Commentary.
“For the LORD will judge his people, and he
will repent himself concerning his servants. 15 The
idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of
men's hands. 16 They have mouths, but they speak
not; eyes have they, but they see not; 17 They have
ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in
their mouths. 18 They that make them are like unto
them: so is every one that trusteth in them.” Psalm
135:14-18.
Then Was the Part of the Hand Sent From Him.—
“To the last ruler of Babylon, as in type to its
first, had come the sentence of the divine Watcher: ‘O
king… to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed
from thee.’” Prophets & Kings, 533.

DANIEL 5:25-28
And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
This is the interpretation of the thing:
MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom,
and finished it.
TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.
PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and
given to the Medes and Persians.
Daniel Interprets the Writing.—
“Turning to the Heaven-sent message on the wall,
the prophet read, ‘Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin.’ The
hand that had traced the characters was no longer
visible, but these four words were still gleaming
forth with terrible distinctness; and now with bated
breath the people listened while the aged prophet declared: [Verses 26-28 quoted.]
“In that last night of mad folly, Belshazzar and
his lords had filled up the measure of their guilt and the
guilt of the Chaldean kingdom. No longer could
God’s restraining hand ward off the impending evil.

“At that meeting, in rooms where the brethren
were accommodated and congregated there was not
much praying, though some rooms were an exception.
I was taken to one room and bade to hear the conversation of men who were in the position regarded as
mouthpiece for God. I heard the jesting, the sarcastic remarks in regard to the messengers and the

140

DANIEL 5
Through manifold providences, God had sought to
teach them reverence for His law. ‘We would have
healed Babylon,’ He declared of those whose judgment was now reaching unto heaven, ‘but she is not
healed.’ Jeremiah 51:9. Because of the strange perversity of the human heart, God had at last found it necessary to pass the irrevocable sentence. Belshazzar was
to fall, and his kingdom was to pass into other hands.”
Prophets & Kings, 530.

“The building of the character of the kingdom of
Babylon was finished. It was sealed in the state as it
was. All the light that could be given to it, was given.
God could do no more. Another kingdom would arise
and have its period of probation.” PJ.

“In this inscription each word stands for a short
sentence. Mene, ‘numbered;’ Tekel, ‘weighed;’
Upharsin, from the root peres, ‘divided.’ God whom
thou hast defied, hath thy kingdom in His own hands,
and hath numbered its days and finished its course just
at the time thou thoughtest it at the height of its prosperity. Thou, who hast lifted up thy heart in pride as
the great one of the earth, art weighed, and found lighter than vanity. Thy kingdom, which thou didst dream
was to stand forever, is divided between the foes already waiting at thy gates.” Smith, DR, 94.

“Oh that my grief were throughly weighed, and
my calamity laid in the balances together!” Job 6:2.
“Let me be weighed in an even balance that God
may know mine integrity.” Job 31:6.

Weighed in the Balances and Found Wanting.—
“The way of the just is uprightness: thou, most
upright, dost weigh the path of the just.” Isaiah 26:7.

“God is weighing our characters, our conduct,
and our motives in the balances of the sanctuary. It
will be a fearful thing to be pronounced wanting in
love and obedience by our Redeemer, who died upon
the cross to draw our hearts unto Him. God has bestowed upon us great and precious gifts. He has given
us light and a knowledge of His will, so that we need
not err or walk in darkness. To be weighed in the
balance and found wanting in the day of final settlement and rewards will be a fearful thing, a terrible mistake which can never be corrected. Young
friends, shall the book of God be searched in vain for
your names?” 3 Testimonies, 370.

Mene, Mene.—
“It is interesting that this word was repeated.
This can be meaningful in terms of the two rulers—
Nabonidus and Belshazzar—who ruled together on the
same throne at the time. One would not outlive the
other and reign on; the reign of both was to come to
an end at the same time—Belshazzar through death,
and Nabonidus through defeat and exile.” Shea,
DARG, 61.

“I have seen an angel standing with scales in his
hands weighing the thoughts and interest of the
people of God, especially the young. In one scale
were the thoughts and interest tending heavenward;
in the other were the thoughts and interest tending
to earth. And in this scale were thrown all the reading
of storybooks, thoughts of dress and show, vanity,
pride, etc. Oh, what a solemn moment! the angels of
God standing with scales, weighing the thoughts of His
professed children—those who claim to be dead to the
world and alive to God. The scale filled with thoughts
of earth, vanity, and pride quickly went down, notwithstanding weight after weight rolled from the scale.
The one with the thoughts and interest tending to
heaven went quickly up as the other went down,
and oh, how light it was! I can relate this as I saw it;
but never can I give the solemn and vivid impression
stamped upon my mind, as I saw the angel with the
scales weighing the thoughts and interest of the people
of God. Said the angel: ‘Can such enter heaven? No,
no, never. Tell them the hope they now possess is
vain, and unless they speedily repent, and obtain salvation, they must perish.’” 1 Testimonies, 124,125.

God Hath Numbered Thy Kingdom.—
“Therefore will I number you to the sword, and
ye shall all bow down to the slaughter: because when I
called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not
hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that
wherein I delighted not.” Isaiah 65:12.
“In the great conflict between faith and unbelief,
the whole Christian world will be involved. All will
take sides. Some may not apparently engage in the
conflict on either side. They may not appear to take
sides against truth, but they will not come out boldly
for Christ, through fear of losing property or suffering
reproach. All such are numbered with the enemies
of Christ; for Christ says, ‘He that is not with me is
against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth
abroad.’ R&H, 2/7/1893.
And Finished It.—
“And now have I given all these lands into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also to
serve him. And all nations shall serve him, and his
son, and his son's son, until the very time of his land
come: and then many nations and great kings shall
serve themselves of him.” Jeremiah 27:6,7.

“God is represented as weighing all men, their
words, their deeds, their motives, that which determines character. ‘The Lord is a God of knowledge,
and by Him actions are weighed.’ ‘Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to
be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter

141

GEMS FROM DANIEL
we are altogether wanting. We know that there is no
one, however earnestly he may be striving to do his
best, who can say, ‘I have no sin.’ He who would say
this would be under a dangerous deception. ‘If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
is not in us.’ How then can we escape the charge,
‘Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting’? We are to look to Christ. At infinite cost he has
covenanted to be our representative in the heavenly
courts, our advocate before God.
“Weighed in the balances, and found wanting.
Man, weighed against God’s holy law, is found wanting. We are enlightened by the precepts of the law, but
no man can by them be justified. Weighed and found
wanting is our inscription by nature. But Christ is
our Mediator, and accepting him as our Saviour, we
may claim the promise, ‘Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.’”
R&H, 3/8/1906.

than vanity.’ ‘Thou, most upright, dost weigh the
path of the just.’ ‘All the ways of a man are clean in
his own eyes; but the Lord weigheth the spirits.’
Important lessons are suggested to us in these scriptures. There is not a thought or motive in the heart that
God is not acquainted with. He sees all as clearly as if
it stood out registered in living characters, and He
weighs individual motives and actions. … God’s claim
is placed in one scale, and man’s character in the other;
and by the balances of the heavenly sanctuary every
man's doom is fixed for eternity.” Testimonies to Ministers, 438,439.
“It is for the eternal interest of every one to search
his own heart, and to improve every God-given faculty.
Let all remember that there is not a motive in the
heart of any man that the Lord does not clearly see.
The motives of each one are weighed as carefully as
if the destiny of the human agent depended upon
this one result. We need a connection with divine
power, that we may have an increase of clear light and
an understanding of how to reason from cause to effect.
We need to have the powers of the understanding cultivated, by our being partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through
lust. Let each one consider carefully the solemn truth,
God in heaven is true, and there is not a design, however intricate, nor a motive, however carefully hidden,
that He does not clearly understand. He reads the secret devisings of every heart. Men may plan out
crooked actions for the future, thinking that God does
not understand; but in that great day when the books
are opened, and every man is judged by the things
written in the books, those actions will appear as
they are.” 3BC, 1160.

“There is a Watcher by their [Christian physicians’] side, as surely as there was a Watcher at that
sacrilegious feast of Belshazzar, when men praised the
gods of silver and gold and drank from the sacred vessels of the temple of God. When men take honor to
themselves, they are dishonoring God. Whenever one
by any action leads men to be forgetful of God, or to
neglect the plain injunctions of His word, the unseen
Witness testifies, as in the writing on the walls of the
palace, ‘Thou art weighed in the balances, and art
found wanting.’ Daniel 5:27.” Medical Ministry, 151.
“Then I was shown a company who were howling
in agony. On their garments was written in large
characters, ‘Thou art weighed in the balance, and
found wanting.’ I asked who this company were.
The angel said, ‘These are they who have once kept
the Sabbath and have given it up.’ I heard them cry
with a loud voice, ‘We have believed in Thy coming,
and taught it with energy.’ And while they were speaking, their eyes would fall upon their garments and see
the writing, and then they would wail aloud. I saw that
they had drunk of the deep waters, and fouled the residue with their feet—trodden the Sabbath underfoot—
and that was why they were weighed in the balance and
found wanting.” Early Writings, 37.

“To be sons of God means more than many dream
of, because they have not been converted. Men are
weighed in the balance and found wanting when
they are living in the practice of any known sin. It is
the privilege of every son of God to be a true Christian
moment by moment; then he has all heaven enlisted on
his side. He has Christ abiding in his heart by faith.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 440,441.
“My brethren, day and night, and especially in the
night season, this matter is presented to me. ‘Tekel;
Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.’ How do we stand before God at this time? We
may be sincere, and yet greatly deceived. Saul of Tarsus was sincere when he was persecuting the church of
Christ. ‘I verily thought,’ he declared, ‘that I ought to
do many things contrary to the name of Jesus.’ He was
sincere in his ignorance. But after Christ had revealed
himself to him, he declared, ‘What things were gain to
me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yea doubtless, and
I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.’
“If we are not cleansed by the blood of Christ,

Peres: Divided & Given To Medes and Persians.—
“The ‘u’ in Upharsen is an Aramaic conjunction
meaning ‘and,’ and when detached from upharsin the
pharsen becomes parsen (RSV ‘parsin’}. Parsen is the
plural of peres and means ‘pieces.’ The message may
thus be interpreted as ‘numbered, numbered, weighed,
pieces.’” Cox, Daniel, 66.
“Upharsin = and pieces, or, and Persians. The letter “u” is the Hebrew word for “and.” The word “peres” means portion. Here the plural noun means “pieces” and the same letters can also stand for Persians.

142

DANIEL 5
Daniel gave the interpretation of the message …UPharsin: and your kingdom has been divided and given
to the Medes and Persians.” Thiele, OSID, 47.

That Night.—
“Belshazzar and his father Nabonidus had deliberately chosen other gods to worship. They worshipped not only Marduk, the regular and prominent
god of Babylon, but Sin, the moon god as well. Nabonidus was a special devotee of this god. He selected
temples of the moon god to rebuild and refurbish, in
Syria as well as in Babylonia. He even built a temple
to Sin in Arabia.
“It is interesting to see this connection with the
moon god in the light of events as they occurred in
Babylon that October night the city was taken. The
final Persian assault on Babylon began on the night of
the fifteenth of a lunar month such as Tishri, a full
moon would be shining. Thus Babylon fell when
Sin, the moon god, was at his fullest and most powerful. Although elevated by Nabonidus to a position of
prominence in the Babylonian pantheon, the moon god
had no power against the decree of Yahweh, the true
God, who had predicted the overthrow of Babylon by
the Medes and Persians. God’s power was shown to be
sovereign over all of the elements of nature and man.
Nothing could turn Him aside from the accomplishment of His purposes—certainly not the power (weakness!) of the false god of the moon.
“These events display another interesting detail in
terms of the calendar. The month of Tishri was the
seventh month of both the Jewish and the Babylonian
calendar. The Hebrew festival of Yom Kippur, the
Day of Atonement, occurred on the tenth day of Tishri.
In other words, the Jewish day of Atonement occurred just five days before the city of Babylon fell.
When Daniel read the writing on the wall he interpreted the meaning of the third word written there, tekel, as
signifying, “You have been weighed on the scales and
found wanting’ (vs. 27). The verb here is in the past
tense—‘you have been weighed.’ When might God
have made such a judgment concerning Babylon? Of
all the days in the Jewish calendar, the Day of Atonement was the day of judgment par excellence.” Shea,
DARG, 60.

“The kingdom was to be divided into pieces,
destroyed, and dissolved. This was to be effected by
the Medes and the Persians. Significantly, the Aramaic form peres contains the consonants of the Aramaic words of Persia and Persians, who were even then at
the gates of Babylon.” 4SDABC, 805.
“Belshazzar was without excuse, for abundant
light had been given him to reform his life. He had had
opportunity for knowing the truth; but he lost all the
benefits of the knowledge by his course of selfindulgence; he did not meet the mind of God, as a man
or a king, and because of this the kingdom had been
taken from him. He who has power to set up and to
tear down, gave the kingdom to another.” Signs,
7/20/1891.

DANIEL 5:29
Then commanded Belshazzar, and
they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a
chain of gold about his neck, and made a
proclamation concerning him, that he
should be the third ruler in the kingdom.
Then Commanded Belshazzar.—
“Notwithstanding this terrible denunciation, Belshazzar did not forget his promise, but invested Daniel
at once with the scarlet robe and chain of gold, and
proclaimed him third ruler in the kingdom. This Daniel accepted, probably with a view to being better prepared to look after the interests of his people during the
transition to the succeeding kingdom.” Smith, DR, 94.
Third Ruler in the Kingdom.—
“Assyrian and Babylonian history provide the insight that co-regency (commonly a father and son sharing the throne) was practiced at times by the rulers of
these nations. This was evidently the case in the last
years of the neo-Babylonian empire. The records state
that when Nabonidus left for an extended sojourn in
Tema (Arabia), he ‘entrusted kingship’ to Belshazzar.
The cuneiform records also clarify the matter of Daniel’s appointment by Belshazzar to be ‘third’ ruler in
the kingdom. Since Nabonidus shared his throne
with Belshazzar, the ‘third’ position was the highest
that could be granted.” BRI, 2SOD, 85.

In That Night.—
“In the spring of BC 538, Cyrus proceeded to
Babylon without hindrance. Nabonadius, the king of
Babylon, drew up his forces in the plain outside the
city, prepared to give battle. Cyrus attacked him at
once and easily defeated him. Nabonidus himself
took refuge in Borsippa, while the greater part of his
army escaped within the walls of the city, where Belshazzar was in command. When they all got within the
mighty walls of Babylon, with all the brazen gates securely fastened with the heavy iron bars, they felt perfectly secure, and laughed defiance at Cyrus and all his
forces, and at all his efforts to force his way in. But
Cyrus had already made a success of turning the river
Gyndes out of its banks, and he determined to do the
same thing for the Euphrates. The Euphrates ran directly though the city, under the walls, and Cyrus de-

DANIEL 5:30
In that night was Belshazzar the king
of the Chaldeans slain.
143

GEMS FROM DANIEL
termined to turn the waters out of the channel, and
then, under cover of darkness, follow the bed of the
river into the city. This also was in fulfillment of
prophecy: ‘A drought is upon her waters; and they
shall be dried up.’ ‘And I will dry up her sea, and
make her springs dry.’ Jer. 50:38; 51:26. Thus
spake the prophet sixty years before, telling what
should be, and the following are the words of the historian telling what was—
“ ‘Withdrawing the greater part of his army from
the vicinity of the city, and leaving behind him only
certain corps of observation, Cyrus marched away up
the course of the Euphrates for a certain distance, and
there proceeded to make a vigorous use of the spade.
His soldiers could now appreciate the value of the experience which they had gained by dispersing the Gyndes, and perceive that the summer and autumn of the
preceding year had not been wasted. They dug a
channel or channels from the Euphrates, by means
of which a great portion of its water would be
drawn off, and hoped in this way to render the natural
course of the river fordable.’ Rawlinson, Seven Great
Monarchies, ch. 8, par. 52.” Waggoner, PL, 69.

numbered and finished his kingdom. The enemy made
a mad rush for the palace. The pen of inspiration describes the overthrow of the kingdom more vividly
than any human historian. Of those guests at the banquet of Belshazzar it is said, ‘I will make them
drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not awake…. I will bring them down
like lambs to the slaughter.’ Then as if the eye of the
prophet failed to separate Satan from the kingdom
which he had so long controlled, he exclaims, ‘How is
Sheshach taken! And how is the praise of the whole
earth surprised! How is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!...’
“In that night was Belshazzar slain,’ and the
kingdom was given to Darius, the aged king of the
Medes. Thus came to an end one of the proudest monarchies that has ever been upon the earth.” Haskell,
SDP, 69,70,74-75.

“For days the siege of Babylon had been on. The
gates were closed and her walls were considered impregnable, while within the city were provisions for
twenty years, But however strong she might seem, God
had said, ‘Though Babylon should mount up to
heaven, and though she should fortify the height of
her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come unto
her.’ [Jeremiah 51:53].
“…To Cyrus, the leader of the Persian army
which was now outside the city walls, God had said
that he held his hand to make him strong. Before you
‘I will loose the loins of kings.’ I will open those twoleaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut; ‘I will go
before thee and make the crooked places straight: I
will break in pieces the gates of brass and cut in sunder
the bars of iron.
“While Belshazzar and his lords drank and feasted, the army of Cyrus was lowering the waters in the
bed of the Euphrates, preparatory to entering the city.
“…In the midst of their feasting and rioting, none
had noticed that the waters in the Euphrates were steadily diminishing. The besieging army of Cyrus, which
had long been held at bay by the massive walls, was
eagerly watching the river. The river had been turned
from its course, and as soon as the water had sufficiently subsided to allow the men a passage in the bed of the
river, they entered from opposite sides of the city. In
their reckless feeling of security, the Babylonians had
left open the gates in the walls which lined the riverbanks inside the city. So the Persians, once in the river-bed, easily entered the city through the open gates.
“Soon one post was running to ‘meet another, and
one messenger to meet another, to show the king of
Babylon that his city is taken at one end.’ But the news
was received too late to save his kingdom. God had

The Night of Judgment Upon Babylon
“The scene here so briefly mentioned is described
in remarks on Daniel 2:39. While Belshazzar was indulging in his presumptuous revelry, while the angel’s
hand was tracing the doom of the kingdom of the empire on the walls of the palace, while Daniel was making known the fearful import of the heavenly writing,
the Persian soldiery, through the emptied channel of
the Euphrates, had made their way into the heart of the
city, and were speeding forward with drawn swords to
the palace of the king. Scarcely can it be said that they
surprised him, for God had just forewarned him of his
doom. But they found him and slew him, and in
that hour the empire of Babylon ceased to be.”
Smith, DR, 95.
“Even while he and his nobles were drinking
from the sacred vessels of Jehovah, and praising their
gods of silver and of gold, the Medes and the Persians,
having turned the Euphrates out of its channel, were

144

DANIEL 5
marching into the heart of the unguarded city. The
army of Cyrus now stood under the walls of the palace;
the city was filled with the soldiers of the enemy, ‘as
with caterpillars’ (verse 14); and their triumphant
shouts could be heard above the despairing cries of the
astonished revelers. ‘In that night was Belshazzar the
king of the Chaldeans slain,’ and an alien monarch sat
upon the throne.
“To the last ruler of Babylon, as in type to its
first, had come the sentence of the divine Watcher: ‘O
king… to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed
from thee.’” Prophets & Kings, 531,533.

“ ‘Had the Babylonians been apprised of what
Cyrus was about, or had they noticed their danger, they
would not have allowed the entrance of the Persians
within the city, which was what ruined them utterly,
but would have made fast all the street-gates which
gave upon the river, and mounting upon the walls
along both sides of the stream, would so have caught
the enemy as it were in a trap. But, as it was, the Persians came upon them by surprise and so took the city.
Owing to the vast size of the place, the inhabitants of
the central parts (as the residents at Babylon declare)
long after the outer portions of the town were taken,
knew nothing of what had chanced, but as they were
engaged in a festival, continued dancing and reveling
until they learnt the capture but too certainly. Such,
then, were the circumstances of the first taking of Babylon.’ Herodotus, Persian Wars, Bk. I, chs. 190, 191.”
Thiele, OSID, 48,49.

Why Belshazzar Was Slain.—
“The Greek historian Xenophon (Cyropaedia VII,
24-43) confirms the Bible statement. He doesn’t refer
to Belshazzar by name, but he relates how there was a
banquet taking place in the Babylonian palace that
night and how a king of Babylon was killed. He also
tells us why that king was killed. On a hunting trip,
Nabonidus, chief king of Babylon, had earlier killed
the son of Gobryas, the Persian general who was to
lead his troops into the city the night Babylon was
overthrown. In revenge for the death of his son,
Gobryas killed the son of Nabonidus.” Shea, DARG,
63.

The Fall and Destruction of Babylon.—
“God ascribes the fall of Babylon to her gluttony and drunkenness. Indulgence of appetite and
passion was the foundation of all their sins.” Counsels
on Health, 110.
“The fall of Babylon constitutes a divine challenge to skepticism which skeptics have never been
able to meet. God’s prophets had foretold the doom of
Babylon while it was still the flourishing metropolis of
the world located in the garden of the East with no human prospects of ever being destroyed. So definite and
clear are these prophetic utterances that they contain
more than 100 details not one of which has failed of
fulfillment. Prophecy is a miracle and as such is a
challenge to doubters and skeptics.” Bunch, BOD, 71.

Herodotus Account.—
“‘The Babylonians, encamped without their walls,
awaited his [Cyrus’s] coming. A battle was fought a
short distance from the city, in which the Babylonians
were defeated by the Persian king, whereupon they
withdrew their defenses. Here they shut themselves
up, and made light of his siege, having laid in a store of
provisions for many years in preparation against this
attack, for when they saw Cyrus conquering nation
after nation, they were convinced that he would never
stop, and that their turn would come at last.
“ ‘Cyrus was now reduced to great perplexity, as
time went on and he made no progress against the
place. In this distress either someone made the suggestion to him, or he bethought himself of a plan, which he
proceeded to put in execution. He placed a portion of
his army at the point where the river enters the city,
and another body at the back of the place where it issues forth, with orders to march into the town by the
bed of the stream, as soon as the water became shallow
enough; he then himself drew off with the unwarlike
portion of his host, and made for the place where
Nitocris dug the basin for the river, where he did exactly what he had done formerly: he turned the Euphrates
by a canal into the basin, which was then a marsh, on
which the river sank to such an extent that the natural bed of the stream was fordable. Hereupon the
Persians who had been left for the purpose at Babylon
by the river-side, entered the steam, which had now
sunk so as to reach about midway up a man’s thigh,
and thus got into the town.

“I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I
shewed them; I did them suddenly, and they came to
pass. 4 Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy
neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass; 5 I have
even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it
came to pass I shewed it thee: lest thou shouldest say,
Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and
my molten image, hath commanded them.” Isaiah 48:36.
“It had been predicted that the city would be taken suddenly and unexpectedly and the inhabitants
caught unawares (Jer. 50:24,25); that the princes of
Babylon would arise from the banquet table and prepare for battle (Isa. 21:5); that they would be slain
while drunk (Jer. 51:39,57); that the city would be
filled with enemy soldiers ‘as with caterpillars’ (Jer.
51:14).” Bunch, BOD, 72.
“Clearly had the Hebrew prophets spoken concerning the manner in which Babylon should fall. As
in vision God had revealed to them the events of the
future, they had exclaimed: ‘How is Sheshach taken!

145

GEMS FROM DANIEL
and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised!
how is Babylon become an astonishment among the
nations!’ ‘How is the hammer of the whole earth
cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a
desolation among the nations!’ ‘At the noise of the
taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is
heard among the nations.’
“‘Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed.’
‘The spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and
her mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is
broken: for the Lord God of recompenses shall surely
requite. And I will make drunk her princes, and her
wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty
men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not
wake, saith the King, whose name is the Lord of hosts.’
“ ‘I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also
taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art
found, and also caught, because thou hast striven
against the Lord. The Lord hath opened His armory,
and hath brought forth the weapons of His indignation:
for this is the work of the Lord God of hosts in the land
of the Chaldeans.’
“’Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed together:
and all that took them captives held them fast; they
refused to let them go. Their Redeemer is strong; the
Lord of hosts is His name: He shall throughly plead
their cause, that He may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.’ Jeremiah 51:41;
50:23, 46; Jeremiah 51:8, 56, 57; 50:24, 25, 33, 34.
“Thus ‘the broad walls of Babylon’ became
‘utterly broken, and her high gates …burned with
fire.’ Thus did Jehovah of hosts "cause the arrogancy
of the proud to cease,’ and lay low ‘the haughtiness of
the terrible.’ Thus did ‘Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency,’ become as Sodom and Gomorrah—a place forever
accursed. ‘It shall never be inhabited,’ Inspiration
has declared, ‘neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent
there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.
But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their
houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall
dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. And the wild
beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses,
and dragons in their pleasant palaces.’ ‘I will also
make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water:
and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith
the Lord of hosts.’ Jeremiah 51:58; Isaiah 13:11, 1922; 14:23.
“To the last ruler of Babylon, as in type to its
first, had come the sentence of the divine Watcher:
‘O king,... to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee.’ Daniel 4:31. [Isaiah 47:1-15 quoted.]” Prophets & Kings, 531-533.

“Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, The beauty of
the Chaldees’ excellency, Shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.” Isaiah 13:19.
“I will also make it a possession for the bittern,
and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom
of destruction, saith the Lord of hosts.” Isaiah 14:23.
Babylon, A Symbol of the World at the End.—
“The destruction of Babylon pictures to some
degree the final destruction of the world, of which
the prophet writes, ‘Behold, the day of the Lord
cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay
the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners
thereof out of it.’ Destruction came upon Babylon
while the king and his lords were engaged in feasting and revelry. Cyrus and his army marched up the
bed of the river Euphrates; for trenches had been dug,
and the river turned from its course, so that there was
no obstruction to their entering the city, provided the
gates were opened. The guardsmen were indulging in
merriment and revelry, and the city was left without
defense. Before the officers were aware, the enemy
had entered the city, and escape was impossible.
Those in one part of the city were slain or captured
before those in another part knew that the city was
invaded. No alarm was sounded, no cry could be
raised to warn the people that the forces of Cyrus were
upon them.
“The monarch, his princes, and guardsmen, were
given up to feasting, and, intoxicated with strong drink,
they knew nothing of the peril of the kingdom. There
was a noise at the palace gates, the doors were
forced open, the troops of Cyrus rushed in, and in a
short time the king and his guests were lying mangled in the heaps of the slain, and the drunken slept
a perpetual sleep. Thus was the prophecy of Isaiah
and Jeremiah fulfilled to the letter.
“…Babylon is a symbol of the world at large.
When its doom was made certain, its kings and officers
seemed to be as men insane, and their own course hastened its destiny. When the doom of a nation is
fixed, it seems that all the energy, wisdom, and discretion of its former time of prosperity, deserts its
men of position, and they hasten the evil they would
avert. Outside enemies are not the greatest peril to an
individual or a nation. The overthrow of a nation results, under the providence of God, from some unwise
or evil course of its own. But the people who fear
God, who are loyal to his laws, who carry out the
principles of righteousness in their lives, have a sure
defense; God will be the refuge of those who trust in
him.” Signs, 12/29/1890.
“The condemnation that will fall upon the nations of the earth in this day will be because of their
rejection of light, and will be similar to that which
fell upon the kings of Babylon; it will be because
they have failed to make the most of present light, present opportunities for knowing what is truth and right-

“O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, Thine end is come, and the measure
of thy covetousness.” Jer. 51:13.

146

DANIEL 5
eousness. Our condemnation in the judgment will not
result from the fact that we have lived in error, but
from the fact that we have neglected heaven-sent opportunities for discovering truth. The means of becoming conversant with the truth are within the reach of all;
but, like the indulgent, selfish king, we give more
attention to the things that charm the ear, and
please the eye, and gratify the palate, than to the
things that enrich the mind, the divine treasures of
truth. It is through the truth that we may answer the
great question, ‘What must I do to be saved?’” Signs,
7/27/1891.

messenger, ‘I will punish the king of Babylon, and that
nation, saith the Lord, for their iniquity, and the land of
the Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations.’
Jeremiah 25:12. Favor would be shown the remnant of
Judah, in answer to fervent prayer. ‘I will be found of
you, saith the Lord: and I will turn away your captivity,
and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all
the places whither I have driven you, saith the Lord;
and I will bring you again into the place whence I
caused you to be carried away captive.’ Jeremiah
29:14.
“Often had Daniel and his companions gone
over these and similar prophecies outlining God’s
purpose for His people. And now, as the rapid course
of events betokened the mighty hand of God at work
among the nations, Daniel gave special thought to the
promises made to Israel. His faith in the prophetic
word led him to enter into experiences foretold by
the sacred writers. ‘After seventy years be accomplished at Babylon,’ the Lord had declared, ‘I will visit
you, and perform My good word toward you, in causing you to return.... I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and
not of evil, to give you an expected end. Then shall
ye call upon Me, and ye shall go and pray unto Me, and
I will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek Me, and
find Me, when ye shall search for Me with all your
heart.’ [Jeremiah 29]: Verses 10-13.” Prophets &
Kings, 551-553.

The Advent of Cyrus.—
“The advent of the army of Cyrus before the
walls of Babylon was to the Jews a sign that their
deliverance from captivity was drawing nigh. More
than a century before the birth of Cyrus, Inspiration
had mentioned him by name, and had caused a record
to be made of the actual work he should do in taking
the city of Babylon unawares, and in preparing the way
for the release of the children of the captivity. Through
Isaiah the word had been spoken:
“ ‘Thus saith the Lord to His anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him;... to open before him the two-leaved
gates; and the gates shall not be shut; I will go before
thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will
break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the
bars of iron: and I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy name,
am the God of Israel.’ Isaiah 45:1-3.
“In the unexpected entry of the army of the Persian conqueror into the heart of the Babylonian capital
by way of the channel of the river whose waters had
been turned aside, and through the inner gates that in
careless security had been left open and unprotected,
the Jews had abundant evidence of the literal fulfillment of Isaiah’s prophecy concerning the sudden
overthrow of their oppressors. And this should
have been to them an unmistakable sign that God
was shaping the affairs of nations in their behalf; for
inseparably linked with the prophecy outlining the
manner of Babylon’s capture and fall were the words:
“ ‘Cyrus, he is My shepherd, and shall perform
all My pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation
shall be laid.’ ‘I have raised him up in righteousness,
and I will direct all his ways: he shall build My city,
and he shall let go My captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts.’ Isaiah 44:28; 45:13.
“Nor were these the only prophecies upon which
the exiles had opportunity to base their hope of speedy
deliverance. The writings of Jeremiah were within
their reach, and in these was plainly set forth the
length of time that should elapse before the restoration of Israel from Babylon. ‘When seventy years
are accomplished,’ the Lord had foretold through His

“Cyrus was one of the greatest characters of
human history comparable to Nebuchadnezzar himself. The early Persians chose the bravest and most
capable of their nobles for kings, and these kings were
mild and merciful. …Just as God chose Nebuchadnezzar as His servant in the punishment of the nations including the kingdom of Judah, so the Lord chose Cyrus as His servant in the punishing of wicked and
corrupt Babylon. One hundred and fifty years before
Cyrus was born, and 174 years before he conquered
Babylon, the Lord had foretold his birth and career and
declared of him: “He is my shepherd, and shall perform all My pleasure.’ See Isa. 44:28; 45:1-5. God
has servants who are not directly numbered with
His own people and among these are rulers of nations.” Bunch, BOD, 27.
Lesson For Today.—
“In the history of Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar, God speaks to nations of today. We are to
take to heart the lessons he sought to teach these rebellious kings; for if Belshazzar had pursued a course
in harmony with the instruction given to his grandfather, he would have retained not only his kingdom
but his life. He disregarded the lessons, and went on
in rebellion against God, committing the very sins for
which his grandfather had been reproved and punished.
He, too, lifted himself up in pride and exaltation, and
the final judgment of God fell upon him and his house.

147

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“For the modern world the fall of ancient Babylon
has two great and important lessons: First, it proves
beyond a doubt that the prophets of God wrote under
divine inspiration and that the Scriptures are indeed
and in truth the word of God. …The second lesson is
that Modern Babylon will share the same fate and will
soon go down to eternal destruction and oblivion, and
all who refuse to come out of Babylon and renounce
her pride, customs and practices, will be destroyed with
her.” Bunch, BOD, 75.

His great sin was that, notwithstanding God had
given him light, he refused to walk in the paths of
righteousness.” Signs, 7/20/1891.
“The condemnation that will fall upon the nations
of the earth in this day will be because of their rejection of light, and will be similar to that which fell
upon the kings of Babylon; it will be because they
have failed to make the most of present light, present
opportunities for knowing what is truth and righteousness. Our condemnation in the judgment will not result
from the fact that we have lived in error, but from the
fact that we have neglected heaven-sent opportunities for discovering truth. The means of becoming
conversant with the truth are within the reach of all;
but, like the indulgent, selfish king, we give more attention to the things that charm the ear, and please the
eye, and gratify the palate, than to the things that enrich
the mind, the divine treasures of truth. It is through the
truth that we may answer the great question, ‘What
must I do to be saved?’
“On every page of God’s word the injunction to
obedience is plainly written, and yet how often his
commands are lightly regarded or wholly set aside!
The command for the observance of the holy Sabbath of the Lord is placed in the very bosom of the
Decalogue, and is so plain that none need err as to
its import, and yet it is treated with as great profanation as were the sacred vessels at the feast of Belshazzar. God sanctified and blessed the seventh day,
setting it apart to be observed as holy time. Yet the
Sabbath of the Lord has been used as a common working day, while a day which possesses no sanctity whatever has been put in the place of God’s sanctified day.
The religious world has accepted error for truth, and
many who claim to be the children of the light are the
children of darkness. The condemnation of those
who trample upon God’s holy Sabbath, and exalt a
Sabbath instituted by the man of sin, will not come
because they have conscientiously observed the first
day of the week, but because they neglected opportunities for searching the Scriptures and learning,
not what man has said, not what the ministers say,
not what the fathers have said, but what saith the
infinite God? What day has God specified as his holy
day? What did he command men to honor when he
spoke with an audible voice from Sinai? That voice is
to be obeyed above every other; the edicts of kings
and nations are void before a command of God.
The Lord of hosts commands our obedience.
“If ministers would search their Bibles, they
would know what saith the Scriptures; but the voices of
false shepherds cry, ‘Lo here! or, lo there!’ but we are
safe only in following Him who said, ‘I am the way,
the truth, and the life.’ The Lord declares, ‘To the law
and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them.’” Signs,
7/27/1891.

Other Spiritual Lessons.—
“Regardless of the powers of plans of men, God
in heaven still rules in the affairs of earth.
“The doom of modern spiritual Babylon is just as
certain as was the doom of ancient Babylon.
“The fate of every man is sealed when he is
weighed in the balances of heaven.
“Feasting and drinking often come on the brink of
ruin.
“The joining of hands between apostate religion and an iniquitous state betoken the operation
of forces inspired by the evil one.
“Trust and reliance on the God of heaven is the
only safe course in the hour of crisis.” Thiele, OSID,
51.

DANIEL 5:31
And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years
old.
Darius the Median Took the Kingdom.—
“Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the
LORD hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the
Medes: for his device is against Babylon, to destroy it;
because it is the vengeance of the LORD, the vengeance of his temple.” Jeremiah 51:11.
“Prepare against her the nations with the kings of
the Medes, the captains thereof, and all the rulers
thereof, and all the land of his dominion.” Jeremiah
51:28.
“With the close of the fifth chapter, the government is transferred to the Medes, of whom Darius,
known in history as Darius the Mede, a man of sixtytwo years, is king. With him is associated Cyrus, the
Persian, the leader of the army, and heir to the throne.
The time represented by the golden head of the image has passed, and a baser metal represents the rising
power.” Haskell, SDP, 77.
Being About Threescore and Two Years Old.—
“Why does Scripture mention the age of Darius?
His age is noted for a purpose. Darius was 62 in the
last year of the captivity. The captivity began in his 8 th
year. Darius was born in the 8th year of the captivity.

148

DANIEL 5
In the darkest hour God was preparing a deliverer.”

Burnside, DPUF, 16.

149

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER SIX
1 It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and
twenty princes, which should be over the whole kingdom;
2 And over these three presidents; of whom Daniel was first:
that the princes might give accounts unto them, and the king
should have no damage.
3 Then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and
princes, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king
thought to set him over the whole realm.
4 Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion
against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none
occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was
there any error or fault found in him.
5 Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against
this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of
his God.
6 Then these presidents and princes assembled together to the
king, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.
7 All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the
princes, the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that
whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days,
save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.
8 Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that
it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.
9 Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.
10 Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went
into his house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day,
and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.
11 Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying and
making supplication before his God.
12 Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning
the king's decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man
that shall ask a petition of any God or man within thirty days,
save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king
answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the
Medes and Persians, which altereth not.
13 Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel,
which is of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not
thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his
petition three times a day.
14 Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him:
and he laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.
15 Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the

king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is,
That no decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be
changed.
16 Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and
cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto
Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver
thee.
17 And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the
den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the
signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel.
18 Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting: neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and
his sleep went from him.
19 Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in
haste unto the den of lions.
20 And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable
voice unto Daniel: and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest
continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?
21 Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever.
22 My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions'
mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him
innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I
done no hurt.
23 Then was the king exceedingly glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was
taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon
him, because he believed in his God.
24 And the king commanded, and they brought those men
which had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of
lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the
mastery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they
came at the bottom of the den.
25 Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.
26 I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom
men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the
living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the
end.
27 He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the
power of the lions.
28 So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the
reign of Cyrus the Persian.

DANIEL 6:1
It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty princes, which
should be over the whole kingdom;

“Daniel was an active leader in the kingdom of
Babylon at the height of its glory. From that time until
the Medes and Persians took the throne of universal
empire, he was at least a resident of the capital, acquainted with all the affairs of the kingdom. Yet he
gave us no consecutive account of events that occurred
during his long connection with these kingdoms. He
touched upon only an event here and there which
would inspire faith, hope, and courage in the hearts of
the people of God in every age, and lead them to be
steadfast in their adherence to the right. The event
narrated in this chapter is alluded to in Hebrews 11,
where we read of those who through faith ‘stopped
the mouths of lions.’” Smith, DR, 97.

The Medes and the Persians.—
“Babylon was taken by the Persians, and Darius the Median was placed upon the throne in 538
BC. When Darius died two years later, Cyrus took
the throne. Somewhere, therefore, between these
two dates the event occurred which is narrated in
this chapter.

150

DANIEL 6
three presidents or ‘Premiers’ (Fenton). Each president
would therefore have forty princes under him.” Bunch,
BOD, 76.

“With the close of the fifth chapter, the government is transferred to the Medes, of whom Darius,
known in history as Darius the Mede, a man of sixtytwo years, is king. …The Medes were not, however, a
new or unknown power, for they are mentioned in
chronology as descendants of Japheth, and as early as
the eighty century BC, when Israel was taken captive
by the Assyrians, they were scattered through the cities
of the Medes. This had brought the Medes into contact with the Jews two centuries before the fall of
Babylon. To their knowledge of the God of the Jews
may be attributed the purity of their worship, for while
they were heathens, they had never fallen into the gross
forms of idolatry which were practiced by most of the
nations of Western Asia.
“The habits of both the Medes and the Persians, but more particularly of the Persians,
brought them in close touch with nature, and in
their worship they took the elements, fire, earth,
water, and air as the highest manifestations of the
Deity. They therefore sought a hill country, and kept a
perpetual fire burning. They believed in the struggle
between good and evil as represented by light and
darkness, and doubtless the words of Isaiah, which are
addressed to Cyrus, had this belief in mind, for the
Lord says, ‘I form the light and create darkness: I
make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these
things.’ [Is. 45:7]. In these words he places himself
above the gods of the Persians, and explains why he
called Cyrus to his strange work.” Haskell, SDP,
77,78.

DANIEL 6:2,3
And over these three presidents; of
whom Daniel was first: that the princes
might give accounts unto them, and the
king should have no damage.
Then this Daniel was preferred above
the presidents and princes, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king
thought to set him over the whole realm.
Three Presidents; Of Whom Daniel Was First.—
“Daniel was doubtless advanced to this high position because of the excellent spirit and fidelity manifest
in his work. As a great man in the empire of Babylon,
Daniel might have been regarded an enemy by Darius,
and have been banished or otherwise put out of the
way. Or as a captive from a nation then in ruins, he
might have been despised and set at naught. But to the
credit of Darius be it said, Daniel was preferred
over all the others, because the discerning king saw
in him an excellent spirit. The king thought to set
him over the whole realm.” Smith, DR, 98.
“It was not after the order of the world that Daniel, belonging to a race held in bondage, should at once
be given one of the highest positions in the newly organized government. It will appear still more unusual
when it is remembered that Daniel had been made third
ruler of the Babylonian kingdom under Belshazzar.
“…The question naturally arises, Why did not the
conquering [Medo-Persian] army destroy Daniel?
…The answer is simple and natural. When the kingdom was taken and Belshazzar slain, Nabonidus, the
first ruler, at the head of an army, was surrounded by
the enemy in another part of the kingdom. This left
Daniel sole ruler in Babylon. He knowing that over
one hundred years before, Isaiah had prophesied that
Cyrus should take the kingdom, was ready to welcome
him whom God had said should build the house of the
Lord at Jerusalem.
“There is also good reason to believe that Daniel and Cyrus were not strangers. When excluded
from the council of Belshazzar, Daniel had spent a portion of his time at Shushan, the capital of Elam. Elam
had revolted from Babylon, in fulfillment of the prophecy of Jeremiah. [Jer. 49:39]. Daniel may have
formed an acquaintance with Cyrus, and showed to him
…the prophecy that pertained to himself, and also revealed to him the way God had said he should enter
Babylon. It is evident from the wording of the decree
given in the first chapter of Ezra, that Cyrus was familiar with these prophecies.
“To the fact of acquaintanceship it may be added

Darius.—
“The father of Darius was Astyages whose sister
was the wife of Nebuchadnezzar. Mandana, the daughter of Astyages and sister of Darius, was the mother of
Cyrus.” Bunch, BOD, 27.
Darius Set Over the Kingdom.—
“When Darius took possession of the throne
of Babylon, he at once proceeded to reorganize the
government.” Sanctified Life, 52.
120 Princes.—
“Darius set over the kingdom one hundred and
twenty princes, there being at that time, as is supposed,
one hundred twenty provinces in the empire, each
one having its prince, or governor. By the victories
of Cambyses and Darius Hystaspes, it was afterward
enlarged to one hundred twenty-seven provinces.
(Esther 1: 1).” Smith, DR, 97,98.
“Darius demonstrates his ability as a ruler by distributing the responsibility of government. He was not
an autocrat who believed that all wisdom resided in
himself. His government was the most democratic of
all ancient kingdoms. It was almost a republic. The
120 satraps or governors were made responsible to

151

GEMS FROM DANIEL
that the excellent spirit and unsurpassed business ability of Daniel brought him into prominence.” Haskell,
SDP, 78,75,76,79.

the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was
faithful, neither was there any error or
fault found in him.

An Excellent Spirit Was in Him.—
“The case of Daniel was presented before me.
Although he was a man of like passions with ourselves,
the pen of inspiration presents him as a faultless character. His life is given us as a bright example of what
man may become, even in this life, if he will make God
his strength and wisely improve the opportunities and
privileges within his reach. Daniel was an intellectual
giant; yet he was continually seeking for greater
knowledge, for higher attainments. Other young
men had the same advantages; but they did not, like
him, bend all their energies to seek wisdom—the
knowledge of God as revealed in His word and in His
works. Although Daniel was one of the world’s great
men, he was not proud nor self-sufficient. He felt the
need of refreshing his soul with prayer, and each
day found him in earnest supplication before God.
He would not be deprived of this privilege even when a
den of lions was opened to receive him if he continued
to pray.
“Daniel loved, feared, and obeyed God. Yet he
did not flee away from the world to avoid its corrupting influence. In the providence of God he was to
be in the world yet not of the world. With all the temptations and fascinations of court life surrounding him,
he stood in the integrity of his soul, firm as a rock in
his adherence to principle. He made God his strength
and was not forsaken of Him in his time of greatest
need.” 4 Testimonies, 569.

They Sought to Find Occasion Against Daniel.—
“His enemies, who hated the faithful statesman
for his integrity, and who wished to remove him from
their path, that they might rise to eminence, planned
and intrigued long in order to find some way by
which he might be condemned and put to death.”
Youth Instructor, 5/25/1899.
“The ‘presidents’ hated Daniel, no doubt because
they could not enrich themselves.” Burnside, DPUF,
93.
They Could Find None Occasion Nor Fault.—
“Daniel was preferred above the presidents and
the princes because an excellent spirit was in him.
Fallen angels feared that his influence would weaken their control over the rulers of the kingdom, for
Daniel was high in command. The accusing host of
evil angels stirred up the presidents and princes to envy
and jealousy, and they watched Daniel closely to find
some occasion against him that they might report him
to the king; but they failed.” 1 Testimonies, 295.
“Under the reign of Darius, Daniel was exalted to
a position of great honor, because the king saw in him
an ‘excellent spirit.’ But when the leading men of the
kingdom saw Daniel thus favored, they became jealous
of him, and soon envied and hated him. His course of
unbending integrity was in marked contrast to their
own lives. The more upright and righteous he was,
the more they hated him. Long they sought to find
something whereby he might be condemned. It angered them to think that they could lay nothing to his
charge. But he was prime minister of the kingdom, and
they knew they would have to prove any charge they
brought against him.
“Daniel’s position was not an enviable one. He
stood at the head of a dishonest, prevaricating, godless cabinet, whose members watched him with
keen, jealous eyes, to find some flaw in his conduct.
They kept spies on his track, to see if they could not in
this way find something against him.” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1900.

“Only by faithfulness in the little things can the
soul be trained to act with fidelity under larger responsibilities. God brought Daniel and his fellows into
connection with the great men of Babylon, that these
heathen men might become acquainted with the principles of true religion. In the midst of a nation of idolaters, Daniel was to represent the character of God.
How did he become fitted for a position of so great
trust and honor? It was his faithfulness in the little
things that gave complexion to his whole life. He
honored God in the smallest duties, and the Lord cooperated with him.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 356.
“When your soul is the temple for the indwelling
Spirit of the Saviour, the gross elements of your nature
will be consumed, and the whole being will become a
living purpose. He who is truly Christ's will have
an experience like that of Daniel, and the fruits of
the Spirit will appear in his life.” Signs, 11/20/1888.

“[Verse 3 quoted.] The honors bestowed upon
Daniel excited the jealousy of the leading men of the
kingdom. The presidents and princes sought to find
occasion for complaint against him. ‘But they could
find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was
faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in
him’ (verse 4).
“What a lesson is here presented for all Christians. The keen eyes of jealousy were fixed upon Dan-

DANIEL 6:4
Then the presidents and princes sought
to find occasion against Daniel concerning
152

DANIEL 6
iel day after day; their watchings were sharpened by
hatred; yet not a word or act of his life could they make
appear wrong. And still he made no claim to sanctification, but he did that which was infinitely better—he lived a life of faithfulness and consecration.
“The more blameless the conduct of Daniel, the
greater was the hatred excited against him by his enemies. They were filled with madness, because they
could find nothing in his moral character or in the discharge of his duties upon which to base a complaint
against him.” Sanctified Life, 42.

then, was in danger; not in danger of losing his life, but
these officials were scheming politicians who
were robbing the government in every possible way. If
they had taxes to gather, they turned a large per cent to
their own account. There was bribery, cheating, wire
pulling, and buying of positions in the Babylonian government, as there is in the world today. Dishonesty
was found everywhere. Inspiration does not describe
the iniquity in detail, but it does say, ‘The godly is perished out of the earth;...they hunt every man his brother
with a net. That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a
reward; and the great man, he uttereth his mischievous
desire: so they wrap it up.’
“…The sixth chapter of Daniel is left on record to
show how a man of God, when elevated to such a position, can remain uncontaminated. It shows that attitude
which any man of God must assume toward popular
vice and corruption, and more than that, it shows what
treatment a man who is true to principle must expect to
receive from the hands of those who are corrupt. Because Daniel did guard the king’s interests, Darius was
about to set him over the whole realm. But the honesty of one man is like a thorn in the flesh of the unjust, and in their political meetings the princes and
presidents sought to destroy the man who made
accurate reports, and who was faultless in his dealings. ‘Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s,’ is a principle of divine government, and from
this principle Daniel could not be swerved.” Haskell,
SDP, 79-81.

“Among those who profess to be servants of
Christ, an earnest purpose should be cultivated, such as
Daniel manifested in the courts of Babylon. He knew
that God was his strength and his shield, his front guard
and his rear guard. Amid the corruptions that surrounded him in the courts of Babylon, he kept himself
free from those sights and sounds which would allure
him, and draw him into temptation. When his duties
required that he be present at scenes of revelry, intemperance, and basest idolatry, he cultivated the
habit of silent prayer, and thus he was kept by the
power of God.” Youth Instructor, 6/7/1894.
“Strict compliance with the requirements of
Heaven brings temporal as well as spiritual blessings. Unwavering in his allegiance to God, unyielding
in his mastery of self, Daniel, by his noble dignity and
unswerving integrity, while yet a young man, won the
‘favor and tender love’ of the heathen officer in whose
charge he had been placed. Daniel 1:9. The same characteristics marked his afterlife. He rose speedily to the
position of prime minister of the kingdom of Babylon.
Through the reign of successive monarchs, the downfall of the nation, and the establishment of another
world empire, such were his wisdom and statesmanship, so perfect his tact, his courtesy, his genuine
goodness of heart, his fidelity to principle, that even
his enemies were forced to the confession that ‘they
could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he
was faithful.’” Prophets & Kings, 546.

“Daniel is another example of integrity, for he
was so faithful that even his enemies were not able to
point out one flaw in his performance of duty. They
declared, ‘We shall not find any occasion against this
Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the
law of his God.’ The secret of Daniel’s strength was
found in his conscientious attention to what the
world would call things of minor importance. He
was found before God three times a day in prayer and
thanksgiving, and he was equally steadfast in his attention to his duties to the king. It is this conscientious
attention to what the world despises that makes a
strong, symmetrical character.” Signs, 5/25/1891.

“Here is recorded the case of a man who was a
devout follower of God, one whose honesty, accuracy,
and skill in every particular was a wonder to the world.
It is a powerful witness to the duties and privileges of
every Christian business man. He was a noble
statesman, but not a politician, an example for all
office-holders. He fulfilled his duties under the
Medes just as faithfully as under the Babylonians.
He served the God of heaven, and not a man-made
party.
…The very position which he occupied put Daniel to the severest test. As chairman or chief of the
presidents over the princes, Daniel was obliged to deal
with all the under-rulers of the empire. One by one
they were obliged to render an account to him. This
was that the king might receive no damage. The king,

A Lesson For Modern Daniels.—
“Those who labor in business lines should take
every precaution against falling into error through
wrong principles or methods. Their record may be like
that of Daniel in the courts of Babylon. When all his
business transactions were subjected to the closest
scrutiny, not one faulty item could be found. The
record of his business life, incomplete though it is, contains lessons worthy of study. It reveals the fact that a
businessman is not necessarily a scheming, policy man.
He may be a man instructed of God at every step. Daniel, while prime minister of the kingdom of Babylon,
was a prophet of God, receiving the light of heavenly

153

GEMS FROM DANIEL
inspiration. His life is an illustration of what every
Christian businessman may be.” 7 Testimonies, 248.

“Daniel’s enemies discovered that he was never
to be found worshiping in any of the temples of
Babylon, nor did he take part in any heathen religious ceremonies. Undoubtedly they had noticed that
he was absent from his office every Sabbath, the day of
weekly rest prescribed in ‘the law of his God.’ They
doubtless reasoned that his set times for prayer interfered with the discharge of his official duties.”
4SDABC, 811.

“Daniel was sorely tried; but he overcame because he was of a humble and prayerful spirit. Although he was surrounded with distrust and suspicion, and his enemies laid a snare for his life, yet he
maintained a serene and cheerful trust in God, never once deviating from principle. Although Daniel
was a man of like passions with ourselves, the pen of
inspiration presents him as a faultless character. His
life is given us as a bright example of what man may
become, even in this life, if he will make God his
strength, and wisely improve the privileges and opportunities within his reach.” Signs, 11/4/1886.

“[Verse 5 quoted]. Thereupon the presidents and
princes, counseling together, devised a scheme whereby they hoped to accomplish the prophet’s destruction.
They determined to ask the king to sign a decree
which they should prepare, forbidding any person
in the realm to ask anything of God or man, except
of Darius the king, for the space of thirty days. A
violation of this decree should be punished by casting
the offender into a den of lions. Accordingly, the
princes prepared such a decree, and presented it to Darius for his signature.” Prophets & Kings, 540.

DANIEL 6:5
Then said these men, We shall not find
any occasion against this Daniel, except we
find it against him concerning the law of
his God.

“As related to the kingdom, Daniel’s conduct was
perfect. He was faithful and true. They could find no
ground for complaint against him on that score. They
then said they could find no occasion to accuse him,
except as concerning the law of his God. So let it be
with us. A person can have no better recommendation.” Smith, DR, 98.

We Shall Not Find, Except We Find It.—
“Their only hope was to make his religious service a treasonable act against the king and kingdom.
This has ever been the method used by bigots in persecuting and destroying the servants of the true God.
Religious persecution has always been placed on the
basis of disloyalty to the state, and on this basis will
the final persecution be carried forward and the sentence of death executed.” Bunch, BOD, 77.

DANIEL 6:6-9
Then these presidents and princes assembled together to the king, and said thus
unto him, King Darius, live for ever.
All the presidents of the kingdom, the
governors, and the princes, the counsellors,
and the captains, have consulted together
to establish a royal statute, and to make a
firm decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days,
save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into
the den of lions.
Now, O king, establish the decree, and
sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.
Wherefore king Darius signed the
writing and the decree.

Concerning the Law of His God.—
“Daniel made no claim to sanctification; but he
did that which was infinitely better—he lived a holy,
sanctified life. The true test of sanctification is the
daily deportment.” R&H, 2/8/1881.
“[Verse 5 quoted]. Three times a day Daniel
prayed to the God of heaven. This was the only accusation that could be brought against him.” Sanctified Life, 43.
“Daniel’s position was not an enviable one. He
stood at the head of a dishonest, prevaricating, godless
cabinet, whose members watched him with keen, jealous eyes, to find some flaw in his conduct. They kept
spies on his track, to see if they could not in this way
find something against him. Satan suggested to these
men a plan whereby they might get rid of Daniel. Use
his religion as a means of condemning him, the enemy
said.
“Daniel was a man of prayer. Three times a day
he knelt before the Lord; and Satan told his enemies
that his destruction must be compassed on this
ground.” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1900.

These Presidents and Princes Assembled Together.—
“‘Came tumultuously.’—margin. They came
rushing in before the king in a manner that indicated
that a crisis had arisen that demanded immediate atten-

154

DANIEL 6
tion. They come into his presence in a body so that
their numbers and official standing might impress him
with the importance of their request which is virtually a
demand. Numbers have great weight with officials
who crave loyalty and co-operation and who fear
the enmity or antagonism of those they serve.”
Bunch, BOD, 77.

and were willing to ignore and heap insult upon their
own religion, and all the multitude of their gods, in
order to ruin the object of their hatred.” Smith, DR,
98,99.
“To forbid prayer for thirty days, is, for so long,
to rob God of all the tribute he has from man, and to
rob man of all the comfort he has in God. Does not
every man’s heart direct him, when in want or distress,
to call upon God? We could not live a day without
God; and can men live thirty days without prayer?
Yet it is to be feared that those who, without any decree forbidding them, present no hearty, serious petitions to God for more than thirty days together, are far
more numerous than those who serve him continually,
with humble, thankful hearts.” Matthew Henry Commentary.

All the Presidents Have Consulted Together.—
“With manifest respect for the king, and with
words which flattered him, a committee of the princes
waited upon Darius. The first words they spoke afterward revealed that there was a plot on foot, for they
said, ‘All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors,’ and other officers had consulted together, when
in truth they had held secret meetings, and the chief of
the presidents was kept in ignorance of the matter. The
king placed great confidence in his prime minister, and
anything purporting to have his approval was accepted
without further investigation. The form of a decree
was presented to the king. It exalted Darius above all
earthly monarchs, and attempted to place him
above God. King Darius placed his seal upon the document, making it a law of the land. For thirty days no
man should bow down or worship or ask any petitions,
save of the king.” Haskell, SDP, 82.

The Source of the Idea for the Decree.—
“The enemies of Daniel left the presence of Darius, rejoicing over the snare now securely laid for the
servant of Jehovah. In the conspiracy thus formed,
Satan had played an important part. The prophet was
high in command in the kingdom, and evil angels
feared that his influence would weaken their control
over its rulers. It was these satanic agencies who
had stirred the princes to envy and jealousy; it was
they who had inspired the plan for Daniel’s destruction; and the princes, yielding themselves as instruments of evil, carried it into effect.” Prophets &
Kings, 540.

Plot Against Daniel.—
“A scheme was now devised to accomplish his
[Daniel’s] destruction. His enemies assembled at the
palace and besought the king to pass a decree that no
person in the whole realm should ask anything of either
God or man, except of Darius the king, for the space of
thirty days, and that any violation of this edict should
be punished by casting the offender into the den of
lions. The king knew nothing of the hatred of these
men toward Daniel, and did not suspect that the decree
would in any way injure him. Through flattery they
made the monarch believe it would be greatly to his
honor to pass such an edict. With a smile of satanic
triumph upon their faces, they come forth from the
presence of the king, and rejoice together over the
snare which they have laid for the servant of God.”
Sanctified Life, 43.

Of Any God or Man, Save of Thee, O King.—
“That even Persian kings were willing occasionally to accept divine honors is evident from the fact that
in Egypt they allowed divine attributes to be added to
their names. Hieroglyphic inscriptions refer to Cambyses as the ‘son of Re’ the sun-god, and to Darius as ‘the
son of god.’” 4SDABC, 811.
The Law of the Medes & Persians Altereth Not.—
“In the Medo-Persian empire the principle of
government was different from that of Babylon.
…The Medo-Persian government was an absolute
monarchy also. There, also, the word of the king
was the law: but with this all-important difference
from Babylon, that when once the word of the king
had gone forth as the law, that law could not be
changed nor reversed even by the king himself. The
king himself was bound, even against himself, by his
own word or decree that had once become the law.
The government of Medo-Persia, therefore, was a government of law; it principle was the supremacy of
THE LAW.
“The plotters were ready with their plea of the supremacy and integrity of ‘the law’; and to urge arguments that it was ‘not a question of religion, but of
the law;’ that to countenance disregard and violation of ‘the law’ was simply to undermine all the

“The decree they presented was designed to increase honor and respect for the royal will. No prayer
or petition, they declared, was to be addressed to any
man or god, save the king, for thirty days. By this flattering approach the princes hid their evil design
against Daniel. The king signed the decree, and it
became an unalterable law of the Medes and Persians.
“Mark the subtlety of these men—the length to
which they went to accomplish the ruin of the good.
If they had made the decree read that no petition should
be asked of the God of the Hebrews, which was the
real design of the matter, the king would at once have
divined their object, and the decree would not have
been signed. But they gave it a general application,

155

GEMS FROM DANIEL
carried them captives, saying, We have sinned, and
have done perversely, we have committed wickedness;
“And so return unto thee with all their heart, and
with all their soul, in the land of their enemies, which
led them away captive, and pray unto thee toward
their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the
city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I
have built for thy name:
“Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling place, and maintain their
cause, And forgive thy people that have sinned against
thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have
transgressed against thee, and give them compassion
before them who carried them captive, that they may
have compassion on them.” 1Kings 8:46-50.

government and make an open bid for a reign of
anarchy, and for the very dissolution of society itself: that they were exceedingly sorry that such an
excellent man as Daniel should be thus involved, yet to
allow such open disregard of ‘the law’ by one of such
high standing and reputation would be only all the
worse; because this very fact of the high standing and
wide reputation of the one who so openly disregarded
‘the law’ would be only the more encouragement to all
people to do the same, etc., etc.”
Jones, IIR,
22,23,27,28.
Wherefore King Darius Signed the Writing.—
“The king’s pride was flattered. He was ignorant of the mischief purposed against Daniel, and he
granted their request. The decree was signed, and
became one of the unalterable laws of the Medes and
Persians.” Signs, 11/4/1886.

His Windows Opened Toward Jerusalem.—
“Daniel falls upon his knees and prays fervently
as he had so often done during
the days of his exile. His
prayer is increased in fervency by the fact that the
seventy years period of captivity were almost at an end.”
Bunch, BOD, 78.

“The kings vanity was flattered. Not for a moment did he think that Daniel, his beloved and honored
servant, would in any way be affected by the law. He
signed the decree, and with it in their possession, the
presidents and princes went forth from his presence,
evil triumph depicted on their countenances. They
deemed that the man they hated was now in their
power.” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1900.

“Daniel looked and
prayed toward Jerusalem, reminding him that the
temple lay in ruins. The 70 year period of captivity
was almost up—one year away. But now, Satan was
tempting Daniel and his fellow Jews with the glories of
this world—make it rich in Babylon. Most of Jews
would choose to remain in Babylon. But Daniel kept
his focus on the soon-coming deliverance. He refused the offer of earthly glory.
“Today let our hearts pray toward the New Jerusalem. Our deliverance is near. Let us not be tempted by the view offered to us by Satan of the glories, the
glitter, the pleasures of this sinful world. Millions of
modern Israelites may decide to remain on planet earth.
But let us set our affections on a better country.”
Unknown Source.

“The king was flattered by this proposition, and
as he did not understand the motive that prompted it, he
signed the desired decree, and made it a law. Did these men think because they had deceived Darius that
they had deceived the Lord also?” Signs, 11/4/1889.

DANIEL 6:10
Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and
his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees
three times a day, and prayed, and gave
thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.

Three Times a Day.—
“The offering of prayer three times a day took
place at the third, sixth, and ninth hours of the day (the
hours being counted from sunrise). The third and ninth
corresponded to the time of the morning and evening
sacrifices. The Psalmist followed the same practice
(Ps. 55:17).” 4SDABC, 812

David Worshiped Toward the Temple in Jerusalem.—
“I will worship toward thy holy temple, and
praise thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy
truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy
name.” Psalm 138:2.
Solomon Counseled To Pray Toward Jerusalem.—
“If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that
sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver
them to the enemy, so that they carry them away
captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near;
“Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land
whither they were carried captives, and repent, and
make supplication unto thee in the land of them that

“Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I
pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice.”
Psalm 55:17.
He Kneeled Upon His Knees.—
“And it was so, that when Solomon had made an
end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the
LORD, he arose from before the altar of the LORD,

156

DANIEL 6
from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up
to heaven.” 1Kings 8:54.

a day and kneel before the open window for prayer
while he knew that prying eyes were observing him
and that his enemies were ready to accuse him of disloyalty to the king; but Daniel would allow no earthly
power to come in between him and his God, even with
the prospect of death in the den of lions.
“…Nothing is gained by cowardice or by fearing
to let it be known that we are God’s commandmentkeeping people. Hiding our light, as if ashamed of
our faith, will result only in disaster. God will leave
us to our own weakness. May the Lord forbid that we
should refuse to let our light shine forth in any place to
which He may call us. If we venture to go forth of
ourselves, following our own ideas, our own plans, and
leave Jesus behind, we need not expect to gain fortitude, courage, or spiritual strength. God has had moral
heroes, and He has them now—those who are not
ashamed of being His peculiar people. Their wills
and plans are all subordinate to the law of God. The
love of Jesus has led them not to count their lives dear
unto themselves. Their work has been to catch the
light from the word of God and to let it shine forth in
clear, steady rays to the world. ‘Fidelity to God’ is
their motto.” 5 Testimonies, 527,528.

“So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah
went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself
down upon the earth, and put his face between his
knees.” 1Kings 18:42.
“And at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my
heaviness; and having rent my garment and my mantle,
I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto
the LORD my God.” Ezra 9:5.
“For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” Ephesians 3:14.
Three Times a Day Daniel Prayed.—
“The prophet’s enemies counted on Daniel’s firm
adherence to principle for the success of their plan.
And they were not mistaken in their estimate of his
character. He quickly read their malignant purpose in
framing the decree, but he did not change his course in
a single particular. Why should he cease to pray now,
when he most needed to pray? Rather would he relinquish life itself, than his hope of help in God. With
calmness he performed his duties as chief of the princes; and at the hour of prayer he went to his chamber,
and with his windows open toward Jerusalem, in accordance with his usual custom, he offered his petition
to the God of heaven. He did not try to conceal his act.
Although he knew full well the consequences of his
fidelity to God, his spirit faltered not. Before those
who were plotting his ruin, he would not allow it even
to appear that his connection with Heaven was severed.
In all cases where the king had a right to command,
Daniel would obey; but neither the king nor his decree could make him swerve from allegiance to the
King of kings.
“Thus the prophet boldly yet quietly and humbly declared that no earthly power has a right to
interpose between the soul and God. Surrounded by
idolaters, he was a faithful witness to this truth. His
dauntless adherence to right was a bright light in the
moral darkness of that heathen court. Daniel stands
before the world today a worthy example of Christian
fearlessness and fidelity.” Prophets & Kings, 540-542.

“It is necessary to maintain a living connection
with heaven, seeking as often as did Daniel—three
times a day—for divine grace to resist appetite and
passion. Wrestling with appetite and passion unaided
by divine power will be unsuccessful; but make Christ
your stronghold, and the language of your soul will be,
‘In all these things we are more than conquerors
through Him that loved us.’” Medical Ministry,
143,144.
“It may be a difficult matter for men in high positions to pursue the path of undeviating integrity
whether they shall receive praise or censure. Yet this
is the only safe course. All the rewards which they
might gain by selling their honor would be only as the
breath from polluted lips, as dross to be consumed in
the fire. Those who have moral courage to stand in
opposition to the vices and errors of their fellow men—
it may be of those whom the world honor—will receive
hatred, insult, and abusive falsehood. They may be
thrust down from their high position, because they
would not be bought or sold, because they could not be
induced by bribes or threats to stain their hands with
iniquity. Everything on earth may seem to conspire
against them; but God has set His seal upon His own
work. They may be regarded by their fellow men as
weak, unmanly, unfit to hold office; but how differently does the Most High regard them. Those who
despise them are the really ignorant. While the
storms of calumny and reviling may pursue the man of
integrity through life, and beat upon his grave, God has
the ‘well done’ prepared for him. Folly and iniquity
will at best yield only a life of unrest and discontent,
and at its close a thorny dying pillow. And how many,

“Daniel was a man of prayer; and God gave him
wisdom and firmness to resist every influence that conspired to draw him into the snare of intemperance.
Even in his youth he was a moral giant in the strength
of the Mighty One.” Signs, 8/14/1884.
“Daniel’s history is a remarkable one. He carried
out his faith and principles against great opposition.
He was condemned to death because he would not
abate one jot of his allegiance to God even in the face
of the king’s decree. It might, at this day, be called
over-righteousness to go, as was his wont, three times

157

GEMS FROM DANIEL
as they view their course of action and its results, are
led to end with their own hands their disgraceful career. And beyond all this waits the judgment, and the
final, irrevocable doom, Depart!” Signs, 2/2/1882.

pretended business, or perform his devotions with more
than ordinary secrecy.” Smith, DR, 99.
“Daniel had a special meeting-place, and an
appointed hour when he met the Lord, and these
appointments were kept. There is a beauty in the
thought of the soul connection between Daniel and
heaven. His spiritual life was an actual thing, a life
which he lived as real and as true as the physical life.
…To sever the intercourse with God would be as
painful to Daniel as to deprive him of natural life;
…It was only by these frequent times of spirit filling,
as it were, that he had strength to meet the nervous
strain of his official duties….
“Daniel did not and could not deny his Saviour by
concealing himself in some corner of his room to pray.
He knelt by the open window, toward Jerusalem. He
did not pray in his heart, silently. He prayed aloud, as
had been his custom before the decree was issued.”
Haskell, SDP. 83,84.

“Daniel heard of what had been done, but he
made no protest. He could see the design of his enemies. He knew that they would watch closely his going out and his coming in, but he calmly attended to his
duties, and at the hour of prayer he went to his chamber, and kneeling by the open window, with his face
toward Jerusalem, he prayed to his God. From his
youth he had been taught that in prayer his face
should be turned toward the temple, where by faith
he saw the revelation of Jehovah’s glory.
“Daniel prayed more fervently than was his wont,
that He who understands the secret working of Satan
and his agents would not leave his servant, but would
care for him. He prayed for strength to endure the trial.
“Some may ask, Why did not Daniel lift his
soul to God in secret prayer? Would not the Lord,
knowing the situation, have excused his servant from
kneeling openly before him? Or why did he not kneel
before God in some secret place, where his enemies
could not see him?
“Daniel knew that the God of Israel must be honored before the Babylonian nation. He knew that neither kings nor nobles had any right to come between
him and his duty to his God. He must bravely maintain his religious principles before all men; for he
was God’s witness. Therefore he prayed as was his
wont, as if no decree had been made.” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1900.

“I was pointed to the fervent, effectual prayers of
his people anciently. ‘Elijah was a man subject to like
passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly.’ Daniel
prayed unto his God three times a day. Satan is enraged at the sound of fervent prayer, for he knows
that he will suffer loss.
“…With the full knowledge of the king’s decree
he still bows before his God, ‘his windows being
open.’ He considers supplication to God of sufficient importance to sacrifice his life rather than to
relinquish it.” Review & Herald, 2/18/62.
And Gave Thanks.—
“Nor did Daniel only pray, and not give thanks,
cutting off some part of the service to make the time of
danger shorter; but he performed the whole. In a word,
the duty of prayer is founded upon the sufficiency of
God as an almighty Creator and Redeemer, and upon
our wants as sinful creatures. To Christ we must turn
our eyes. Thither let the Christian look, thither let
him pray, in this land of his captivity.” Matthew
Henry Commentary.

“It is just as convenient, just as essential, for us to
pray three times a day as it was for Daniel. Prayer is
the life of the soul, the foundation of spiritual
growth. In your home, before your family, and before
your workmen, you should testify to this truth. And
when you are privileged to meet with your brethren in
the church, tell them of the necessity of keeping open
the channel of communication between God and the
soul. Tell them that if they will find heart and voice to
pray, God will find answers to their prayers. Tell them
not to neglect their religious duties. Exhort the brethren to pray. We must seek if we would find, we must
ask if we would receive, we must knock if we would
have the door opened unto us. If there are only a few
assembled, there are enough to claim the precious
promises of God. The Father, the Son, and the holy
angels will be present with you to behold your faith,
your steadfast principle, and there you will have of
the outpouring of God’s Holy Spirit.” Signs,
2/10/1890.

“Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your
requests be made known unto God. 7 And the peace
of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep
your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.” Philippians 4:6,7.
As He Did Aforetime.—
“How long had Daniel been praying like this?
He was deported to Babylon in 605 BC when he was
approximately eighteen years of age. The present episode took place during the brief reign of Darius the
Mede, therefore it must have taken place either in 539
BC or 538 BC. If we add Daniel’s sixty-seven years in
Babylon to his age of eighteen when taken captive, we

“Daniel realized that a conspiracy was formed
against him, but he took no means to thwart it. He
simply committed himself to God, and left the issue
to His providence. He did not leave the capital on

158

DANIEL 6
“It is no new thing for what is done faithfully,
in conscience toward God, to be misrepresented as
done obstinately, and in contempt of the civil powers. …Daniel, that venerable man, is brought as the
vilest of malefactors, and is thrown into the den of lions, to be devoured, only for worshipping his God.”
Matthew Henry Commentary.

come to an age of about eighty-five years for Daniel
at the time this episode occurred. Daniel was an old
man when the Persians took over, but he was still intellectually capable, and his life of faith still burned
bright. This was the result of a lifetime of faith and
prayer, a beautiful example of faithfulness.” Shea,
DARG, 86,87.

“They found him, just as they intended and
hoped, praying to his God. So far their scheme worked
well. They were not long in going to the king with
the matter.
“Receiving an acknowledgment from the monarch that the decree was in force, they were ready to
inform him against Daniel. In an attempt to excite the
prejudices of the king they said, ‘That Daniel, which is
of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not
thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed.’
Yes, they complained, that poor captive, who is entirely dependent on you for all that he enjoys, so far from
being grateful and appreciating your favors, regards
you not, nor pays any attention to your decree.” Smith,
DR, 101.

DANIEL 6:11-13
Then these men assembled, and found
Daniel praying and making supplication
before his God.
Then they came near, and spake before
the king concerning the king's decree; Hast
thou not signed a decree, that every man
that shall ask a petition of any God or man
within thirty days, save of thee, O king,
shall be cast into the den of lions? The king
answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.
Then answered they and said before
the king, That Daniel, which is of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth
not thee, O king, nor the decree that thou
hast signed, but maketh his petition three
times a day.

Daniel’s Test Similar to Those in Last Days.—
“I presented events to transpire in the near future
which will test the people of God, bringing them
where they will be required to make such decisions
as Daniel made when the decree went forth that all
who for the next thirty days should offer a petition to
any save the king, should be thrown into the lion’s den.
Had Daniel obeyed the decree, he would have dishonored God; but he was true to principle, and the Lord
delivered him. It is Satan’s constant aim to exalt himself and his inventions, and to dishonor God. He is not
satisfied unless he has the supremacy. It is not the
purpose and work of God to compel men’s consciences; but Satan pushes his advantages.” Review
& Herald, 1/29/1884

Daniel Found Praying.—
“His adversaries watch him an entire day.
Three times he has repaired to his chamber, and
three times the voice of earnest intercession has
been heard. The next morning the complaint is
made to the king that Daniel, one of the captives of
Judah, has set at defiance his decree. When the
monarch heard these words, his eyes were at once
opened to see the snare that had been set. He was sorely displeased with himself for having passed such a
decree, and labored till the going down of the sun to
devise a plan by which Daniel might be delivered. But
the prophet’s enemies had anticipated this, and they
came before the king with these words: ‘Know, O king,
that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be
changed.’” Sanctified Life, 44.

Daniel, of the Children of the Captivity of Judah—
“The form of the accusation revealed the full hatred and contempt that these men felt toward Daniel.
They did not refer to the dignity of his office but characterized him merely as a foreigner, a Jewish exile.
They doubtless hoped thereby to bring his conduct under the suspicion of being an act of rebellion against
the royal authority.” 4SDABC, 812.

DANIEL 6:14,15
Then the king, when he heard these
words, was sore displeased with himself,
and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him:
and he laboured till the going down of the
sun to deliver him.
Then these men assembled unto the

They Spake Before the King.—
“Eagerly they hastened to Darius, concealing their
cruel joy under a cloak of regret that they were obliged
to inform against Daniel. But they declared that by
Daniel’s act the king’s position as sovereign of the
land was endangered, and his authority despised..”
Youth Instructor, 11/1/1900.

159

GEMS FROM DANIEL

king, and said unto the king, Know, O
king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor statute which
the king establisheth may be changed.

And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king
sealed it with his own signet, and with the
signet of his lords; that the purpose might
not be changed concerning Daniel.

The King Was Sore Displeased With Himself.—
“When the monarch heard these words, he saw at
once the snare that had been set for his faithful servant.
He saw that it was not zeal for kingly glory and
honor, but jealousy against Daniel, that had led to the
proposal for a royal decree. ‘Sore displeased with himself’ for his part in the evil that had been wrought, he
‘labored till the going down of the sun’ to deliver his
friend. The princes, anticipating this effort on the part
of the king, came to him with the words, ‘Know, O
king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, that no
decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be
changed.’ The decree, though rashly made, was unalterable and must be carried into effect.” Prophets &
Kings, 543.

They Brought Daniel.—
“Daniel was brought before the king and his
princes to answer the accusation brought against
him. He had opportunity to speak for himself, and
he boldly acknowledged his belief in the living God,
the maker of heaven and earth. He made a noble
confession of faith, relating his experience from his
first connection with the kingdom.
“In his perplexity and distress, Darius said to
Daniel, I have done all I can to save you. I can do no
more. ‘Thy God, whom thou servest continually, he
will deliver thee,’ he added, as he bade him a sorrowful
farewell.” Youth Instructor, 11/1/1900.

“The king realized that he had placed himself
in the position of the omnipotent God in his realm.
But he realized that he had no power to do the things
that God continually and wonderfully performed in his
empire to keep it together. He began to see his kingdom crumbling around him, and himself powerless to
do anything about it. He realized that he had cut off
communication with the One who could help. The
people were taught to look to a weak man for help. He
was desperate to get this law changed, and the God of
Daniel back in control.” PJ

“Daniel refused to yield when principle was at
stake. Being disobedient to an earthly law and king
was a light thing in his estimation to disloyalty to
the King of heaven and the Law of the Heavenly
Kingdom of which he was a citizen. He would rather
face the sentence of death by an earthly court than the
penalty of eternal death by the supreme tribunal of the
universe. It was the habit of a lifetime to stand for
right regardless of the circumstances; to be as true to
duty as the needle to the pole. His God had never
failed him. How could he in this last test of his life fail
his God?” Bunch, BOD, 80.

The King Labored to Deliver Daniel.—
“Then the king saw the trap that had been prepared for him as well as for Daniel, and he labored
until the going down of the sun to deliver him, probably by personal efforts with the conspirators to
cause them to relent, or by arguments and endeavors to procure the repeal of the law. ” Smith, DR,
101.

Daniel Cast Into the Lions’ Den.—
“Daniel was cast into the den of lions. But he had
good company in that den of wild beasts; for the ‘angel
of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
Him, and delivereth them.’ God sent his angel, and
closed the mouths of the hungry lions, that they should
not hurt him.” Bible Echo, March 1, 1893.
Thy God Will Deliver Thee.—
“The king’s words were in striking contrast
with those of Nebuchadnezzar uttered on another
occasion that was in some respects similar (Ch.
3:15). Darius may have been acquainted with the miracles that God had performed in the days of Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar.” 4SDABC, 813.

These Men Assembled Unto the King.—
“For the second time on that fateful day Daniel’s
enemies came to the king, this time in the evening. For
many hours they had waited for the execution of the
verdict, and when nothing happened they resorted
again to the king and impudently claimed their prey.”
4SDABC, 813.

Stone Laid Upon the Mouth of Den and Sealed.—
“No doubt the placing the stone was ordered by
the providence of God, that the miracle of Daniel’s
deliverance might appear more plain; and the king
sealed it with his own signet, probably lest Daniel’s
enemies should kill him. Let us commit our lives and
souls unto God, in well-doing. We cannot place full
confidence even in men whom we faithfully serve; but
believers may, in all cases, be sure of the Divine favor

DANIEL 6:16,17
Then the king commanded, and they
brought Daniel, and cast him into the den
of lions. Now the king spake and said unto
Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.
160

DANIEL 6
and consolation.” Matthew Henry Commentary.

DANIEL 6:18
Then the king went to his palace, and
passed the night fasting: neither were instruments of musick brought before him:
and his sleep went from him.

“When the hands of men are tied; when there is
no power on earth to help; then is God’s opportunity.
…Probably some feared that friends and sympathizers
of Daniel might come to the rescue, so the seal of the
king was placed upon the stone, that the purpose
might not be changed. Satan exulted as he did years
later when he saw the Son of God in the sepulcher,
with a stone before the door, and the stone sealed with
the Roman seal. But there was no more power to
hold Daniel in the den of lions than to keep Christ in
the grave. The angel came, not to the stone, but into
the den, and one of the most precious times for Daniel
was when he sat in the center of the cave, and those
lions couched at his feet or fondly licked his hands.”
Haskell, SDP, 85,86.

That Night.—
“Full of satanic exultation, Daniel’s enemies returned to their homes. They drank freely of wine,
and congratulated themselves on their success in
putting out of the way one whom they could not bribe
to forsake the path of integrity.
“Not so did Darius pass the night. Daniel’s testimony had made a deep impression on his mind. He
had some knowledge of the dealing of God with the
people of Israel, and Daniel’s conduct sent home to his
heart the conviction, that the God of the Hebrews was
the true God. He was filled with remorse for having
signed the decree brought to him. His conscience was
awakened, and he passed a sleepless and troubled
night. The chamber of royalty was one of sorrow
and prayer. All music was hushed. All amusements
were laid aside. No comforters were admitted.
During that sleepless night the king thought as he
had never thought before.”
Youth Instructor,
11/1/1900.

“God did not prevent Daniel’s enemies from casting him into the lions’ den; He permitted evil angels
and wicked men thus far to accomplish their purpose;
but it was that He might make the deliverance of
His servant more marked, and the defeat of the enemies of truth and righteousness more complete. ‘Surely the wrath of man shall praise Thee’ (Psalm 76:10),
the psalmist has testified. Through the courage of
this one man who chose to follow right rather than
policy, Satan was to be defeated, and the name of
God was to be exalted and honored.” Prophets &
Kings, 543,544.
“The enemies of Daniel sealed the stone because
they were afraid that the king would deliver him. They
were suspicious of each other and had reason to be.
…This sealing served the purpose of God just as the
sealed stone at the entrance of Joseph’s tomb made
of none effect the false report of the Jews that the
disciples had stolen the body of Jesus. Daniel’s enemies could not deny the miracle of his deliverance.”
Bunch, BOD, 81.
“This was a prophetic harbinger of the sealing of
Christ’s tomb after His crucifixion.” PJ.
The King Sealed It.—
“Sealed Egyptian tombs may serve to illustrate
the technique of sealing an opening. After the door had
been closed for the last time, it was covered with plaster, and either seals were stamped all over the wet plaster or roll seals were rolled over it. A similar procedure may have been followed in the case of the closing
and sealing of the lion’s den. The sealing was most
probably carried out by means of cylinder seals, which
were common among the Assyrians, Babylonians, and
Persians. Every excavation in Mesopotamia brings to
light numerous examples of such seals.” 4SDABC.

“The best way to have a good night,
is to have a good conscience.” Burnside, DPUF, 95.
Daniel Continues to Pray.—

161

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“On account of his praying to God, he is cast into
the lions’ den. Evil angels thus far accomplish their
purpose. But Daniel continues to pray, even in the
den of lions. Was he suffered to be consumed? Did
God forget him there? Oh, no; Jesus, the mighty
Commander of the hosts of heaven, sent His angel
to close the mouths of those hungry lions that they
should not hurt the praying man of God; and all
was peace in that terrible den. The king witnessed
his preservation and brought him out with honors. Satan and his angels were defeated and enraged. The
agents he had employed were doomed to perish in the
same terrible manner in which they had plotted to destroy Daniel.
“The prayer of faith is the great strength of the
Christian and will assuredly prevail against Satan. This
is why he insinuates that we have no need of prayer.
The name of Jesus, our Advocate, he detests; and when
we earnestly come to Him for help, Satan’s host is
alarmed. It serves his purpose well if we neglect the
exercise of prayer, for then his lying wonders are more
readily received.” 1 Testimonies, 296.

Daniel Delivered.—
“Early the next morning, hoping and yet despairing, condemning himself, and praying to him whom
he began to recognize as the true God, Darius went
to the lions’ den, and cried aloud: ‘O Daniel, servant of
the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?’
“With intense anxiety he waited for an answer,
and unspeakable thankfulness filled his heart as a
voice came up from below: ‘O king, live forever. My
God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions'
mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me and also before
thee, O king, have I done no hurt.’ Youth Instructor,
11/1/1900.
“The course of the king after Daniel had been cast
into the den of lions attests his genuine interest in the
prophet’s behalf, and the severe condemnation he felt
for his own course in the matter. At dawn he repaired
to the den of hungry and ravenous beasts. Daniel was
alive, and his response to the monarch’s salutation
was no reproach for his having yielded to his evil
counselors. In terms of respect and honor he said, ‘O
king, live forever.’ Afterward he reminded the king, in
a manner which he must have keenly felt, but to which
he could take no exception, that before him he had
done no wrong. Because of his innocency, God,
whom he served continually, had sent His angel and
had shut the lions’ mouths.
“Here, then, stood Daniel, preserved by a power
higher than any power of earth. His cause was vindicated, his innocency declared. ‘No manner of hurt was
found upon him, because he believed in his God.’”
Smith, DR, 102,103.

DANIEL 6:19-23
Then the king arose very early in the
morning, and went in haste unto the den of
lions.
And when he came to the den, he cried
with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and
the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God,
whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?
Then said Daniel unto the king, O
king, live for ever.
My God hath sent his angel, and hath
shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not
hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also before
thee, O king, have I done no hurt.
Then was the king exceedingly glad for
him, and commanded that they should take
Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was
taken up out of the den, and no manner of
hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God.

“Daniel’s heart was innocent before God, and
before the king his actions were totally innocent. Paul
expressed the same experience in Acts 24:16: ‘And
herein do I exercise myself, to have always a conscience void of offence toward God, and toward
men.’ Both Daniel and Paul had the law of God written in their hearts by the Holy Spirit. Both were blame-

Very Early in the Morning.—
“The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre,
and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre.”
John 20:1.

162

DANIEL 6
less toward God (in the first four commandments) and
toward men (in the last six commandments).” PJ

“Angels are sent on missions of mercy to the
children of God. To Abraham, with promises of
blessing; to the gates of Sodom, to rescue righteous
Lot from its fiery doom; to Elijah, as he was about to
perish from weariness and hunger in the desert; to Elisha, with chariots and horses of fire surrounding the
little town where he was shut in by his foes; to Daniel,
while seeking divine wisdom in the court of a heathen
king, or abandoned to become the lions’ prey; to Peter,
doomed to death in Herod’s dungeon; to the prisoners
at Philippi; to Paul and his companions in the night of
tempest on the sea; to open the mind of Cornelius to
receive the gospel; to dispatch Peter with the message
of salvation to the Gentile stranger—thus holy angels
have, in all ages, ministered to God’s people.
“A guardian angel is appointed to every follower
of Christ. These heavenly watchers shield the righteous from the power of the wicked one. This Satan
himself recognized when he said: ‘Doth Job fear God
for nought? Hast not Thou made an hedge about him,
and about his house, and about all that he hath on every
side?’ Job 1:9, 10. The agency by which God protects
His people is presented in the words of the psalmist:
‘The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear Him, and delivereth them.’ Psalm 34:7. Said
the Saviour, speaking of those that believe in Him:
‘Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones;
for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do
always behold the face of My Father.’ Matthew
18:10. The angels appointed to minister to the children
of God have at all times access to His presence.”
Great Controversy, 512,513.

O Daniel, Servant of the Living God.—
“Daniel was counted peculiar, and every man who
makes God his counselor, and who seeks him in simplicity of heart, will be counted peculiar by the world.
But this is the faith we need, this is the experience that
we must have; for Christ has died to redeem us from all
iniquity and to purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. We should live with an eye
single to his glory, and then we shall be able to gain
the victory over the world. We must come out from
the world and be separate, if we would be the sons
of God, the heirs of heaven. If we do this, we shall
enter in through the gates into the city, we shall have a
right to the tree of life, and we shall see the King in his
beauty.” Signs, 11/4/1889.
Is Thy God Able to Deliver Thee.—
“In the sixth chapter of Daniel is recorded another
instance of deliverance pointing to ‘the final deliverance of the people of God.’ The plot of Daniel’s enemies to persuade the king to pass a law necessitating a
choice between obedience to God’s Law or the law of
the State, will be repeated and enlarged in its double
application when the apostate churches seek government aid to enforce Sunday laws. As the king did not
see the subtlety behind the request of Daniel’s enemies,
so many lawmakers will not discern the cunning behind the appeal to the State to pass laws which will
bring spiritual Israel into times of extreme peril. After
passing through a night of supreme trust in God, Daniel
was ‘delivered’ (see Daniel 6:14, 16, 20, 27) from his
peril: similarly, spiritual, world-wide Israel, after being
plunged into a period of affliction and distress necessitating implicit trust in their God, will be ‘delivered’
(Daniel 12: 1) at the time of the 6th plague.” Were,
KONAJ, 49.

Shut the Lion’s Mouths.—
“Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths
of lions.” Hebrews 11:33.
Before Him Innocency Was Found in Me.—
“The demonstration is made in perfection forever
that the person who disregards any law that touches
service to God is innocent before God, and also does
‘no hurt’ to the king, nor to the State, nor to society,
nor to any principle of law or government.
“All of which in divine truth demonstrates again
that no earthly government can ever have any right or
jurisdiction in matter of religion: that is, in ‘the duty
which we owe to our Creator, and the manner of discharging it.’ And in this case there is the additional
demonstration that no government can ever of right
incorporate in the law provisions touching religion, and
then plead the supremacy and integrity of ‘the law:’
that ‘it is not primarily a question of religion but only
of the law.’ that ‘we are not asking for religious observance, we ask only respect for law.’ In the case of
Daniel and the ‘supremacy of the law of the Medes and
Persians,’ the divine answer to all such pleas is that,
nothing pertaining to religion can ever of right have
any place in the law.

My God Hath Sent His Angel.—
“When Daniel was cast into the den of lions because of his fidelity to God, the Lord sent his angel to
deliver him; and He will deliver us if we put our trust
in Him and obey Him. Heaven is very much nearer
to us than we think. When we place ourselves in the
right relation to God, angels of heaven are beside
us. We are to hide in Jesus, and he that touches you,
he that harms or distresses you, touches Christ; for
Christ identifies his interest with that of his people.
Christ suffers in the person of his saints. We must
remember that the God of Daniel is our God, and that
we can be faithful under all circumstances. We can go
to Him in confidence, and through his grace preserve
our integrity.” Bible Echo, 1/15/1893

163

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“The right of perfect individuality in religion is a
divine, and therefore an absolutely inalienable, right.
And to make religious observances or prohibitions a
matter of the law, does not affect the free exercise of
this divine right. The fullness of the right, and the perfect liberty of its exercise, abide ever the same, even
though religion be made a matter, and a part, of the
law. And when religion or religious observance or
prohibition is fixed in the law, even though the law be
as supreme and inflexible as that of the Medes and Persians, the divine right and perfect liberty of individuality in religion then extend to the law that incorporates the religion, and such law in simple no law.
The subterfuge of enforcing religious observances or
prohibitions under cover of ‘the supremacy and integrity of the law,’ instead of taking away or in any way
limiting the divine right and perfect liberty of individuality in religion, simply reacts to the extent of actually
sweeping away all ground of claim for ‘the supremacy
and integrity of the law’—in actually nullifying the
specific law in the case.
“The civil law is rightly supreme in the realm
of things civil, but in the realm of things religious it
simply has no place at all. …The realm of religion is
the realm of God. In that realm God alone is Sovereign, and His will is the only law. And in that realm
the individual stands alone with God, and responsible
to Him alone.” Jones, IIR, 29-32.

these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power,
nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were
their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed
on them.” Daniel 3:27.
“Just as Nebuchadnezzar and his officials had
carefully examined the three Hebrews when they came
out of the fiery furnace and did not find even the smell
of fire of them, so Darius and his princes examined
Daniel to see if the lions had hurt him in any way
and they could not find even a scratch or bruise
upon his body.” Bunch, BOD, 83.

DANIEL 6:24
And the king commanded, and they
brought those men which had accused
Daniel, and they cast them into the den of
lions, them, their children, and their wives;
and the lions had the mastery of them, and
brake all their bones in pieces or ever they
came at the bottom of the den.
The King Commanded.—
“The snare which his enemies had laid for his destruction proved to be their own ruin. At the command
of the king they were cast into the den, and instantly
devoured by the wild beasts.” Sanctified Life, 45.

“Daniel told the king that he had been delivered
because a higher court had reversed the king’s sentence. ‘Forasmuch as before Him innocency was
found in me.’…“For He found me innocent.’—Moffatt.
This indicates that Daniel had appealed his case to
the court of heaven and that the supreme tribunal
of the universe had reversed the decision of the Persian court and annulled the punishment. God had
found him innocent whom the king and princes had
declared guilty. ‘For the eyes of the Lord run to and
fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong
in behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward Him.’ 2
Chron. 16:9. Daniel’s heart was perfect and he was
therefore innocent of any wrong even against the king,
and he reminded the king that he had done him no injury.” Bunch, BOD, 83.

“Why, then, were Daniel’s accusers brought and
cast in? They probably attributed the preservation of
Daniel, not to any miracle in his behalf, but to the fact
that the lions chanced at that time not to be hungry.
The king may have said, ‘In that case they will no more
attack you than him, so we will test the matter by putting you in.’ The lions were hungry enough when not
restrained by divine intervention, and these men were
torn to pieces before they reached the bottom of the
den. Thus was Daniel doubly vindicated, and the
words of Solomon were strikingly fulfilled: ‘The
righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked
cometh in his stead.’ Proverbs 11:8.” Smith, DR 103.
Men Which Had Accused Daniel Thrown In.—
“Unjust attack upon the innocent has often
brought ruin to the attackers. Haman attempted to destroy Mordecai and was himself destroyed. The envious wise men tried to rid themselves of the three Hebrews, but they were defeated and the Hebrews exalted. Likewise the enemies of Daniel suffered the cruel fate they had planned for him while he was elevated and greatly honored by the king.” Bunch, BOD, 83.

King Darius was Exceedingly Glad.—
“ ‘Ye are the light of the world.’ What an impression was produced upon Darius by the conduct
of Daniel! Daniel lived a pure and holy life. God was
first with him. Whenever real Christianity reigns in the
heart, it will be revealed in the character. All will take
knowledge of such, that they have been with Jesus.
The undivided affections must be given to God.” Testimonies to Ministers, 443.

“They have prepared a net for my steps; my soul
is bowed down: they have digged a pit before me, into
the midst whereof they are fallen themselves. Selah.”
Psalm 57:6.

No Manner of Hurt Was Found Upon Him.—
“And the princes, governors, and captains, and
the king's counsellors, being gathered together, saw

164

DANIEL 6
power and goodness in rescuing His servant from the
power of the lions. How excellent a eulogy of the
great God and His faithful servant!
Thus closes the historical part of the book of Daniel.” Smith, DR, 103.

Them, Their Children, and Their Wives.—
“Both Herodotus and Ammianus Marcellinus testify that consigning to death the wives and children
along with condemned men was in accordance with
Persian custom.” 4SDABC, 814.

All People, Nations, & Languages on Earth.—
“And I saw another angel fly in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto
them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation,
and kindred, and tongue, and people.” Rev. 14:6.

“And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan
the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the garment, and
the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters,
and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent,
and all that he had: and they brought them unto the
valley of Achor.” Joshua 7:24.

“For he will finish the work, and cut it short in
righteousness: because a short work will the Lord
make upon the earth.” Romans 9:28.

DANIEL 6:25-27
Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in
all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.
I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear
before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his
kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,
and his dominion shall be even unto the
end.
He delivereth and rescueth, and he
worketh signs and wonders in heaven and
in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from
the power of the lions.

He is the Living God.—
“Through the trial that was permitted to come upon Daniel, great good resulted to the nation; for it gave
opportunity to call the attention of great and small
to the fact that God was able and willing to save him
who trusted in him. Daniel showed to the nation
that Jehovah was a living God. He brought out chapters in his experience showing that God had manifested
himself to his servant in a remarkable manner. He told
them how he had stood before them as a prophet of the
Most High God, and that no earthly power had the right
to interfere with a man's personal relation to his God.
Thus God was manifested above every king, emperor, or statesman, as the one to be honored and
obeyed.” Signs, 11/4/1889.
He Delivers, Rescues, & Works Signs & Wonders.—
“Jesus does not desire those who have been purchased at such a cost to become the sport of the enemy’s temptations. He does not desire us to be overcome and perish. He who curbed the lions in their
den, and walked with His faithful witnesses amid
the fiery flames, is just as ready to work in our behalf to subdue every evil in our nature. Today He is
standing at the altar of mercy, presenting before
God the prayers of those who desire His help. He
turns no weeping, contrite one away. Freely will He
pardon all who come to Him for forgiveness and restoration. He does not tell to any all that He might reveal,
but He bids every trembling soul take courage. Whosoever will, may take hold of God’s strength, and make
peace with Him, and He will make peace.
“The souls that turn to Him for refuge, Jesus lifts
above the accusing and the strife of tongues. No man
or evil angel can impeach these souls. Christ unites
them to His own divine-human nature. They stand
beside the great Sin Bearer in the light proceeding from
the throne of God.” Ministry of Healing, 90.

Another Global Decree.—
“Daniel’s deliverance resulted in another proclamation’s being sent out through the empire in
favor of the true God, the God of Israel. All men
were commanded to fear and tremble before Him. The
plot which Daniel’s enemies had designed to prove his
ruin, resulted only in his advancement. In this case,
and in the experience of the three Hebrews in the fiery
furnace, the approval of God is placed on two great
lines of duty—the refusal to yield to any known sin,
and the refusal to omit any known duty. From these
instances the people of God in all ages may derive encouragement.
“The decree of the king sets forth the character of
the true God: He is the Creator; all others are without
life in themselves. He is steadfast forever; all others
are helpless and unavailing. He has a kingdom; for He
made and governs all. His kingdom shall not be destroyed; all others come to an end. His dominion is
without end; no human power can prevail against it.
He delivers those who are in bondage. He rescues His
servants from their enemies when they call upon Him
for help. He works wonders in the heavens and signs
upon the earth. And to complete all, He has delivered
Daniel, giving before our eyes the fullest proof of His

“From the record of the deliverance of Daniel we
may learn the lesson that God will deliver us from a
greater and more dangerous lion than those which
menaced Daniel. 1 Peter 5:8. The deliverance from

165

GEMS FROM DANIEL
sin, and Satan its author, is even a greater deliverance
than that of Daniel and one in which we all can
share.” Bunch, BOD, 85.

Through the reign of successive monarchs, the
downfall of the nation, and the establishment of
another world empire, such were his wisdom and
statesmanship, so perfect his tact, his courtesy, his genuine goodness of heart, his fidelity to principle, that
even his enemies were forced to the confession that
‘they could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as
he was faithful.’ Dan. 6:4. ” Prophets & Kings, 546.

“From the story of Daniel’s deliverance we may
learn that in seasons of trial and gloom God’s children should be just what they were when their prospects were bright with hope and their surroundings all that they could desire. Daniel in the lions’
den was the same Daniel who stood before the king as
chief among the ministers of state and as a prophet of
the Most High. A man whose heart is stayed upon God
will be the same in the hour of his greatest trial as he is
in prosperity, when the light and favor of God and of
man beam upon him. Faith reaches to the unseen, and
grasps eternal realities.
“Heaven is very near those who suffer for righteousness’ sake. Christ identifies His interests with the
interests of His faithful people; He suffers in the person
of His saints, and whoever touches His chosen ones
touches Him. The power that is near to deliver
from physical harm or distress is also near to save
from the greater evil, making it possible for the servant of God to maintain his integrity under all circumstances, and to triumph through divine grace.” Prophets & Kings, 545.

And in the Reign of Cyrus.—
“The sentence construction allows interpretations
that make Cyrus either a co-ruler with, or successor to,
Darius.” 4SDABC, 814.
Influence Upon Cyrus.—
“The wicked opposition to God’s servant was
now completely broken. ‘Daniel prospered in the reign
of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.’ And
through association with him, these heathen monarchs were constrained to acknowledge his God as
‘the living God, and steadfast forever, and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.’” Prophets &
Kings, 545.
“The deliverance of Daniel from the den of lions had been used of God to create a favorable impression upon the mind of Cyrus the Great. The
sterling qualities of the man of God as a statesman of
farseeing ability led the Persian ruler to show him
marked respect and to honor his judgment. And now,
just at the time God had said He would cause His temple at Jerusalem to be rebuilt, He moved upon Cyrus as
His agent to discern the prophecies concerning himself,
with which Daniel was so familiar, and to grant the
Jewish people their liberty.” Prophets & Kings, 557.

DANIEL 6:28
So this Daniel prospered in the reign of
Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.
So Daniel Prospered.—
“The experience of Daniel as a statesman in the
kingdoms of Babylon and Medo-Persia reveals the
truth that a businessman is not necessarily a designing,
policy man, but that he may be a man instructed by
God at every step. Daniel, the prime minister of the
greatest of earthly kingdoms, was at the same time a
prophet of God, receiving the light of heavenly inspiration. A man of like passions as ourselves, the pen of
inspiration describes him as without fault. His business transactions, when subjected to the closest
scrutiny of his enemies, were found to be without
one flaw. He was an example of what every businessman may become when his heart is converted and consecrated, and when his motives are right in the sight of
God.
“Strict compliance with the requirements of
Heaven brings temporal as well as spiritual blessings. Unwavering in his allegiance to God, unyielding
in his mastery of self, Daniel, by his noble dignity and
unswerving integrity, while yet a young man, won the
‘favor and tender love’ of the heathen officer in whose
charge he had been placed. Daniel 1:9. The same characteristics marked his afterlife. He rose speedily to the
position of prime minister of the kingdom of Babylon.

“Again the nations of the world saw the power of
Israel’s God to preserve his faithful people. Darius had
his belief in God confirmed; and Cyrus had received a
lesson he could not soon forget. It was a fresh token to
the Israelites that God was in their midst to bless them.
…Greater light came to Daniel, for it was after this
experience that a large portion of the prophecies were
given to him. …God not only honored Daniel by a
most miraculous deliverance, but his integrity was the
means of publishing the truth throughout the world.
From this time Daniel prospered—during the reign of
Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus, who issued the wonderful decree for the deliverance of the Jews.
“If sick at heart because of the seeming prosperity
of the wicked and the increase of wickedness among
men in high places, learn their fate from the sixth chapter of Daniel.
“If oppressed because of adherence to the Word
of God, remember that Daniel represents all such, and
what was done for him will be done for all whom
Heaven favors today. Though death claim the body,
the promise of God is a speedy resurrection; and
whether in death, in prison, or the den of lions, Sa-

166

DANIEL 6
tan has no power over Christ. ‘I am come that ye
might have life, and that ye might have it more abundantly.’” Haskell, SDP, 86,87.

167

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER SEVEN
1 In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a
dream and visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the
dream, and told the sum of the matters.
2 Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea.
3 And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one
from another.
4 The first was like a lion, and had eagle's wings: I beheld till
the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the
earth, and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's heart
was given to it.
5 And behold another beast, a second, like to a bear, and it
raised up itself on one side, and it had three ribs in the mouth of
it between the teeth of it: and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh.
6 After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, which had
upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four
heads; and dominion was given to it.
7 After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth
beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had
great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped
the residue with the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the
beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns.
8 I considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among
them another little horn, before whom there were three of the
first horns plucked up by the roots: and, behold, in this horn
were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great
things.
9 I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of
days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of
his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame,
and his wheels as burning fire.
10 A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him:
thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times
ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the
books were opened.
11 I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which
the horn spake: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.
12 As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and
time.
13 I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of
man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of
days, and they brought him near before him.
14 And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a king-

dom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him:
his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.
15 I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body,
and the visions of my head troubled me.
16 I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him
the truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.
17 These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which
shall arise out of the earth.
18 But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and
possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.
19 Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was
diverse from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth were
of iron, and his nails of brass; which devoured, brake in pieces,
and stamped the residue with his feet;
20 And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other
which came up, and before whom three fell; even of that horn
that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, whose
look was more stout than his fellows.
21 I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and
prevailed against them;
22 Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to
the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints
possessed the kingdom.
23 Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom
upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall
devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in
pieces.
24 And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that
shall arise: and another shall rise after them; and he shall be
diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings.
25 And he shall speak great words against the most High, and
shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change
times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand until a time
and times and the dividing of time.
26 But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end.
27 And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of
the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.
28 Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me:
but I kept the matter in my heart.

INTRODUCTION

days of Babylon to the great investigative judgment,
which is the central theme of the chapter.
…Although the prophet was shown the history of nations, the angel of revelation touched briefly on those
subjects, but lingered on the soul-thrilling description
of the investigative judgment.” Haskell, SDP, 88,89.

“One of the important principles to know in understanding Bible prophecy is the rule of ‘repeat and
enlarge.’ …The Lord repeats and enlarges our understanding of the events covering the period of time from
Daniel’s day to the Second Coming of Christ. In Daniel 7, God repeats what was given in Daniel 2, which
are the foundation blocks of the later prophecies. He
then enlarges the past part, which makes thepicture
more complete.” Cox, Daniel, 74

“The vision of Daniel 7 is structurally divided into four parts, each concluding with the setting up of the
everlasting kingdom:
“Vision: 7:1-14: The full vision in its chronological sequence.
“Explanation: 7:15-18: Daniel wants to know the
meaning of the vision. An angel gives a brief explana-

“To the student of prophecy, the seventh chapter
of Daniel is a most important record. By a continuous
chain of events, the prophet gives the history from the

168

DANIEL 7
tion ending with the eternal kingdom
“Inquiry: 7:19-22: Daniel desires to know about
the fourth beast, the ten horns, the little horn and the
everlasting kingdom.
“Explanation: 7:23-27: The angel provides the
final and fullest explanation of the fourth beast, the ten
horns, the little horn and the everlasting kingdom.”
Bohr, ND7, 2.

Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you
an expected end. Then shall ye call upon Me, and ye
shall go and pray unto Me, and I will hearken unto
you. And ye shall seek Me, and find Me, when ye
shall search for Me with all your heart.’ [Jeremiah 29]:
Verses 10-13.
“Shortly before the fall of Babylon, when Daniel
was meditating on these prophecies and seeking God
for an understanding of the times, a series of visions
was given him concerning the rise and fall of kingdoms. With the first vision, as recorded in the seventh chapter of the book of Daniel, an interpretation
was given; yet not all was made clear to the prophet.
‘My cogitations much troubled me,’ he wrote of his
experience at the time, ‘and my countenance changed
in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.’ Daniel 7:28.”
Prophets & Kings, 551-554.

DANIEL 7:1
In the first year of Belshazzar king of
Babylon Daniel had a dream and visions of
his head upon his bed: then he wrote the
dream, and told the sum of the matters.
The First Year of Belshazzar.—
“It is also possible now to date accurately the first
year of Belshazzar’s kingship to 550/549 BC.” BRI,
2SOD, 85

DANIEL 7:2,3
Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds
of the heaven strove upon the great sea.
And four great beasts came up from
the sea, diverse one from another.

“The vision of Daniel 7 was given at the beginning of that unusual ten-year period at a time when
Nabonidus had just left for the desert of Arabia [for a
period of ten years from 550 BC to about 540 BC] and
Belshazzar had just been put in charge of affairs in
Babylon as co-king with his father. Why would God
have given this particular vision at that specific time?
There may have been one good reason.
“By 550 BC it was already evident that the kingdom of Babylon was weakening and on its way to being overthrown by some other power. Thus one function of this vision was to spell out the events that would
take place when this happened. These developments
were not to take the people of God by surprise. Ten
years later when the Persian bear took over from the
Babylonian lion, the people of god would find assurance that they were indeed being led by God—that He
had given evidence through His prophet that He was
still in charge of human affairs and that He knew what
would happen.” Shea, DARG, 198,199.

Why Are Symbols Used.—
“To hide the facts from those who have rejected
truth and thus became the great enemies of the saints.”
Burnside, DPUF, 97.
“[Symbols] portray the great enemies of God and
His people with their cruel warfare and persecutions
against ‘the saints of the Most High.’ The preservation
of these visions demanded the use of parables or symbols to conceal the meanings from the wicked and at
the same time reveal them to the righteous. Of his
prophecies Daniel himself wrote: ‘None of the wicked
shall understand; but the wise shall understand.’ Dan.
12:10. We owe the very existence of the books of
Daniel and the Revelation to the parabolic method
in which they were written, which conceals the truth
from the enemies of God and reveals it to His
friends. It was for this same reason that Christ did so
much of His preaching in parables of symbols. His
enemies made it necessary.” Bunch, BOD, 88.

“This is the same Belshazzar mentioned in
Daniel 5. Chronologically, this chapter precedes the
fifth chapter; but chronology is here disregarded in
order that the historical part of the book may stand by
itself.” Smith, DR, 105

“If any man will do His will, he shall know of the
doctrine….” John 7:17.

Daniel Had a Dream and Visions of His Head.—
“As the rapid course of events betokened the
mighty hand of God at work among the nations, Daniel
gave special thought to the promises made to Israel.
His faith in the prophetic word led him to enter into
experiences foretold by the sacred writers. ‘After
seventy years be accomplished at Babylon,’ the Lord
had declared, ‘I will visit you, and perform My good
word toward you, in causing you to return.... I know
the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the

How to Interpret Symbols.—
“All Scripture language is to be taken literally,
unless there exists some good reason for regarding
it as figurative. All that is figurative is to be interpreted by that which is literal. That the language
here used is symbolic is evident from verse 17, which
reads, ‘These great beasts, which are four, are four
kings which arise out of the earth.’

169

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“…The circumstances under which they arose, as
represented in the prophecy, are also stated in symbolic
language. The symbols introduced are the four winds,
the sea, four great beasts, ten horns, and another horn
which had eyes and a mouth and which rose up in war
against God and His people. We have now to inquire
what they denote.” Smith, DR, 105.

fourth. The last one is in existence when all earthly
scenes are brought to an end by the final judgment.
From the time of Daniel to the end of this world’s
history, there were to be but four universal kingdoms, as we learned from Nebuchadnezzar’s dream
of the great image in Daniel 2, interpreted by the
prophet sixty-five years before. Daniel was still living under the kingdom denoted by the head of gold.”
Smith, DR, 105,106.

The Four winds of the Great Heaven Strove.—
“In symbolic language winds represent strife,
political commotion, and war, as we read from the
prophet Jeremiah: ‘Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a
great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of
the earth. And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day
from one end of the earth even unto the other end of
the earth.’ Jeremiah 25: 32, 33. The prophet speaks of
a controversy which the Lord is to have with all nations. The strife and commotion which produces all
this destruction is called ‘a great whirlwind.’
That winds denote strife and war is evident in the
vision itself. As the result of the blowing of the winds,
kingdoms arise and fall through political strife.” Smith,
DR, 105,106.

The Principle of Repeat and Enlarge.—
“The first beast of this vision must therefore denote the same kingdom as the head of gold of the great
image, namely, Babylon. The other beasts no doubt
represent the succeeding kingdoms portrayed by that
image. But if this vision covers essentially the same
period of history as the image of Daniel 2, the query
may arise, Why is it given? Why was not that first
vision sufficient? We answer, The history of world
empires is passed over again and again in order that
additional characteristics may be brought out, and
additional facts and features may be presented. It is
thus that we have ‘line upon line’ according to the
Scriptures. In chapter 2, only the political aspects of
world dominion are portrayed. Here earthly governments are introduced in their relationship to God’s
truth and God’s people. Their true character is shown
by symbols of wild and ravenous beasts.” Smith, DR,
106,107.

“And upon Elam will I bring the four winds
from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter
them toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come. For I
will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies,
and before them that seek their life: and I will bring
evil upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the
LORD; and I will send the sword after them, till I
have consumed them.” Jeremiah 49:36,37.

“The great kingdoms that have ruled the world
were presented to the prophet Daniel as beasts of
prey, rising when ‘the four winds of the heaven strove
upon the great sea.’” Daniel 7:2.” Great Controversy,
439.

The Great Sea.—
“No specific body of water, such as the Mediterranean Sea, need be inferred. The sea is here symbolic
of the nation of the world—the ‘great sea’ of humanity in all ages (see Rev. 17:15; cf. Isa. 17:12; Jer.
46:7).” 4SDABC, 820.

FOUR Great Beasts.—
“Every nation that has come upon the stage of action has been permitted to occupy its place on the earth,
that it might be seen whether it would fulfill the purpose of ‘the Watcher and the Holy One.’ Prophecy has
traced the rise and fall of the world's great empires—
Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome. With
each of these, as with nations of less power, history
repeated itself. Each had its period of test, each failed,
its glory faded, its power departed, and its place was
occupied by another.” Education, 176,177.

“The waters which thou sawest... are peoples,
and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.” Revelation 17:15.
Four Great Beasts.—
“‘These great beasts, which are four, are four
kings which arise out of the earth.’ That kingdoms are
intended, and not merely individual kings, is clear from
the words, ‘But the saints of the Most High shall
take the kingdom.’ In explaining verse 23, the angel
said, ‘The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom
upon the earth.’ These beasts are therefore symbols
of four great kingdoms.
“…Since these beasts denote four kings, or kingdoms, we inquire, Where shall we begin and what four
empires are represented? These beasts arise consecutively, for they are enumerated from the first to the

“’Thus saith the Lord God; Remove the diadem,
and take off the crown:... exalt him that is low, and
abase him that is high. I will overturn, overturn,
overturn, it: and it shall be no more, until He come
whose right it is; and I will give it Him.’ Ezekiel
21:26,27.
“The crown removed from Israel passed successively to the kingdoms of Babylon, Medo-Persia,
Greece, and Rome. God says, ‘It shall be no more,
until He come whose right it is; and I will give it
Him.’” Education, 179.

170

DANIEL 7

gle’s wings: I beheld till the wings thereof
were plucked, and it was lifted up from the
earth, and made stand upon the feet as a
man, and a man’s heart was given to it.

Why Beasts Used as a Symbol.—
“The germ in the seed grows by the unfolding of
the life-principle which God has implanted. Its development depends upon no human power. So it is with
the kingdom of Christ. It is a new creation. Its principles of development are the opposite of those that rule
the kingdoms of this world. Earthly governments
prevail by physical force; they maintain their dominion by war; but the founder of the new kingdom
is the Prince of Peace. The Holy Spirit represents
worldly kingdoms under the symbol of fierce beasts of
prey; but Christ is ‘the Lamb of God, which taketh
away the sin of the world.’ John 1:29. In His plan of
government there is no employment of brute force
to compel the conscience. The Jews looked for the
kingdom of God to be established in the same way as
the kingdoms of the world. To promote righteousness
they resorted to external measures. They devised
methods and plans. But Christ implants a principle.
By implanting truth and righteousness, He counterworks error and sin.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 77.

The First.—
“The capital of Nebuchadnezzar’s world-empire
is spoken of by Isaiah as ‘Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldee’s excellency,’ ‘the
golden city;’ ‘the lady of the kingdoms’ ‘that
dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures;’
and by Jeremiah as ‘the praise of the whole earth.’
Jeremiah also speaks of ‘the broad walls of Babylon...
and her high gates;’ Isaiah, of her ‘gates of brass.’
…Nebuchadnezzar was an instrument of God’s judgments.” Youth Instructor, 10/11/1904.
The First Was Like a Lion.—
“Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have driven
him away: first the king of Assyria hath devoured him;
and last this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath
broken his bones.” Jer. 50:17. (See also Jeremiah
4:7; 50:43,44,)

“Untamed and savage beasts of prey are the divine symbols of the godless nations of this earth during
the reign of sin. The tastes, ambitions, and inclinations
of their rulers and military conquerors are like those of
ferocious animals. The four beasts of this vision represent the four forms of brute force by which Satan
rules the world from Babylon till his kingdom is overthrown and the everlasting kingdom of God is established. All of the great empires of this prophecy were
greedy, selfish and savage. Their universal rulership
were made possible through bloodshed and war.
This is true of most of the nations of human history. It
has been the survival of the strongest and most cruel
except when God has intervened. Satan is the world’s
great war lord and has always caused the winds of
strife and human passion to stir up the most savage
elements in men and nations.” Bunch, BOD, 88.

“An appropriate symbol for Babylon.
The
winged lion is found on Babylonian objects of art.
The combination of lion and eagle was a common motif—more often a lion with eagle’s wings, sometimes
with claws or a beak.” 4SDABC, 820.

Movement From East to West.—
“It is worthy of notice that the fulfillment of
prophecy moves from east to west. The lion and bear
are powers which bear sway in Asia. The leopard governs toward the eastern part of Western Europe and
the dragon rules in the western portion of Western
Europe. When we study Revelation, we will see that
the second beast of Revelation 13 rules west of Europe
(the United States of America). While Protestant eyes
are fixed on the east as the place for the fulfillment of
Bible prophecy, it is fulfilling in the west right before
their eyes and they can’t see it because they are looking
in the wrong place!!” Bohr, ND7, 4.

The Lion = Babylonian Kingdom—606-538 BC
Eagle’s Wings Denote God’s Guidance.—
“First, Israel was led by God from Egypt to the
Promised land.
“Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and
how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you
unto myself.” Ex. 19:4.
“As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over
her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them,
beareth them on her wings: So the LORD alone did
lead him.” Deut. 32:11,12.
“The wings of the eagle represent Divine guid-

DANIEL 7:4
The first was like a lion, and had ea171

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ance that was given to Nebuchadnezzar:
“Behold, I will send and take all the families of
the north, saith the LORD, and Nebuchadrezzar the
king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them
against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof,
and against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them…” Jerermiah 25:9.
And now have I given all these lands into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my
servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him
also to serve him.” Jeremiah 27:6.
“And I will strengthen the arms of the king of
Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will
break Pharaoh’s arms, and he shall groan before him
with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.” Ezekiel 30:24. “ PJ.

“There came a time when the wings were
plucked. It no longer rushed upon its prey like an eagle. The boldness and spirit of the lion were gone. A
man’s heart—weak, timorous, and faint—took the
place of a lion’s strength. Such was the case with the
nation during the closing years of its history, when it
had become enfeebled and effeminate through
wealth and luxury.” Smith, DR, 107.
“Could anything better express the change that
came into the Babylonian Empire before it collapsed?
In English history we read of Richard the LionHearted. King Richard was a lion-hearted man, full
of courage and strength. But here we have a manhearted lion.” Anderson, UDP, 89.
“Under King Nebuchadnezzar, Babylon was the
richest and most powerful kingdom on the earth. Its
riches and splendor have been faintly portrayed by Inspiration. But it did not fulfill God’s purpose; and
when his time had come, this kingdom of pride and
power, ruled by men of the highest intellect, was
broken, shattered, helpless. Christ has declared,
‘Without me ye can do nothing.’ The illustrious
statesmen of Babylon did not regard themselves as
dependent on God. They thought that they had created all their grandeur and exaltation.” Youth Instructor, 9/23/1903.

A Lion Having Eagle’s Wings.—
“In the image, Babylon was represented by gold,
the king of metals. The noblest of metals in the form
of the noblest part of man, and the noblest of beasts
with the wings of the noblest of birds, are the prophetic symbols of Babylon, ‘the glory of kingdoms.’
Bunch, BOD, 89.
Wings Were Plucked.—
“Notice the passive verbs in this verse: ‘wings
were plucked’, ‘it was lifted up,’ it ‘was made to
stand,’ and ‘a man’s heart was given to it’. It is clear
that someone else is guiding history!!” Bohr, ND7, 4.

“Instead of being a protector of men, Babylon became a proud and cruel oppressor. The words of Inspiration picturing the cruelty and greed of rulers
in Israel reveal the secret of Babylon’s fall and of
the fall of many another kingdom since the world
began: ‘Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the
wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the
flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither
have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye
bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost; but with force
and with cruelty have ye ruled them.’ Ezekiel
34:3,4.” Education, 176.

A Man’s Heart Was Given To It.—
“Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass
over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his
god.” Hab. 1:11.
“While Daniel watched the same kingdom in his
vision the noble lion with its wings, denoting power
and rapidity of conquest, had been lifted up from the
earth into an unnatural position and made to stand upon
its feet as a man, and a man’s heart was given to it.
Man’s heart without Christ is simply sin. The wings
were shorn, and then Babylon was represented as it
existed at the time of the vision, bereft of its strength,
abandoned by God, with Belshazzar standing at the
head of the government. The prophet Habakkuk
gives the reason for this sudden weakening of the
mighty power of Babylon. He says, ‘Then shall his
mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend,
imputing this his power unto his god.’ The history of
the kingdom as given in previous chapters shows how
and when this was done. Babylon committed the unpardonable sin, imputing the power and Spirit of
God to the gods of the heathen, and by this act the
lion was shorn of its strength, the wings were
plucked, and a man’s heart was given to it. Two
years after the vision, in the year 538 BC, Daniel was a
witness to the complete overthrow of the kingdom.”
Haskell, SDP, 90,91.

DANIEL 7:5
And behold another beast, a second,
like to a bear, and it raised up itself on one
side, and it had three ribs in the mouth of it
between the teeth of it: and they said thus
unto it, Arise, devour much flesh.
The Bear.—
“As in the image of Daniel 2, so in this series of
symbols a marked deterioration is noticed as we descend from one kingdom to another. The silver of the

172

DANIEL 7
breast and arms is inferior to the gold of the head. The
bear is inferior to the lion. Medo-Persia fell short of
Babylon in wealth, magnificence, and brilliance.
The bear raised itself up on one side. The kingdom
was composed of two nationalities, the Medes and the
Persians. The same fact is represented by the two
horns of the ram in Daniel 8. Of these horns it is said
that the higher horn came up last, and of the bear that it
raised itself up on one side. This was fulfilled by the
Persian division of the kingdom, for although it came
up last, it attained the higher eminence, becoming a
dominant influence in the nation. (See comments on
Daniel 8: 3.) …The character of the power is well represented by a bear. The Medes and Persians were cruel
and rapacious, robbers and spoilers of the people. This
Medo-Persian kingdom continued from the overthrow of Babylon by Cyrus to the battle of Arbela
in 331 BC, a period of 207 years.” Smith, DR,
107,108.

120,000 additional fighting men. Xerxes assembled
and led the largest army of ancient times. A conservative estimate of the number of his fighting men
is 2,500,000. Artaxerxes commanded an army of
900,000 men, with a reserve force of 300,000 more.
The last Darius had an army of 1,000,000 soldiers
when he was defeated by Alexander with a small army
of Grecian warriors. His slow movements in contrast
with the rapidity of his antagonist was largely responsible for his defeat. The bear is also a robber and despoiler and these terms are applied to the Medes and
Persians in Jer. 51:48-56.” Bunch, BOD, 91.
“The bear of Daniel seven symbolizes the same
power as the ram of chapter eight, which the angel
there tells the prophet represents the Medo-Persian
empire. The history of this empire given in the eleventh chapter of the book of Daniel, and the study of
that chapter together with the thirteenth and twenty-first chapters of Isaiah, will reveal the bear-like
character of the nation which arose and devoured
much flesh. The history of the second great kingdom
covers the years from 538 to 331 BC.” Haskell, SDP,
91,92.

“The bear is a mountain dweller, making it an
apt symbol for a mountainous country such as Media
which was later joined to the country of Persia on the
elevated plateau of Iran. To reach Media-Persia, the
forces of Assyria or Babylon had to march up through
the Zagros mountains. Nebuchadnezzar built the famous hanging gardens of Babylon for his Median
wife because she was lonesome for her native mountains and bored by the flat plain of Mesopotamia.”
Shea, DARG, 202.

Three Ribs in the Mouth of It.—
“Beasts grip and hold their prey with their teeth.
Deut. 32:24; Ps. 124:6. The three ribs between the
teeth of the bear no doubt stand for three powers that
have in some signal way fallen prey to the depredations
of the bear, Medo-Persia. The three powers so to
suffer were probably Lydia, Babylon, and Egypt.
Croesus of Lydia fell before Cyrus in 547 BC, Babylon
fell in 539 , and Egypt fell to Cambyses in 525.”
Thiele, OSID, 61.
“These …three major westward conquests of Persia—Babylon to the west, 539 BC; Lydia to the north,
546 BC; and Egypt to the south, 525 BC …correspond
well with the three ribs in the mouth of the MedoPersian bear (chap. 7). However, the bear is not described as going off in these three directions to make
its conquests. The ribs are already present in the bear’s
mouth when it is described.” BRI, 2SOD, 503.
They Said Thus Unto It.—
“Notice, once again, that someone is active behind the scenes of history: ‘they said unto it, Arise,
devour much flesh.’ It is obvious that someone is giving the Medes and Persians permission to conquer.
‘They’ in this verse no doubt refers to the watchers
or angels who are the emissaries of God in the guidance of human events (compare Ezekiel 1 where the
angels carry on God’s redemptive purpose on earth).”
Bohr, ND7, 5.

The Bear = Medo-Persian Empire, 538-301 BC.
“The bear is a ponderous and awkward animal
and therefore slow in its movements, but it is expressive of great strength and brute force. It is greedy,
cunning, cruel, sullen, and ferocious. The bear is also
noted for its persistency. …The bear is therefore a fit
symbol of Medo-Persia whose armies never moved
with the speed of the Babylonians. The armies of the
Medes and Persians were large and ponderous and
moved with the massive strength and heaviness of the
awkward bear. Darius marched through Scythia with
700,000 men. He also had a fleet of 600 ships with

Symbol of Ram in Chapter 8 Compared.—
“The ram which thou sawest having two horns are
the kings of Media and Persia.” Daniel 8:20.

173

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Pharaohs and his troops hailed him as a god. When
he set forth again that year he directed his armies toward Mesopotamia, the heart of the Persian Empire.
The Persians took their stand near Arbela, east of the
junction of the Tigris and Great Zab rivers, but their
forces were defeated and routed. The fabulous riches
of the world’s greatest empire lay open to the young
king, 25 years old.
“After preliminary organization of his empire Alexander pushed his conquests to the north and to the
east. By 329 BC he had taken Maracanda, now Samarkand in Turkistan. Two years later he invaded
northwest India. Soon after crossing the Indus River,
however, his troops refused to go farther, and he was
forced to yield to them. Returning to Persia and Mesopotamia, Alexander was faced with the stupendous
work of organizing the administration of his territories.
In 323 BC he made his capital in Babylon, a city
that still preserved reminders of the glory of Nebuchadnezzar’s day. In the same year, after a round of
hard drinking, Alexander fell ill and died.
“…The symbolic vision represented the animal
with wings added to it, not two but four, denoting
superlative speed. The symbol most fittingly describes the lightning speed with which Alexander and
his Macedonians in less than a decade came into possession of the greatest empire the world had yet know.
There is no other example in ancient times of such
rapid movements of troops on so large and successful a scale.” 4SDABC, 821,822.

“Both of these beasts were unbalanced. The
bear was raised up on one side (7:5a). Correspondingly, the ram’s two horns were unequal and the higher
one came up last (8:3). The bear had three ribs in its
mouth (7:5b), while the ram charged off in three
directions of conquest (8:4a). Since the same points
are made about both beasts, the identification of the
second beast in chapter 7 as Medo-Persia is a direct
equation.” BRI, 2SOD, 185.

DANIEL 7:6
After this I beheld, and lo another, like
a leopard, which had upon the back of it
four wings of a fowl; the beast had also
four heads; and dominion was given to it.
The Leopard Had Four Wings of a Fowl.—
“The third kingdom, Grecia, is here represented
by the symbol of a leopard. If wings upon the lion
signified rapidity of conquest, they would signify the
same here. The leopard itself is a swift-footed beast,
but this was not sufficient to represent the career of
the nation here symbolized. It must have wings in addition. Two wings, the number the lion had, were
not sufficient; the leopard must have four. This
would denote unprecedented celerity of movement,
which we find to be a historical fact in the Grecian
kingdom. The conquests of Grecia under Alexander
had no parallel in ancient times for suddenness and
rapidity. His military achievements are summarized by
W. W. Tarn:
“ ‘He was a master in the combination of various
arms; he taught the world the advantages of campaigning in winter, the value of pressing pursuit to the utmost, and the principle of “march divided, fight united.” He marched usually in two division, one conducting the impediments and his own [division] traveling
light; his speed of movement was extraordinary. It is
said that he attributed his military success to “never
putting anything off.” ...The enormous distances traversed in unknown country imply a very high degree of
organizing ability; in ten years he had only two serious
breakdowns.... Had a lesser man attempted what he
achieved, and failed, we should have heard enough of
the hopeless military difficulties of the undertaking.’
The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. VI, pp. 425,
426.” Smith, DR, 108,109.

Leopard = Grecian Empire—331-168 BC.
The Beast Had Also Four Heads.—
“It is important to underline that the leopard did
not have the four heads when it began to rule. How
do we know this? The answer is, by a comparison of
Daniel 7 with Daniel 8. In Daniel 8 the he-goat (a symbol of Greece, 8:21) governed for a period with a notable horn on its head (Alexander the Great). Only after
that great horn was broken, did four others come out to
replace it. So, just as the he-goat governed for a period
and then sprouted four horns, so, the leopard ruled for a
period and then it grew four heads. It is clear that the

“In 334 BC, Alexander crossed the Hellespont
and entered Persian territory with only 35,000 men, the
meager sum of 70 talents in cash, and but one month’s
store of provisions. The campaign was a series of triumphs. The first victory was achieved at Granicus, the
next at Issus in the following year, and the next at Tyre
in the year after that. Passing through Palestine, Alexander conquered Gaza and then entered Egypt virtually
unopposed. Here in 331 BC he founded the city of
Alexandria. He declared himself the successor to the

174

DANIEL 7
four heads and the four horns came up after the leopard
and he-goat had ruled for a period of time (see, Daniel
8:5-8).” Bohr, ND7, 5.

who was commissioned to act as guardian of the throne
until the expected heir was old enough to reign. On
leaving Greece on his campaign of conquest Alexander
left Antipater as regent of Macedon. After conquering
Egypt he left Ptolemy, one of his generals, in charge of
that country, and another general, Seleucus, was made
regent of Babylon. On the death of Alexander these
four generals became rivals for the vacant throne, each
claiming the superior right.
“War, intrigue and diplomacy continued among
these rival generals for a number of years. By 301 BC,
all of Alexander’s relatives who could lay any claim to
the throne had died or been slain and his four leading
generals divided his kingdom between them. In the
North, Lysimachus ruled over Thrace, Bithynia, and
the smaller provinces of Asia Minor. In the South,
Ptolemy ruled Egypt, Libya, Arabia, and Palestine. In
the West, Cassander controlled Macedon and Greece,
and in the East, Seleucus ruled Syria and all of the
conquered territory to the Indus. These four kings
ruled over the same kingdom as had Alexander, but
from four different points and under four different sovereigns. The leopard had one body with four heads and
thus fitly symbolized the Grecian Empire. Later
prophecies also picture these four divisions. See Dan.
8:8,22; 11:3,4. The Kingdom of Alexander was divided ‘toward the four winds of heaven,’ or, the
four points of the compass.” Bunch, BOD, 93, 94.

“Alexander died without arranging for the succession to his throne. First his weak-minded half-brother
Philip and then his posthumous son Alexander were the
titular rulers under the regency of one of another of the
generals, and the empire was divided into a large number of provinces, the most important of which were
controlled by about six leading generals as satraps.
“But the central authority—that is, the regency for
the two puppet kings—was never strong enough to
weld the vast empire together. Through some 12 years
of internal struggle, during which the control of various
sections of the territory changed repeatedly, and during
which both kings were slain, Antigonus emerged as the
last of the claimants for central power over the whole
empire. He was opposed by a coalition of four powerful leaders, Cassander, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and
Ptolemy, who were bent on dividing the territory
among themselves. In 306 Antigonus declared himself
king (jointly with his son Demetrius) of the entire empire, the successor of Alexander. Thereupon the four
allies, abandoning their subordinate title of satrap,
declared themselves kings of their respective territories.
“The long life-and-death struggle over the question as to whether the empire should be united under
Antigonus and Demetrius or divided by the four generals was settled by the Battle of Ipsus in 301 BC. Antigonus was killed. Demetrius fled, and their territory
was divided. This left, with the exception of the small
fragments, four independent kingdoms in place of the
huge empire that Alexander had won but had not been
able to consolidate. Ptolemy had Egypt, also Palestine and part of Syria; Cassander had Macedonia,
with nominal sovereignty of Greece; Lysimachus
had Thrace and a large part of Asia Minor; and
Seleucus had the bulk of what had been the Persian
Empire—part of Asia Minor, northern Syria, Mesopotamia, and the east.
“Alexander’s empire, even in its divided phase,
was still a continuation and embodiment of its founder’s ideal—a Greco-Macedonian—Asiatic world of
diverse peoples, united by Greek language, thought,
and civilization. Except for political centralization,
the Hellenistic world constituted as much a unity as it
had been under Alexander, and more so than had ever
been achieved before. It was aptly represented by a
single beast with multiple heads (or in ch. 8, with
multiple horns).” 4SDABC, 822.

And Dominion Was Given To It.—
“Once again we are told that a power outside history is guiding world affairs: ‘and dominion was given
to it’. Notice that the leopard did not take dominion.
Rather, dominion was given to it!!” Bohr, ND7, 5.

DANIEL 7:7
After this I saw in the night visions,
and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and
terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had
great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in
pieces, and stamped the residue with the
feet of it: and it was diverse from all the
beasts that were before it; and it had ten
horns.
A Fourth Beast.—
“The three preceding powers were symbolized
by three of the mightiest beasts of the earth, but when
the fourth beast was considered, there was no animal
with a character to represent its terrible nature; so
a beast without name, having iron teeth, brass nails,
and ten horns, was presented to the prophet.” Haskell,
SDP, 92,93.

“Alexander died on June 28, 323 BC, as the result
of a combination of malaria and debauchery, and left
no heir to the throne. A son born a few months after
his death was murdered before he was old enough to
claim the throne. Alexander on his death-bed gave the
signet ring to Perdiccas, one of his leading generals,

“Inspiration finds no beast in nature to symbolize
the power here illustrated. No addition of hoofs, heads,

175

GEMS FROM DANIEL
horns, wings, scales, teeth, or nails to any beast found
in nature will answer. This power is diverse from all
the others, and the symbol is wholly different from
anything found in the animal kingdom.
“The foundation for a volume is laid in verse 7,
but for lack of space we are compelled to treat it briefly
here. This beast corresponds to the fourth division
of the great image—the legs of iron. In the comment
on Daniel 2: 40 are given some reasons for believing
this power to be Rome. The same reasons are applicable to the present prophecy. How accurately Rome
answered to the iron portion of the image! How accurately it answers to the beast before us! In the dread
and terror which it inspired, and in its great strength, it
answered admirably to the prophetic description. The
world had never seen its equal. It devoured as with
iron teeth, and broke in pieces all that stood in its way.
It ground the nations into the dust beneath its brazen
feet.” Smith, DR, 110.

190 Rome defeated Antiochus III and took the Seleucid
territory as far east as the Taurus Mountains.
“In 168 BC, at the Battle of Pydna, Rome ended
the monarchy of Macedonia, dividing it up into four
confederacies; and probably in the same year warned
Antiochus IV away from his attack on Egypt. In 146
Rome annexed Macedonia as a province and placed
most of the Greek cities under the governor of Macedonia.
“If Rome’s mastery of the east is reckoned from
the removal of the monarchs of the three Hellenistic
kingdoms, by Roman power, the date 168 BC may be
regarded as the first step in the process. However, the
Seleucid and Ptolemaic kings remained on their thrones
till much later, 63 in Syria and 30 in Egypt. If the dates
of the annexation of these three kingdoms as Roman
provinces are chosen, the dates would by 146, 64, and
30 BC respectively. Some historians emphasize 168
BC because by that time Rome had conquered Macedonia and had saved Egypt from falling to the Seleucid
kingdom by merely forbidding the invasion of Antiochus IV. This demonstrated that Rome virtually
controlled all three kingdoms even though she had
as yet conquered only one of them.” Unknown
Source.
It Had Great Iron Teeth.—
“These iron teeth further represent the conquering and destructive nature of this kingdom, but it also
forms a direct link with the fourth kingdom in Daniel 2 where the fourth kingdom was represented by the
iron legs of the image (2:33, 40).” Shea, DARG, 204.
It Devoured and Brake in Pieces.—
“As the animal tore to pieces and devoured its
prey with these grotesque fangs, so Rome devoured
nations and peoples in its conquests. Sometimes
whole cities were destroyed, as in the case of Corinth
in 146 BC, then again kingdoms, such as Macedonia
and the Seleucid dominions had been, were divided
into provinces [‘broke in pieces’]. The kingdom of
Dacia disappeared after the emperor Trajan was finished with it.” Unknown Source.

4th Kingdom of Rome: First Pagan and then Papal.
Dreadful.—
“Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast,
which was diverse from all the others, exceeding
dreadful….” Daniel 7:19.
“And I prayed unto the LORD my God, and made
my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that
love him, and to them that keep his commandments.”
Daniel 9:4.
“Apparently, this fourth beast would attempt
to take the place of God in the minds of its subjects.” PJ.

It Had Ten Horns.—
“And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten
kings that shall arise.” Daniel 7:24.
“It had ten horns, which are explained in verse
24 to be ten kings, or kingdoms, which should arise
out of this empire. As already noticed in comments
on Daniel 2, Rome was divided into ten kingdoms.
These divisions have ever since been spoken of as the
ten kingdoms of the Roman Empire.” Smith, DR, 110.

Strong Exceedingly.—
“By 200 BC, when Carthage was no longer a rival
(although it was not destroyed until more than half a
century later), Rome was the mistress of the western
Mediterranean and had begun to enter into contacts
with the East, where she was thenceforth to become
dominant also. In 197 Rome defeated Macedonia and
set up the Greek states under her own protection. In

“Its division into ten parts was accomplished between the years 356 and 483 AD.” Biblical Institute,
35.

176

DANIEL 7
“Each of the preceding kingdoms had fallen
into the hands of some strong general who took
the rule, but with Rome the case was different.
The details of this history are given in the eighth
chapter of Revelation under the symbol of the
seven trumpets. Barbarian hordes from the
north of Europe and Asia swept over the Roman empire between the years 351 and 483
AD, crushing the government into ten parts.
“To the Roman kingdom, heaven itself was
poured out in the person of the Saviour, and it was
Rome that nailed him to the cross. It was a Roman seal
on his tomb, and a Roman guard at his grave. The early church suffered persecution at the hands of this same
power. Judgment came to Rome when these barbarians overran the empire with fire and sword, and
the kingdom was divided into ten parts.” Haskell,
SDP, 93,94.

“…Various writers on prophecy have prepared
various lists of kingdoms into which Rome was divided. These lists agree on most items, but there are slight
differences. The differences are due mainly to the state
of flux that things were in as Rome came to its end.
Kingdoms arose and kingdoms disappeared. Tribes
located in one region today were elsewhere tomorrow.
In a number of instances smaller groups of invading
barbarians united into larger groups. Other small
groups continued to carry on independently of their
fellows, but hardly enjoyed the strength or stability to
warrant the title of kingdoms. The history of the period
is so involved and there was so much of change that it
is no easy task to set forth any specific list of ten kingdoms into which Rome was divided.
“…The list of A.T. Jones is probably as satisfactory as any list of ten tribes which established themselves on the territory of western Rome between the
years 350 and 476 AD. Their years and the territory in
which they ultimately settled is as follows:
351 AD
Alemanni
Germany
351 AD
Franks
France
406 AD
Burgundians
Switzerland
406 AD
Suevi
Portugal
406 AD
Vandals
Africa
408 AD
Visigoths
Spain
449 AD
Saxons
Britain
453 AD
Ostrogoths
Italy
453 AD
Lombards
Italy
476 AD
Heruli
Italy ”
Thiele, OSID, 62,63.
“Gibbon, discussing the period between 400 and
500 AD, mentions no less than eight of these tribes
within a single paragraph: ‘The formidable Visigoths
universally adopted the religion of the Romans, with
whom they maintained a perpetual intercourse, of war,
of friendship, or of conquest. …During the same period, Christianity was embraced by almost all the Barbarians, who established their kingdoms on the ruins of
the Western empire; the Burgundians in Gaul, the
Suevi in Spain, The Vandals in Africa, the Ostrogoths
in Pannonia, and the various bands of mercenaries
(Heruli, etc.), that raised Odoacer to the throne in Italy.
The Franks and the Saxons still persevered in the errors of Paganism; but the Franks obtained the monarchy of Gaul by their submission to the example of Clovis.’ Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,
III, 543” Thiele, OSID, 63.

“ ‘The destruction of the Roman Empire in the
West by the German barbarians is one of the most
momentous events in history. It marks a turning point
in the fortunes of mankind.’ Myers, General History,
p.315.” Burnside, DPUF, 101.
“Unlike most Catholic Christians within the Roman Empire, the majority of the barbarian tribes that
parceled out that empire were followers of Arius, presbyter of Alexandria (d. AD 336), who denied that ‘the
man Christ Jesus’ (1 Tim. 2:5) was of the same
[identical] essence as the Father.” Mansell, OSOA,
10,11.
List of Ten Horns.—
“The ten parts into which Rome was to be divided
should meet the following specifications:
“They must be separate, independent kingdoms.
“They must be established within the bounds of
the Roman Empire.
“They must be established at the time of the fall
of the empire.
“They must possess a certain degree of permanency.

“It should be noted that when the Bible gives a
list of individuals making up a group of some special
number, the emphasis is frequently upon the number rather than the specific individuals making up
the group. Thus there were twelve tribes of Israel
corresponding to the twelve sons of Jacob, but at least
four different listings may be found. First are the
twelve sons of Jacob, and then are lists which omit
certain sons of Jacob such as Levi (Num. 1:5-15, 21-

177

GEMS FROM DANIEL
43; 2:3-29; 10:14-27; 13:4-15; 26:7-50; 34:14-28),
Simeon (Dt. 33:6-24), or Dan (Rev 7:5-8).”
“…When one name is omitted another must be
added to take its place, for the total of twelve must be
preserved. Thus in the usual listings of the twelve
tribes Levi is omitted as having his part in the temple
service, and two parts are given to the tribe of Joseph,
Namely Ephraim and Manasseh. In Dt. 33:6-24 where
Simeon is omitted, Levi is added. In Rev 7:5-8 where
Dan is omitted, Levi is added, and Joseph and Manasseh appear instead of Ephraim and Manasseh.
“Thus in regard to the ten kingdoms into
which Rome is divided, no one specific list of ten
particular kingdoms is the vital matter. Ten stands
for the number of kingdoms into which Rome was
divided, the same as twelve stands for the number of
the tribes of Israel and the apostles of Christ. After
Judah was dropped, Matthias was added to make up the
twelve.” Thiele, OSID, 63,64.

horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth
speaking great things’—fit emblems of the shrewdness,
penetration, and arrogant claims of an apostate religious organization.” Smith, DR, 110,111.
The Historical Rise of the Little Horn.—
“In apostolic times each local congregation selected its own officers and regulated its own affairs.
The church universal was nevertheless ‘one body’ by
virtue of the invisible operation of the Holy Spirit, and
the guidance of the apostles, that united believers everywhere in ‘one Lord, one faith, one baptism’ (see Eph.
4:3-6). Leaders in the local churches were to be men
‘full of the Holy Ghost’ (Acts 6:3), selected, qualified,
and guided by the Holy Ghost (see Acts 13:2), and
appointed (Acts 6:5) and ordained by the church (Acts
13:3).
“As the church ‘left’ its ‘first love’ (Rev. 2:4), it
forfeited its purity of doctrine, its high standards of
personal conduct, and the invisible bond of unity provided by the Holy Spirit. In worship, formalism took
the place of simplicity. Popularity and personal power
came more and more to determine the choice of leaders, 1) who first assumed increasing authority within the local church, 2) then sought to extend their
authority over neighboring churches.
“Administration of the local church under the
guidance of the Holy Spirit eventually gave way to
ecclesiastical authoritarianism at the hands of a single official, the bishop, to whom every church member
was personally subject and through whom alone he had
access to salvation. Henceforth leadership thought
only of ruling the church instead of serving it, and the
‘greatest’ was no longer one who considered himself
‘servant of all.’ Thus, gradually, developed the concept of a priestly hierarchy that interposed between the
individual Christian and his Lord.
“3) According to writings attributed to Ignatius of
Antioch, who died about 117 AD, the presence of the
bishop was essential to the celebration of religious
rites and to the conduct of church business.
“4) Irenaeus (d. about 200) ranked bishops of the
various churches according to the relative age and importance of the churches over which they presided. He
accorded special honor to churches founded by the
apostles, and held that all other churches should
agree with the church in Rome in matter of faith
and doctrine.
“5) Tertullian (d. 225) taught the supremacy of
the bishop over the presbyters—local elected elders.
“6) Cyprian (d. about 258) is considered the
founder of the Roman Catholic hierarchy. He advocated the theory that there is but one true church, and that
outside of it there is no access to salvation. He put
forth the claim a) that Peter had founded the church
in Rome, b) that the bishop of the church at Rome
should therefore be honored above other bishops,
and c) his opinions and decisions should always prevail. He emphasized the importance of direct apostolic

“ ‘It probably is preferable to take the number ten
as a round number which may have fluctuated up or
down at any given historical time, according to the
political and military fortunes of those various powers.’
[William Shea, Daniel 1-7, p. 167.]” Heiks, AD538,
29.
Rome in Two Phases Goes to the End.-“In Daniel 7, we have a separate beast for Babylon, a separate beast for Media-Persia, a separate beast
for Greece, and a separate beast of Rome. The little
horn power was part of the fourth beast that came up
right after Greece, yet it moves down toward the end of
time in the little horn phase. The point is that in Daniel
7, just as in Daniel 2, the power that comes up after
Greece remains until the time of the end, though in
a different form.” Goldstein, 1844MS, 22.

DANIEL 7:8
I considered the horns, and, behold,
there came up among them another little
horn, before whom there were three of the
first horns plucked up by the roots: and,
behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes
of man, and a mouth speaking great things.
There Came Up Another Little Horn.—
“Daniel considered the horns. A strange movement appeared among them. Another horn, at first
little, but afterward more stout than its fellows,
thrust itself up. It was not content quietly to find a
place of its own, and fill it; it must thrust aside some of
the others, and usurp their places. Three kingdoms
were thus plucked up.
“This little horn, as we shall have occasion to notice more fully hereafter, was the papacy. …‘In this

178

DANIEL 7
succession, asserted the literal priesthood of the clergy,
and taught that no church might celebrate religious
rites or conduct its affairs without the presence and
consent of the bishop.
“7) 313 AD, Constantine becomes Roman emperor and accepts Christianity.
“8) 321 AD, Constantine enacts first general Sunday law.
“9) 330 AD, The removal of the political capital
from Rome to Constantinople by Constantine left the
bishop of Rome comparatively free of imperial control, and thereafter the emperor rather consistently
supported his claims as against those of other bishops.
“10) About 343 the Synod of Sardica assigned
the bishop of Rome jurisdiction over metropolitan
bishops, or archbishops.
“12) 364 AD, The Council of Laodicea enacts
more strict Sunday Law and denounces Sabbath keeping.
“13) Augustine (d. 430), one of the great church
Fathers and founder of medieval theology, maintained
that Rome had always been supreme over the
churches. His classic The City of God set forth in bold
outline the Catholic ideal of a universal church in control of a universal state, and this provided the theoretical basis for the medieval papacy.
“14) Innocent I (d. 417) claimed supreme jurisdiction over the entire Christian world, but was
not able to exercise that power.
“15) Leo 1 (the Great, d. 461) was the first
bishop of Rome to proclaim that Peter had been the
first pope, to assert the succession of the papacy
from Peter, to claim primacy directly from Jesus
Christ, and to succeed in applying these principles
to papal administration of the affairs of the church.
Leo 1 gave to the theory of papal power its final form,
and made that power a reality. It was he who procured
an edict from the emperor declaring that papal decisions have the force of law. With imperial support he
set himself above the councils of the church, assuming
the right to define doctrine and to dictate decisions.
His success in persuading Attila not to enter Rome
(452) and his attempt to stop Gaiseric (Genseric, 455)
enhanced his prestige and that of the papacy. Leo the
Great was definitely a temporal as well as a spiritual
leader of his people.
“16) Papal claims to temporal power were based
largely on the supposed authority of forged documents
known as ‘pious frauds,’ such as the so-called Donation of Constantine.
“17) With the conversion (496) of Clovis, king of
the Franks, and his victory on the battlefield over one
of the Arian tribes (508), the papacy found a strong
army to champion its interests…. For more than
twelve centuries the sword of France, the ‘eldest son’
of the papacy, was an effective agent for the conversion of men to the Church of Rome and for maintaining
papal authority.

“18) The emperor Justinian strongly supported
the bishop of Rome, and advanced his interests, by an
imperial edict recognizing his supremacy over the
churches of both East and West—an edict that could
not become fully effective until after the breaking of
the Ostrogothic hold on Rome in 538.” Taken mainly
from: 4SDABC, 835-837.
“The creation of the Papal States in the eighth
century and the fact that the Muslims conquered the
Christian centers of Alexandria, Jerusalem, and
Antioch, reducing their influence, further enhanced the
stature and importance of the bishop of Rome.”
Pfandl, DTSOB, 60.
“Leo the Great was pope AD 440 to AD 461, in
the very time when the former Rome was in its very
last days, when it was falling rapidly to ruin. And
Leo the Great declared in a sermon that the former
Rome was but the promise of the latter Rome; that the
glories of the former were to be reproduced in Catholic
Rome; that Romulus and Remus were but the forerunners of Peter and Paul; that the successors of Romulus
therefore were the precursors of the successors of Peter; and that, as the former Rome had ruled the
world, so the latter Rome, by the see of the holy
blessed Peter as head of the world, would dominate
the earth. This conception of Leo’s was never lost
from the Papacy. And when, only fifteen years afterward, the Roman Empire had, as such, perished, and
only the Papacy survived the ruin, and firmly held
place and power in Rome, this conception of Leo’s was
only the more strongly, and with the more certitude,
held and asserted.
“…Taking the ground that she is the only true
continuation of original Rome, upon that the Papacy
took the ground that wherever the New Testament
cites, or refers to, the authority of original Rome, she is
now meant, because she is the only true continuation
of original Rome. Accordingly, where the New Testament enjoins submission to ‘the powers that be,’
or obedience to ‘governors,’ it means the Papacy;
because the only power and the only governors that
then were, were Roman, and the papal power was
the true continuation of the Roman.
“And it was only the logical culmination of this
assumption when Pope Boniface VIII [1235-1303]
presented himself in the sight of the multitude, clothed
in a curiass, with a helmet on his head, and a sword in
his hand held aloft, and proclaimed: ‘There is no other
Caesar, nor king, nor emperor than I, the Sovereign
Pontiff and Successor of the Apostles;’ and, when further he declared, ex cathedra: ‘We therefore assert,
define, and pronounce that it is necessary to salvation
to believe that every human being is subject to the
Pontiff of Rome.’
“This is proof enough that the little horn of the
seventh chapter of Daniel is Papal Rome, and that it

179

GEMS FROM DANIEL
is in spirit and purpose intentionally the continuation of
original Rome.” Jones, CWCP, 90.

“John II—532-535: Justinian acknowledged him
to be the head of all the churches (533).
[Nicholas I— 858-867] pronounced the following: ‘It is evident that the popes can neither be bound
nor unbound by any earthly power, nor even by that of
the apostle [Peter], if he should return upon the earth;
since Constantine the Great has recognized that the
pontiffs held the place of God upon earth, divinity
not being able to be judged by any living man. We are,
then, infallible, and whatever may be our acts, we are
not accountable for them but to ourselves.’]
“Gregory I—590-604: Acted as if he were a
king.
“Gregory VII—1073-1085: Exercised restraint
over civil authorities.
“Innocent III—1198-1216: Played a leading
role in the affairs of the rulers of Europe.
[Pope Boniface VIII—1235-1303: “It is necessary to salvation to believe that every human being is
subject to the Pontiff of Rome.’ From Unam Sanctam,
1302 AD.]” Thiele, OSID, 65. Bohr, ND7, 22.

“Rome in the days of Christ was the center of the
world. Paul and others preached the gospel in that city.
A church was organized, and for years this church of
Rome ranked with the churches of Jerusalem, Constantinople, and others. Gradually but surely, worldliness took the place of the spirit of Christ, and Roman bishops became exalted. The mystery of iniquity of which Paul wrote in his letter to the Thessalonians, was at work in Rome. At the time of the division
of the empire the bishops were greedy for civil power,
and in the time of national distress the church grasped
the reins of government; the little horn had received
power. This was AD 538, when the last of the three
horns was plucked up and the decree Justinian made in
533 went into effect. (See Gibbon, chapter 41.) Paganism on the throne had been cruel enough, but when
those pagan principles which had lived since the
days of Babylon took the name and outward form of
Christianity, the power which bore sway was still
more cruel.” Haskell, SDP, 96.

Another Little Horn Among the Ten.—
“The papacy had its rise among the other powers
that were to succeed imperial Rome. Its seat was in
the city of Rome, and its rise to power was slow and
almost imperceptible. There was a gradual transition
from imperial to papal Rome. Even in New Testament
times this power was beginning to make its appearance.
“John wrote of men who loved to have the
preeminence (3 John 9) and said that the antichrist was
already in the world (1 John 4:3). Paul warned of men
who would speak perverse things (Acts 20:28-30) and
said that the mystery of iniquity was already at work (2
Thess. 2:7). As the various national groups that were
ultimately to become successors of Rome, were coming into existence at a very early period, this was also
true of the religious group that in later years became so extremely powerful in Rome.”
“…Upon the collapse of imperial Rome in 476
and the establishment of barbarian states on the ancient
ruins, the church gradually became more and more
powerful, until ultimately it became the dominating
element in the life of the time. The Church took the
place of the Empire and the Pope became the successor of Caesar.” Thiele, OSID, 65.

“The vast empire of Rome crumbled to pieces,
and from its ruins rose that mighty power, the Roman Catholic Church. This church boasts of her infallibility and her hereditary religion. But this religion
is a horror to all who are acquainted with the secrets of
the mystery of iniquity. The priests of this church
maintain their ascendency by keeping the people in
ignorance of God’s will, as revealed in the Scriptures.”
Youth Instructor, 9/22/1903
Influential Leaders in the Rise of the Papacy.—
“Among the leaders who were to play a part in the
development of the papal power the following may be
mentioned:
“Victor I—193-203:
Ordered the eastern
churches to observe Easter on Sunday. They refused
and were excommunicated.
“[Sylvester I—314-335: Accepted offer of
Constantine to unite church with the state. Transferred the rest of the Sabbath to the first day of the
week.]
“Julius I—341-352: Council of Sardica (343)
gave the bishop of Rome the privilege of judging between contending bishops.
“Innocent I—402-417: Had the conception of
being the universal bishop.
“Sixtus III—432-440: ‘I am appointed by God
to watch over the whole church.’
“Leo 1—440-461: Issued a decree that the Bishop of Rome is supreme. Saved the city of Rome from
Attila the Hun.
“Symmachus—498-514: Convert from paganism to Christianity. Speech by Eunodius that ‘the Roman Pontiff was constituted judge in the place of God,
which he fulfilled as the vicegerent of the Most High.’

“ ‘When the Roman Empire had disintegrated and
its place had been taken by a number of rude, barbarous kingdoms, the Roman Catholic church not only
became independent of the states in religious affairs
but dominated secular affairs as well. At time, under
such rulers as Charlemagne (768-814), Otto the Great
(936-73), and Henry III (1039-56), the civil power controlled the church to some extent; but in general, under
the weak political system of feudalism, the wellorganized, unified, and centralized church, with the
pope at its head, was not only independent in ecclesiastical affairs but also controlled civil affairs.’

180

DANIEL 7
(Carl C. Eckhardt, The Papacy and World-Affairs
[1937], p.1).” 4SDABC, 826.

The Little Horn is the Papacy—Five Witnesses.—
“Dr. Adam Clarke (Methodist):
‘Among
Protestant writers this is considered to be popedom.’
“Alexander Campbell (Church of Christ): ‘I positively affirm these items never met in any king, state,
or empire, save that of papal Rome.’
“John Dowling (Baptist): ‘The prophecies of
Daniel and Revelation, these two passages alone complete a prophetic picture of the papal antichrist.’
“Dr. Scott (Church of England): ‘This evidently
points to the power of the church and bishop of
Rome.’
“Albert Barnes (Presbyterian): ‘The papacy is
well represented by the little horn.’” Burnside, DPUF,
103.

The Little Horn is the Papacy—Ten Points.—
“The main points in the nature, character, and actions of this ‘little horn,’ which we must note in order
to discover the power intended, are these:
“1. Its place: within the body of the divided empire—Western Europe. ‘Among them’ [the ten kings].
Verse 8.
“2. The period of its origin [out of Pagan Rome].
Soon after the division of the Roman territory into ten
divisions, 476 AD: ‘Another’ [thus, a kingdom also]
‘after them’. Verses 8, 24.
“3. ‘Three of the first horns plucked up by the
roots,’ verse 8, because the three (the Heruli, the Ostrogoths, and Vandals) were Arian, didn’t believe in
the Trinity, and opposed the papacy that was to ‘subdue three kings,’ verse 24.
“4. It was a horn, but with ‘eyes like the eyes of
a man,’ verse 8. Its kings would be reasoning, looking
to the future, laying long-range plans, overseers or
bishops or prophets.
“5. ‘Whose look was more stout than its fellows,’ verse 20, as it gained superiority over other
kingdoms and world-wide influence.
“6. ‘A mouth speaking great things,’ verse 8.
Great things against the Most High,’ verse 25. “Its
moral character: boastful and blasphemous; by its
great words spoken against the Most High, it would
elevate itself into the religious realm and take the place
of Christ, and thus be the anti-Christ.
“7. Its lawlessness: ‘Think to change times and
laws,’ verse 25, the principal one of which is the
change of the Sabbath, when the papacy claims sole
responsibility for having done, even asserting that the
act is evidence of its power.
“8. Its opposition to the saints: ‘Shall wear out
the saints, verse 25, ‘made war with the saints and prevailed against them.’ Verse 20. It would be a persecuting power, and that for so long a period that it would
wear out the saints of the Most High.
“9. Its duration: ‘time, times and a half,’ or a
year, two years, and a half a year, or 1260 years. From
538, when the Ostrogoths abandoned the siege of
Rome and the Pope was freed from Arian control, until
1798, when France’s General Berthier entered Rome,
took the Pope prisoner, and declared the political rule
of the papacy at an end, 1260 years of papal supremacy
having come to a close.
“10. Its doom: it would suffer the loss of its dominion [as was done by Berthier] before it would itself
be destroyed. ‘They shall take away his dominion to
consume and destroy it to the end.
“Here are ten distinct and perfectly tangible features that all meet in the Roman Papacy, and we are
therefore bold to say it is the great and evil reality predicted.” Bunch, BOD, 98; Teach, D&R, 47,48.

Eyes Like the Eyes of a Man.—
“The pope terms himself the ‘Overseer of overseers.’ He claims more than human wisdom and foresight and there can be no doubt, but his cunning policies and almost uncanny vision are inspired by that
mighty angel who before his fall was declared to be
‘full of wisdom.’ See Rev. 13:2.” Bunch, BOD, 103.
“Christ is symbolized as a lamb with seven eyes,
to indicate His omniscient wisdom. (Rev. 5:6.) This
‘little horn’ power will be noted for its far-seeing vision and diplomacy.” Burnside, DPUF, 111.
“See Martin Luther withstanding that mighty
church which is the masterpiece of the world’s wisdom.” Christ Object Lessons, 78.
Speaking Great Things.—
“The church of Rome boasts of her infallibility,
and of the power of her hereditary religion. But this
religion is a horror to all who are acquainted with the
secrets of the mystery of iniquity. The priests of this
church maintain their ascendency by keeping the people in ignorance of the will of God.” R&H, 2/6/1900.
“Hans Kung, a leading theologian of the Catholic
Church was defrocked from his chair at the University
of Tubingen for writing a book titled Infallible?: An
Inquiry. In this book, Kung shows that Pope Paul VI’s
encyclical, Humane Vitae, is not only based of bad
history but also on bad science. This book provides a
plethora of examples which show that popes have
made gargantuan mistakes even when they speak
ex-cathedra on faith and morals. So much for the
Dogma of Papal Infallibility!!
“According to the Bible, it is the prerogative of
God alone to place kings on the throne and to depose
them (Daniel 2:21) and yet the Papacy, throughout its
history has boastfully claimed the right to install kings
and depose them.” Bohr, ND7, 27.
“The Bible makes it clear that God the Father has
given Jesus Christ the right to judge because He is the

181

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Son of Man (John 5:22, 27). In fact, the Father has given Jesus ALL JUDGMENT!! But the Papacy claims
that it has been given the right to serve as judge of
mankind. In this way, the Papacy, once again, claims
to possess the right to exercise the role which belongs
to God alone.
“Notice the following evidence:
“In Gregory VII’s Dictatus Papae, article 18
reads: ‘That his [the Pope’s] sentence is not to be reviewed by any one; while he alone can review the decisions of all others.’ Article 19 states: ‘That he [the
Pope] can be judged by no one’.” Bohr, ND7, 28.

ple where they were becoming increasingly restless.
At the same time Zeno was deeply concerned about the
Arian Heruls in Italy, whose leader, Odovacar, in 476
had removed the last of the Western Roman Emperors and had proclaimed himself king. (This action of Odovacar’s is viewed as marking the ‘fall of the
[Western] roman Empire.’)
“In 487 Zeno officially commissioned Theodoric, leader of the Ostrogoths, to march to Italy and
dispose of the Heruls. Zeno reckoned that in the process he would relieve Constantinople of its ferocious
neighbors. Further, whichever tribe won the contest in
Italy, he would have one less Arian tribe to contend
with. As things turned out, after five years of
fighting, the Ostrogoths fulfilled their mission from
Zeno and destroyed the Heruls, who disappeared
from history. Thus the Catholic emperor Zeno accomplished the elimination of one of the Arian horns.
“Theodoric died in 526. The following year Justinian became emperor in the East. Justinian was deeply committed to religious affairs, but his citizens were
by no means all united with him. In fact, Justinian
ruled three different kinds of Christians: the Arians,
…the Monophysites, …and the Catholics…. Justinian
himself sided so strongly with the Catholics that in
533 he officially stated that the pope of Rome was
the ‘head of all the holy churches’; and in harmony
with this declaration he spent his long reign attempting
to convert of eliminate everyone who did not regard the
pope as head.
“In the 530’s Justinian launched a holy war
against the Arian Vandals and the Arian Ostrogoths.
He found legal pretexts for doing this, of course, but
Procopius, the historian-reporter who went along on
the campaign, reveals in his History of the Wars that
Justinian’s real purpose was to ‘protect the Christians,’
that is, to protect the Catholics from the Arians.
“Justinian commissioned his finest general, Belisarius, to sail with an army from Constantinople to
North Africa and destroy the Vandals. After the crucial battle of Tricamarum the Vandals in 534 ‘disappeared like a mist,’ says the Shorter Cambridge
Medieval History.
“Belisarius, obeying orders, then turned north
against the Arian Ostrogoths in Italy. He took Palermo
on the island of Sicily by using the masts of his chips
to raise boatloads of soldiers to the top of the city
walls. In December 536 he marched unopposed into
Rome with a mere 5000 men. The Ostrogoths counterattacked by surrounding Rome with 150,000 men (Procopius says), making Belisarius a prisoner inside the
city he hoped to liberate.
“The Goths then foolishly cut the fourteen aqueducts leading into Rome in the hope of driving Belisarius to surrender from lack of water. But the torrents
that poured from the broken aqueducts created a quagmire that bred malarial mosquitoes and caused epidemics. The large Gothic army was so grievously reduced by disease that in March 538 Belisarius with

“In John 17:11, ‘Holy Father’ was the title given by Jesus to His Father in heaven. Today this is
given repeatedly to the pope, and accepted by him.
Matthew 23:9 says, ‘Call no man your father upon
earth: for one is your father which is in heaven.’ This
is not referring to one’s natural father. We are commanded to ‘Honor thy father and thy mother.’ This is
speaking of religious leaders. Every priest takes that
title in a spiritual sense and certainly not in a natural
sense.” Burnside, DPUF, 112.
(See additional comments on ch. 7:25.)
Before Whom.—
“Neither this passage nor its context gives the
plucking up of the three horns as necessary before the 3
½ times can begin. It is true that verse 8 says that ‘before him three of the first horns were plucked up,’ but
this “before” is translated from the Aramaic
qodam, which means place, and not time.” Heiks,
AD538, 35.

Before Whom Three Horns Were Plucked Up.—
“The reason for their overthrow was their adherence to Arianism [and religious liberty] in opposition to the orthodox Catholic faith [and the use of
force].” Haskell, SDP, 95.
“Zeno, the Eastern Roman Emperor (474-491),
grew increasingly fearful of the Arian Ostrogoths, who
were encamped in a reserve not far from Constantino-

182

DANIEL 7
his small force was able to defeat it handily.
“Skirmishes and battles followed here and there
in Italy for a number of years until the Catholic general
Narses annihilated all but a couple of thousand Ostrogoths—and the Ostrogoths, like the Heruls and Vandals, disappeared from history….
“And the crucial military event that lay behind
this pathetic scene was the calamitous defeat of Rome
in 538 when, says Thomas Hidgkin in Italy and Her
Invaders, Catholic soldiers ‘dug the grave of the Gothic
monarchy.’
“Thus was the prophecy of Daniel 7 fulfilled that
said, ‘Three of the first horns were plucked up by
the roots,’ allowing the little horn to grown greater
than the rest.” Maxwell, 1GC, 139-141.

Cast Down.—
“By an unfortunate translation in verse 9, a wrong
idea is almost sure to be conveyed. The phrase ‘cast
down’ is from a Chaldee word, remi, which may
properly be rendered ‘hurled by violence,’ as is plainly
the case where it is used to describe the casting of the
three Hebrews into the fiery furnace, and of casting
Daniel into the den of lions. But another equally correct translation is ‘to set or place in order,’ as in the
placing of the judgment seats mentioned here, as
also a like setting or placing in Revelation 4:2, in
which the Greek bears out the same meaning. The
Revised Version in Daniel 7: 9 reads properly, ‘thrones
were places,’ as Gesenius defines the root remah, with
reference to Daniel 7: 9 as an example.” Smith, DR,
111.

(See more comments on Daniel 7:24 on the
three horns that were uprooted. See new research on
the Heruli in Italy and the Arian Visigoths in Gaul.
Who was the first horn uprooted?)

Thrones Were Cast Down.—
“And immediately I was in the spirit; and, behold,
a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne.
And round about the throne were four and twenty
seats [thrones]: and upon the seats I saw four and
twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment; and they
had on their heads crowns of gold.” Revelation 4:2,4.

Plucked Up By the Roots.—
“The real emphasis of the scriptures was the removal of Arian jurisdiction from the three main and
distinct Arian kingdoms as stated by Procopius and
having it replaced with Catholic jurisdiction. As
long as that Arian principle of religious liberty (which
was diametrically opposed to the government of the
Catholic Church) was still in place and upheld judicially by those Arian powers and enforced by civil means,
the scriptures could not yet be fulfilled:
“Daniel 7:24 “... And he shall subdue three kings”
“Unfortunately, there has been a misreading of
the Bible here. Simply put, the uprooting of a race is
when the nationality of those peoples no longer exists.
The uprooting of a kingdom occurs when its legislative branch no longer functions and its means of
civil enforcement ceases to exist. The Billings Gazette fully illustrates this universally accepted and understood principle. By setting up Catholic legislation
as supreme in a previously held Arian territorial
jurisdiction, that kingdom was ‘plucked up by the
roots.’” Heiks, AD538, 75,76.

“And the four and twenty elders, which sat before God on their seats [thrones], fell upon their faces,
and worshipped God….” Revelation 11:16.
“First thrones are ‘cast down.’ At this point no
one is sitting on them (7:9). The Chaldee word for
‘cast down’ is the same that is used to describe Daniel
being ‘cast’ into the lions’ den and his three friends
being ‘cast’ into the fiery furnace. It is also the same
word which Daniel used to depict the work of casting
down that the little horn performed in Daniel 8: 10, 11,
12. The little horn cast down the place of the sanctuary, the stars and the truth but now God will respond
by turning the tables and ‘casting down’ thrones to
judge it for its misbehavior. After the thrones were
‘cast down,’ (which clearly shows that they were not
there before!) the Ancient of Days ‘did sit.’ The question immediately suggests itself: Where was the Father
before He sat down? Was He just standing there where
the thrones were put in place or was He in some other
location and then came to where the thrones were
placed? Daniel 7:9 does not tell us, but Daniel 7:22
does. We are told there, that the Ancient of Days came
to the place of judgment which means He was not there
before (The same ‘ramaic word is used in Daniel 7:13
where the Son of man ‘came’ and was ‘brought’ before the Father). Once again we ask, Where was the
Father before he sat down on his newly placed throne?
“The answer to this question is found in the Hebrew sanctuary. There were four key places in the Hebrew sanctuary: the encampment, the court, the holy
place and the most holy place. The encampment was
the place where needy sinners resided. The court was

DANIEL 7:9,10
I beheld till the thrones were cast
down, and the Ancient of days did sit,
whose garment was white as snow, and the
hair of his head like the pure wool: his
throne was like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as burning fire.
A fiery stream issued and came forth
from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times
ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.
183

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the location where the sacrifices were offered. In the
holy place the blood of the sacrifices was applied by
the priest and in the most holy place sins were blotted
out once a year at the end of the year.
“It is obvious that the encampment and the court
symbolized the earth. It is on earth where needy sinners reside and it was on earth where Jesus Christ was
sacrificed for sin. Where did Jesus go upon His ascension? The Bible tells us that He sat down at the right
hand of God (his role as King of the kingdom of grace.
After all, kings sit on thrones) and that He was standing
at the right hand of God (His role as ministering High
Priest, because priests stand ministering before God)
[Acts 7:55; Hebrews 1:3]. Obviously, both the Father
and the Son were in the same place upon the ascension. But, which place? There can be no doubt that
it is the holy place. And why? The geography of the
Hebrew sanctuary dictates it because after the court
was the holy place.
“Those who believe that Jesus went directly into
the most holy place upon His ascension are at a loss to
explain why Jesus would leap from the court to the
most holy place upon His ascension thus totally bypassing the holy place. Both Peter and Paul clearly
inform us that Jesus went to heaven with His blood to
be our intercessor, a work which clearly belongs to the
holy place (Hebrews 7:25-26; I Timothy 2:5; Romans
8:34; Acts 2:16-39). This is why Jesus, after His ascension, is depicted as one walking among the seven candlesticks and ministering before the golden altar of
incense (Revelation 1; 8:3-5). …If the Father and the
Son were in the holy place in 1798 and then moved for
the judgment at some point thereafter, they must have
moved to the most holy place. There are no other options because the work of judgment must be performed
in the most holy place where the Ark of the Covenant
and the Law of God are found!! (study Revelation
11:15-19 where this is made crystal clear). Thus we
conclude that both the Father and the Son were in the
holy place until the beginning of the judgment.
“But sometime after 1798, the Father moved
from the holy to the most holy place. This movement
is highlighted by the fact that the Father’s throne, as
seen in the synonymous parallelism, has wheels—fiery
wheels!! [‘His throne was ablaze with flames, Its
wheels were a burning fire,’ NASB] The angels actually move the wheels (Daniel 7:10; see the description
of the same throne in Ezekiel 1) as they bring the Father into the most holy place. But note that there is not
only one throne. There are thrones [plural]. How
many are there and who sits upon them? We are not
told in Daniel 7 but one thing is certain, it is not the
angels who sit on the thrones. How do we know this?
The Bible makes it clear that the angels are constantly
on the move. They are ministering spirits sent out to
minister to those who will inherit salvation (Hebrews
1:14). In the Bible the angels always stand before God
and are sent to minister throughout the universe. In
fact, in Ezekiel 1 the angels are in constant movement,

never having a restful moment! Notice the following
awesome description given by Ellen G. White:
‘The Bible shows us God in His high and holy
place, not in a state of inactivity, not in silence and
solitude, but surrounded by ten thousand times ten
thousand and thousands of thousands of holy beings,
all waiting to do His will. Through these messengers,
He is in active communication with every part of His
dominion. By His Spirit He is everywhere present.
Through the agency of His Spirit and His angels He
ministers to the children of men.’ (Ellen G. White, The
Ministry of Healing, p. 417).
“Revelation 5:11 makes it abundantly clear that
God is surrounded by ten thousand times ten thousand
and thousands of thousands of angels. But it is not
the angels who sit upon the thrones but rather the
24 elders (Revelation 4:4). As we study Daniel 7 and
Revelation 4-5 together, we discover that there are 24
thrones and the elders sit upon them. But who these
elders are and what their role is, remains to be seen.
There is undoubtedly a close link between Daniel 7 and
Revelation 4-5 which we must return to later, but before we do, we must make a few remarks about the
relationship between Daniel 7 and Ezekiel 1-11. Even a
hasty glance at these two passages will reveal their
close relationship. In both we have a chariot-throne,
angels who guide the wheels, fire, clouds, and an awesome Being who sits on the chariot-throne In both, the
idea of judgment is at the forefront.
“It should not surprise us that Daniel and Ezekiel
spoke in similar terms because they were contemporaries. A thorough study of Ezekiel 1 is far beyond the
scope of this paper, but as William Shea has shown
elsewhere, Ezekiel 1 describes the journey of God from
heaven to earth to judge apostate Jerusalem. The date
for Ezekiel 1 is 592 BC. It is of critical importance to
remember that in Ezekiel it is God’s apostate people
who are in view. They are committing abominations,
the greatest of which is sun-worship (8:16), they are
called a harlot (chapter 16), they are shedding innocent
blood, the priests do violence to the law, and prophets
and kings are corrupt but in their midst is a remnant
who sigh and cry because of the abominations which
are being committed. These will be sealed for salvation while the apostate ones will be marked for destruction (9:1-6). Finally, the Shekinah departs (11:22-23),
the city is left desolate and Nebuchadnezzar comes and
executes God’s judgment upon it in 586 BC. Like
Daniel, Ezekiel presents three steps in the judgment
process: Investigation (9:1-4), sentence (11:22-23, the
Shekinah leaves), execution of the sentence (9:5-6).
“I believe that what happened with Jerusalem locally and historically (Ezekiel’s view) is a type of what
will take place universally and prophetically (Daniel’s
view [and Ezekiel’s view—editor’s note.])….
“As we have already shown, Daniel seven’s little
horn symbolizes an apostate Christian power. This
power is committing abominations (Matthew 24:15;
Revelation 17:5; Daniel 11:31), it is described as a har-

184

DANIEL 7
lot (Revelation 17:1), it sheds innocent blood (Revelation 17:6), it thinks it can change the law (Daniel
7:25), it persecutes a remnant who remain faithful to
God (Daniel 7:21, 25). God’s faithful ones will be
sealed for salvation (Revelation 7:1-4) whereas the
apostates will be marked for destruction (Revelation
14:9-11). The Shekinah will depart the heavenly temple (Revelation 15:5-8) and then desolation and destruction will come upon the apostates in the form of
the seven last plagues (Revelation 16-19). The key
point we should remember here is that both Daniel and
Ezekiel portray a judgment process which has God’s
professed people in view. Clearly, among those who
claim to be God’s people, there are genuine and counterfeit believers. The judgment process has the purpose
of separating these two groups.
“Now let’s take a look at the relationship between
Daniel 7 and Revelation 4-5. The striking similarities
between these two passages have led some scholars to
conclude that they are both describing the same historical event. Is this true? Are both Daniel 7 and Revelation 4-5 describing the judgment which begins sometime after 1798? I believe the answer to this question
is a resounding no!! Why, then, are there so many similarities? Simply because the two passages are portraying two distinct events where the same beings are present.
“It is clear that the scene of Revelation 4-5 is
describing the inauguration of Christ’s priesthood
upon His ascension to heaven. We are told in Acts
1:9-11 that Jesus was taken to heaven in a cloud. Before Jesus arrives, the Father is seen sitting upon His
throne by himself (Revelation 4:2). Surrounding Him
are elders on 24 thrones (4:4). There is no evidence that
the Father moved to this throne from somewhere else,
He is simply there. At this point Jesus has not yet arrived. But in 5:6 Jesus appears on the scene, not as the
Son of man of Daniel 7, but as a lamb ‘as if it had
been slain.’ A song is then sung extolling Jesus as the
one who was slain to redeem mankind (5:9). Revelation 5:11 uses almost the same terminology as Daniel 7
to describe the angelic hosts.
“As we have already seen, Jesus ascended to the
Father in the holy place for His inauguration. Upon
His arrival, the Father was waiting for Him as were the
24 elders, and the angelic hosts to celebrate His work
of redemption as the lamb of God. This is the glorious
event which Peter described in his eloquent sermon of
Acts, chapter 2. Ellen G. White makes this clear in her
book, The Desire of Ages, pp. 831-835. All the beings
who would later be present for the beginning of the
judgment were also present for His inauguration. This
is why the two scenes appear so similar.
“In Daniel 7 the entire heavenly entourage moves
from the holy to the most holy place. Notice that when
this happens, a different song is sung extolling God as
judge and king! (Revelation 11:15-19). Ellen White
describes this glorious movement in Early Writings,
pp. 54-56 where she is clearly making reference to the

vision of Daniel 7. In other words, Revelation 4-5
describes Jesus going from earth to heaven on a cloud
to His Father upon His ascension to be invested as
High Priest. On the other hand, in Daniel 7, He is portrayed as coming on clouds from the holy to the
most holy place to His Father in 1844 to be invested
as King. The same beings are present on both occasions and this is why the scenes are so similar.
In summary, Daniel 7 presents a clear sequence
of events. First, thrones are put in place. Then, the
angels bring the Father on His chariot-throne from the
holy to the most holy place and He sits down on His
throne. The 24 elders then sit on their thrones. Then
the Son of man is brought by the clouds of angels in
the chariot-throne to where the Father had been
brought.” Bohr, ND7, 120-123.
The Place of the Sanctuary Restored at the Time of
Judgment.—
“…When this passage is compared with chapter
7, a further suggestion can be made about the possible
meaning intended in chapter 8. If it was the specific
foundation for God’s throne that was cast down in
8:12, the casting down of God’s throne in the heavenly court scene in 7:9-10 requires something of a
restoration there. The throne of an earthly monarch
usually is placed upon a raised platform of dais in the
throne room of the palace.
“Daniel 7:9-10 conveys a similar picture. The
throne of God which was ‘cast down’ or set up in this
judgment scene would naturally be set up on some such
dais. The heavenly host assembled for the judgment
gathers before that throne upon its dais. The platform
of dais implied here (in 7:9-10) would naturally have
been identified as the makon for that throne.
“The parallel, then, is that in chapter 8 the prophet
saw the makon symbolically ‘cast down’ to the earth.
On the other hand in chapter 7 the prophet saw the
literal makon ‘restored,’ as it were, to its natural
position in the heavenly sanctuary. Then God’s
throne was ‘cast down’ upon that makon. In one case it
was the makon of the sanctuary or God’s throne that
was ‘cast down’ while in the other instance it was
God’s throne ‘cast down’ upon its makon in order to
begin the judgment described in this scene.” BRI,
2SOD, 214-215.
The Ancient of Days Did Sit.—
“Thus was presented to the prophet’s vision the
great and solemn day when the characters and the lives
of men should pass in review before the Judge of all
the earth, and to every man should be rendered ‘according to his works.’ The Ancient of Days is God
the Father. Says the psalmist: ‘Before the mountains
were brought forth, or ever Thou hadst formed the
earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, Thou art God.’ Psalm 90:2. It is He, the
source of all being, and the fountain of all law, that is
to preside in the judgment.” Great Controversy, 479.

185

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ture of it. The wheels of His chariot-throne are described as a ‘fire of burning.’ The implication is that it
was through some kind of locomotion related to these
wheels that, riding upon His throne, God came into the
audience chamber where He met with His angelic host.
…The motion of that chariot-throne also conveyed the
Deity to His temple for judgment.” Shea, SSPI, 102.

“God alone is represented as great. In the vision
of the prophet He is seen casting down one mighty
ruler and setting up another. He is revealed as the
monarch of the universe, about to set up His everlasting kingdom—the Ancient of days, the living
God, the Source of all wisdom, the Ruler of the present, the Revealer of the future.” 16MR, 333.

“The throne ablaze with flames and the wheels as
burning fire represent the purging process of the
judgment (see, Malachi 3:3-5; Matthew 3:12; Psalm
50:3; 97:1-14; Isaiah 30:27-28).” Bohr, ND7, 119,120.

“The Bible shows us God in His high and holy
place, not in a state of inactivity, not in silence and
solitude, but surrounded by ten thousand times ten
thousand and thousands of thousands of holy beings, all waiting to do His will. Through these messengers He is in active communication with every part
of His dominion. By His Spirit He is everywhere present. Through the agency of His Spirit and His angels
He ministers to the children of men. Above the distractions of the earth He sits enthroned; all things
are open to His divine survey; and from His great
and calm eternity He orders that which His providence sees best.” Ministry of Healing, 479.

“And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, even every one that is written among the
living in Jerusalem:
“When the Lord shall have washed away the filth
of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the
blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit
of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.” Isa. 4:
3,4

Did Sit.—
“Whey God is described at the beginning of this
stanza as sitting, it is not stated precisely where He was
sitting. The implication… is that He was sitting upon a
throne; …God’s own personal throne is identified and
described more specifically in the heart of this stanza,
in the couplet consisting of vs. 9c and 10a.” Shea,
SSPI, 101.

The Move From the Holy Place Into the Most Holy
Place of the Heavenly Sanctuary—A Vision.—
“I saw a throne, and on it sat the Father and the
Son. I gazed on Jesus’ countenance and admired His
lovely person. The Father’s person I could not behold,
for a cloud of glorious light covered Him. I asked Jesus if His Father had a form like Himself. He said He
had, but I could not behold it, for said He, ‘If you
should once behold the glory of His person, you would
cease to exist.’ Before the throne I saw the Advent
people—the church and the world. I saw two companies, one bowed down before the throne, deeply interested, while the other stood uninterested and careless.
Those who were bowed before the throne would offer
up their prayers and look to Jesus; then He would look
to His Father, and appear to be pleading with Him. A
light would come from the Father to the Son and from
the Son to the praying company. Then I saw an exceeding bright light come from the Father to the Son,
and from the Son it waved over the people before the
throne. But few would receive this great light. Many
came out from under it and immediately resisted it;
others were careless and did not cherish the light, and it
moved off from them. Some cherished it, and went
and bowed down with the little praying company. This
company all received the light and rejoiced in it, and
their countenances shone with its glory.
“I saw the Father rise from the throne, and in
a flaming chariot go into the holy of holies within
the veil, and sit down. Then Jesus rose up from the
throne, and the most of those who were bowed down
arose with Him. I did not see one ray of light pass
from Jesus to the careless multitude after He arose, and
they were left in perfect darkness. Those who arose
when Jesus did, kept their eyes fixed on Him as He left
the throne and led them out a little way. Then He

His Wheels as Burning Fire.—
“It is a chariot or movable throne that is described with ‘wheels as burning fire.’ The description
is similar to that in Ezekiel 1 and 10. It is doubtless
the cherubim chariot of living creatures or angels
described in Psalm 104:3; 68:17,18; 18:10.” Bunch,
BOD, 107.
“Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the
waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind.” Psalm 104:3.
“The chariots of God are twenty thousand,
even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them, as
in Sinai, in the holy place.” Psalm 68:17.
“And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea,
he did fly upon the wings of the wind.” Psalm 18:10.
A Fiery Stream Issued From Before Him.—
“And out of the throne proceeded lightnings
and thunderings and voices: and there were seven
lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are
the seven Spirits of God.” Revelation 4:5.
“This description underlines the idea of motion
onto the scene of action. Just as flames of fire are
active rather than static, so their use to describe
God’s throne presents a vibrant and dynamic pic-

186

DANIEL 7
raised His right arm, and we heard His lovely voice
saying, ‘Wait here; I am going to My Father to receive
the kingdom; keep your garments spotless, and in a
little while I will return from the wedding and receive
you to Myself.’ Then a cloudy chariot, with wheels
like flaming fire, surrounded by angels, came to
where Jesus was. He stepped into the chariot and
was borne to the holiest, where the Father sat.
There I beheld Jesus, a great High Priest, standing before the Father. On the hem of His garment was a bell
and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate. Those
who rose up with Jesus would send up their faith to
Him in the holiest, and pray, ‘My Father, give us Thy
Spirit.’ Then Jesus would breathe upon them the Holy
Ghost. In that breath was light, power, and much love,
joy, and peace.
“I turned to look at the company who were still
bowed before the throne; they did not know that Jesus had left it. Satan appeared to be by the throne,
trying to carry on the work of God. I saw them look
up to the throne, and pray, ‘Father, give us Thy Spirit.’
Satan would then breathe upon them an unholy influence; in it there was light and much power, but no
sweet love, joy, and peace. Satan’s object was to keep
them deceived and to draw back and deceive God’s
children.” Early Writings, 54-56.

Thousands & Ten Thousands Minister Unto Him.—
‘I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels
round about the throne, and the beasts and the elders:
and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands.’ Rev. 5:11.
“The thousand thousands who minister unto Him,
and the ten thousand times ten thousand who stand
before Him, are not sinners arraigned before the judgment seat, but heavenly intelligences who wait before
Him, attendant on His will. John saw the same heavenly attendants before the throne of God, and he
describes the majestic scene in these words: [Rev.
5:11 quoted].” Smith, DR, 113.
“Holy angels as ministers and witnesses, in
number ‘ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands,’ attend this great tribunal.” Great
Controversy, 479.
“This poetic progression is not given to express a
literal number of angels; it is given to express totality.
All of God’s faithful angels will be there. Every human being who has ever lived has had a guardian
angel, and all of those guardian angels will be there
in the judgment to testify for their charges. Believers will not be unrepresented in that judgment. With
Christ, our High Priest and Advocate, and our guardian
angel present, we will be well represented.” Shea,
DARG, 214.

“The heavenly sanctuary is nothing less than all
heaven engaged in its work for the salvation of sinners.
God the Father is there seated on the throne of the
universe where He is the supreme judge, making
decisions that extend to the end of time. Christ the
Son is there, pleading His blood which was shed for the
salvation of sinners. The entire angelic host is there,
looking with reverence to the law of God which is the
very foundation of God’s throne. …The earthly sanctuary could reveal only the slightest glimpse of the
vastness, glory, and magnificence of the sanctuary of
heaven.” Thiele, OSID, 101.

The Judgment Was Set.—
“This heavenly judgment takes place prior to the
time that the saints receive the kingdom. So it is a preadvent judgment which involves investigation and
cleansing.” Ferrell, BD, 27.
“Verses 9-10, 22, and 26 clearly reveal that the
judgment occurs immediately after, and as a result of,
the malignant work of the little horn in verses 8, 21,
and 25. This means that the judgment could not have
taken place at the cross or in apostolic times or even
when a person dies. The judgment must have begun
sometime after 1798.” Bohr, ND7, 2.

“The heavenly temple, the abiding place of the
King of kings, where ‘thousand thousands ministered
unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood
before Him’ (Daniel 7:10), that temple filled with the
glory of the eternal throne, where seraphim, its shining
guardians, veil their faces in adoration—no earthly
structure could represent its vastness and its glory.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 357.

“And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and
three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be
cleansed.” Daniel 8:14.
“At the time appointed for the judgment—the
close of the 2300 days, in 1844—began the work of
investigation and blotting out of sins. All who have
ever taken upon themselves the name of Christ must
pass its searching scrutiny. Both the living and the
dead are to be judged ‘out of those things which were
written in the books, according to their works.’” Great
Controversy, 486.

Angels Like Lightning.—
“As God’s messengers they go forth, like ‘the
appearance of a flash of lightning,’ (Ezekiel 1:14),
so dazzling their glory, and so swift their flight. The
angel that appeared at the Saviour’s tomb, his countenance ‘like lightning, and his raiment white as snow,’
caused the keepers for fear of him to quake, and they
‘became as dead men.’ Matt. 28:3,4.” Great Controversy, 512.

187

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“The work to be accomplished is of immense
magnitude. The judgment relates (1) to all the righteous; (2) to all the wicked; (3) to all the evil angels.
The number of cases, therefore, to be acted upon at
this grand tribunal exceeds our powers of conception. We must not, however, suppose that there will be
any difficulty on the part of the Judge in acting upon
every case individually. Far from this, "there is a time
there for every purpose and for every work." The
judgment, indeed, pertains to an immense number of
beings; yet “every one of them shall give account of
himself to God.” Rom.14:12. It will not relate to so
vast a number as to make it otherwise than a strictly
personal matter. Nor will there be aught of confusion
or disorder in that final reckoning. God has plenty of
time for the work, and he has no lack of agents to do
his bidding.” Andrews, JEO, 5,6.

His providence sees best.’ (Ellen G. White, The Ministry of Healing, p. 417).
“We conclude, then, that the Father presides the
judgment in a supervisory role, while the Son is the
active agent who deals with the ‘nuts and bolts.’
Bohr, ND7, 119.
Worldwide Announcement of God’s Judgment.—
“We have already learned that God the Father sits
in judgment, as described in Daniel 7, before the advent of our Lord to this earth. And in Revelation 14
the fact that the hour of God’s judgment has come
is announced to the inhabitants of the earth by a
mighty proclamation. The judgment scene of Daniel
7 is closed by the coronation of Christ. And the judgment hour of Revelation 14 is followed by our Lord’s
being seen upon the white cloud with a crown upon his
head, a proof that his priesthood has then given place to
his kingly office. Each of these pertains to the closing
events of this dispensation. There can be, therefore,
no doubt that the hour of God’s judgment announced in Revelation 14 is the time when God the
Father sits in judgment, as described in Dan.7:914.” Andrews, JEO, 46, 47.

The Ancient of Days is Judge.—
“Daniel 7 informs us three times that the Ancient of Days is the judge (verses 9, 13, 22). This
would seem to indicate that God the Father is the
judge. However, there are other Biblical texts which
indicate that the Father judges no man but has committed all judgment to the Son of Man. In II Corinthians
5:10 the apostle Paul tells us that we must all stand
before the great judgment seat of Christ. And John
5:22, 27 unequivocally states that the Father has committed all judgment to the Son. What is all the more
amazing about these verses in the gospel of John is that
they have three clear links with the judgment scene in
Daniel 7: God, the Son of man, and judgment. How do
we solve this apparent discrepancy? Let’s look at an
analogous case.
“In the Bible, God the Father is identified as the
Creator (Revelation 4:11). Yet the Bible tells us that
the Father executed the works of creation through
Jesus (John 1:1-3; Colossians 1:16-17; Hebrews 1:2).
In other words, the Father performed the work of creation through the instrumentality of His Son. The Father
is the Master Architect and the Son is the Master
Builder. In similar fashion, the apostle Paul tells us in
Acts 17:30-31 that the Father will judge the world
through ‘that Man whom He has appointed.’ Ellen
White clarifies:
“‘Says the Psalmist: “Before the mountains were
brought forth, or ever Thou hadst formed the earth and
the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, Thou
art God.’ Psalm 90:2. It is He, the source of all being,
and the fountain of all law, that is to preside in the
judgment. And the holy angels as ministers and witnesses, in number ‘ten thousand times ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands,’ attend this great tribunal.’
(Ellen G. White, The Great Controversy, p. 479, bold is
mine).
‘Above the distractions of the earth He sits enthroned; all things are open to His divine survey; and
from His great and calm eternity He orders that which

“And I saw another angel fly in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto
them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation,
and kindred, and tongue, and people, 7 Saying with
a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for
the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him
that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.” Revelation 14:6,7.

The Law the Standard of Judgment.—
“The law of God is the standard by which the
characters and the lives of men will be tested in the
judgment. Says the wise man: ‘Fear God, and keep
His commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
For God shall bring every work into judgment.’
Ecclesiastes 12:13, 14. The apostle James admonishes
his brethren: ‘So speak ye, and so do, as they that

188

DANIEL 7
shall be judged by the law of liberty.’ James 2:12.”
Great Controversy, 482.

is missing—not a thought, a feeling, an act, a word.
God keeps an exact transcript of each person’s life
from conception till death. Our life story is there
(Psalm 139:16), our secrets (Ecclesiastes 12:13), our
words (Matthew 12:34-37), our works (Revelation
22:12), our evil deeds (Isaiah 65:5-6), our tears (Psalm
56:8). Our good deeds are written in the books of remembrance (Malachi 3:16). So to speak, God has another Stephen P. Bohr in heaven in written form. This
record of each person’s character, self-identity or
individuality is carefully preserved in the heavenly
books. Regarding this, Ellen G. White remarks:
“‘The grand judgment is taking place, and has
been going on for some time. Now the Lord says,
Measure the temple and the worshipers thereof. Remember when you are walking the streets about your
business, God is measuring you; when you are attending your household duties, when you engage in conversation, God is measuring you. Remember that your
words and actions are being daguerreotyped [photographed] in the books of heaven, as the face is reproduced by the artist on the polished plate....’ ( The SDA
Bible Commentary, ‘Ellen G. White Comments,’ vol.
7, p. 972).
“‘Accurately recorded in the books of heaven are
the sneers and trivial remarks made by sinners who pay
no heed to the call of mercy when Christ is represented
to them by a servant of God. As the artist takes on the
polished glass a true picture of a human face, so God
daily places upon the books of heaven an exact representation of the character of every individual’. (Ellen
G. White, Manuscript 105, 1901 as found in The SDA
Bible Commentary, volume 4, p. 1171).
“‘Remember that this world is God’s daguerreotyped [photography] office. The pictures of all who
live here, old and young, are being made in the books
of heaven. What shall the likeness be?’ (Ellen G.
White, Manuscript Releases, volume 3, p. 352).
“This exact transcript of every nook and cranny of
our lives is what the Bible calls ‘the spirit.’ Notice the
following awesome statement:
“‘Our personal identity is preserved in the resurrection, though not the same particles of matter or material substance as went into the grave. The wondrous
works of God are a mystery to man. The spirit, the
character of man, is returned to God, there to be preserved. In the resurrection every man will have his
own character. God in His own time will call forth
the dead, giving again the breath of life, and bidding
the dry bones live. The same form will come forth, but
it will be free from disease and every defect. It lives
again bearing the same individuality of features, so
that friend will recognize friend. There is no law of
God in nature which shows that God gives back the
same identical particles of matter which composed the
body before death. God shall give the righteous dead a
body that will please Him.’ (The SDA Bible Commentary, ‘Ellen G. White Comments,’ volume 6, p. 1093).
“Notice that it is not only the breath of life which

“When the judgment shall sit, and everyone
shall be judged by the things written in the books,
the authority of God’s law will be looked upon in a
light altogether different from that in which it is
now regarded by the Christian world. Satan has
blinded their eyes and confused their understanding, as
he blinded and confused Adam and Eve, and led them
into transgression. The law of Jehovah is great, even
as its Author is great. In the judgment it will be recognized as holy, just, and good in all its requirements.
Those who transgress this law will find that they have a
serious account to settle with God; for His claims are
decisive.” R&H, 5/7/1901.
“When the judgment shall sit, and the books
shall be opened, and every man shall be judged according to the things written in the books, then the
tables of stone, hidden by God until that day, will be
presented before the world as the standard of righteousness. Then men and women will see that the prerequisite of their salvation is obedience to the perfect
law of God. None will find excuse for sin. By the
righteous principles of that law, men will receive their
sentence of life or of death.” 1 Selected Messages,
225.
“Let us, as Christ’s followers, search our hearts as
with a lighted candle to see what manner of spirit we
are of. For our present and eternal good, let us criticize
our actions, to see how they stand in the light of the
law of God. For this law is our standard. Let every
soul search his own heart.” 7BC 986.
“In His teachings, Christ showed how farreaching are the principles of the law spoken from Sinai. He made a living application of that law whose
principles remain forever the great standard of
righteousness—the standard by which all shall be
judged in that great day when the judgment shall
sit, and the books shall be opened. He came to fulfill
all righteousness, and, as the head of humanity, to
show man that he can do the same work, meeting every
specification of the requirements of God. Through the
measure of His grace furnished to the human agent, not
one need miss heaven. Perfection of character is attainable by every one who strives for it. This is made
the very foundation of the new covenant of the gospel.
The law of Jehovah is the tree; the gospel is the fragrant blossoms and fruit which it bears.” 1 Selected
Messages, 211,212.
The Books Were Opened.—
“Daniel 7:10 informs us that the judgment sat and
‘the books [plural] were opened.’ And, what is in the
books? The answer is actually quite simple. The
books contain a complete record of our lives. Nothing

189

GEMS FROM DANIEL
returns to God when we die. It is our self-identity [that
which makes me ‘me’ in distinction to others] which is
preserved there until the day of the resurrection. Does
the Bible corroborate this view of Ellen White that the
spirit is the character of man? Absolutely!
“‘In the above statement, Ellen White is actually
commenting on Job 19:25-27 where Job expresses the
assurance that when he resurrects, it will be he himself
and not another. In other words, he will receive is own
self-identity at the resurrection. Besides Job 19:25-27,
there are three other texts which show that Ellen White
was correct in her assessment. Luke 8 contains the story of the resurrection of Jairus’ daughter. When Jesus
called her to rise, we are told that ‘her spirit returned to
her.’ (8:55) Notice that it does not say: ‘the spirit returned to her.’ What God gave back to her was the
breath of life along with her own self-identity. This is
why the flow of her thoughts picked up exactly where
it had left off when she died. She was hungry when
she died and she was hungry when she rose from the
dead.
“The same can be said about Jesus when He died
on the cross. When He cried out: ‘Father, into your
hands I commend my spirit,’ (Luke 23:46). He was not
merely saying: ‘Into your hands I commend my breath
of life.’ He was really saying, ‘Into your hands I commend my self-identity, my individuality, my character.’
When Jesus resurrected, He picked up at the very instant where he had left off when He died.
“The same can be said of Stephen. As he was being stoned, he cried out, ‘Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.’
(Acts 7:59). Notice that he does not say ‘the spirit’ but
rather, ‘my spirit.’ It was His self-identity or the record
of his life that he wanted Jesus to preserve until the day
of the resurrection.
“Similarly, when Jesus resurrected Lazarus, there
can be no doubt that Lazarus’ thoughts began where
they had left off when he died. The exact character or
self-identity which God had preserved in the books was
returned to him intact!! Though not directly related to
the pre-Advent judgment, the same can be said about
the wicked when they resurrect after the millennium.
Notice the following statement:
“‘There are kings and generals who conquered
nations, valiant men who never lost a battle, proud,
ambitious warriors whose approach made kingdoms
tremble. In death these experienced no change. As they
come up from the grave, they resume the current of
their thoughts just where it ceased. They are actuated
by the same desire to conquer that ruled them when
they fell.’ (Ellen G. White, The Great Controversy, p.
664).
“Why do wicked resurrect wicked and the righteous, resurrect righteous? Simply because they are given the very ‘spirit,’ character or self-identity they went
into the grave with. So, we conclude that the ‘books’
contain an exact transcript of each person’s life.”
Bohr, ND7, 124-126.

“Not all who profess to be Christians are true disciples. Before the final reward is given, it must be decided who are fitted to share the inheritance of the
righteous. This decision must be made prior to the
second coming of Christ in the clouds of heaven; for
when He comes, His reward is with Him, ‘to give every man according as his work shall be.’ Revelation
22:12. Before His coming, then, the character of every
man’s work will have been determined, and to every
one of Christ’s followers the reward will have been
apportioned according to his deeds.
“It is while men are still dwelling upon the earth
that the work of investigative judgment takes place in
the courts of heaven. The lives of all His professed
followers pass in review before God. All are examined according to the record of the books of heaven,
and according to his deeds the destiny of each is
forever fixed.” Christ Object Lessons, 310.
“In the typical service only those who had come
before God with confession and repentance, and whose
sins, through the blood of the sin offering, were transferred to the sanctuary, had a part in the service of the
Day of Atonement. So in the great day of final
atonement and investigative judgment the only cases considered are those of the professed people of
God. The judgment of the wicked is a distinct and
separate work, and takes place at a later period.
‘Judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that
obey not the gospel?’ 1 Peter 4:17.
“The books of record in heaven, in which the
names and the deeds of men are registered, are to
determine the decisions of the judgment. Says the
prophet Daniel: ‘The judgment was set, and the books
were opened.’ The revelator, describing the same scene, adds: ‘Another book was opened, which is the
book of life: and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the books, according to
their works.’ Revelation 20:12.
“The book of life contains the names of all who
have ever entered the service of God. Jesus bade His
disciples: ‘Rejoice, because your names are written in
heaven.’ Luke 10:20. Paul speaks of his faithful fellow
workers, ‘whose names are in the book of life.’ Philippians 4:3. Daniel, looking down to ‘a time of trouble,
such as never was,’ declares that God’s people shall be
delivered, ‘everyone that shall be found written in the
book.’ And the revelator says that those only shall
enter the city of God whose names ‘are written in the
Lamb’s book of life.’ Daniel 12:1; Revelation 21:27.
“ ‘A book of remembrance’ is written before
God, in which are recorded the good deeds of ‘them
that feared the Lord, and that thought upon His
name.’ Malachi 3:16. Their words of faith, their acts
of love, are registered in heaven. Nehemiah refers to
this when he says: ‘Remember me, O my God,... and
wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the
house of my God.’ Nehemiah 13:14. In the book of

190

DANIEL 7
God’s remembrance every deed of righteousness is
immortalized. There every temptation resisted, every
evil overcome, every word of tender pity expressed, is
faithfully chronicled. And every act of sacrifice, every
suffering and sorrow endured for Christ’s sake, is recorded. Says the psalmist: ‘Thou tellest my wanderings: put Thou my tears into Thy bottle: are they
not in Thy book?" Psalm 56:8.
“There is a record also of the sins of men. ‘For
God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.’
‘Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment.’ Says the Saviour: ‘By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy
words thou shalt be condemned.’ Ecclesiastes 12:14;
Matthew 12:36, 37. The secret purposes and motives
appear in the unerring register; for God ‘will bring
to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the hearts.’ 1 Corinthians 4:5. ‘Behold, it is written before Me,... your
iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together,
saith the Lord.’ Isaiah 65:6, 7.
“Every man’s work passes in review before God
and is registered for faithfulness or unfaithfulness.
Opposite each name in the books of heaven is entered
with terrible exactness every wrong word, every selfish
act, every unfulfilled duty, and every secret sin, with
every artful dissembling. Heaven-sent warnings or
reproofs neglected, wasted moments, unimproved
opportunities, the influence exerted for good or for
evil, with its far-reaching results, all are chronicled
by the recording angel.” Great Controversy, 480482.

“As Christ at His ascension appeared in the presence of God to plead His blood in behalf of penitent
believers, so the priest in the daily ministration sprinkled the blood of the sacrifice in the holy place in the
sinner’s behalf.
“The blood of Christ, while it was to release the
repentant sinner from the condemnation of the law,
was not to cancel the sin; it would stand on record
in the sanctuary until the final atonement; so in the
type the blood of the sin offering removed the sin
from the penitent, but it rested in the sanctuary until the Day of Atonement.
“In the great day of final award, the dead are
to be ‘judged out of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works.’ Rev. 20:12.
Then by virtue of the atoning blood of Christ, the
sins of all the truly penitent will be blotted from the
books of heaven. Thus the sanctuary will be freed,
or cleansed, from the record of sin. In the type, this
great work of atonement, or blotting out of sins, was
represented by the services of the Day of Atonement—the cleansing of the earthly sanctuary, which
was accomplished by the removal, by virtue of the
blood of the sin offering, of the sins by which it had
been polluted.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 357,358.
Our Hearts Inspected.—
“We are now living in the great day of atonement.
In the typical service, while the high priest was making
the atonement for Israel, all were required to afflict
their souls by repentance of sin and humiliation before
the Lord, lest they be cut off from among the people.
In like manner, all who would have their names
retained in the book of life should now, in the few
remaining days of their probation, afflict their souls
before God by sorrow for sin and true repentance.
There must be deep, faithful searching of heart.
The light, frivolous spirit indulged by so many professed Christians must be put away. There is earnest
warfare before all who would subdue the evil tendencies that strive for the mastery. The work of preparation is an individual work. We are not saved in groups.
The purity and devotion of one will not offset the want
of these qualities in another. Though all nations are
to pass in judgment before God, yet He will examine
the case of each individual with as close and searching scrutiny as if there were not another being upon
the earth. Everyone must be tested and found without
spot or wrinkle or any such thing.” Great Controversy,
489,490.

The Sanctuary Services Point to a Judgment.—
“That sanctuary, in which Jesus ministers in
our behalf, is the great original, of which the sanctuary built by Moses was a copy. The heavenly temple,
the abiding place of the King of kings, where ‘thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before Him’ (Daniel 7:10),
that temple filled with the glory of the eternal throne,
where seraphim, its shining guardians, veil their faces
in adoration—no earthly structure could represent
its vastness and its glory. Yet important truths concerning the heavenly sanctuary and the great work
there carried forward for man’s redemption were to be
taught by the earthly sanctuary and its services.
“After His ascension, our Saviour was to begin
His work as our High Priest. Says Paul, ‘Christ is not
entered into the holy places made with hands, which
are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to
appear in the presence of God for us.’ Hebrews 9:24.
As Christ’s ministration was to consist of two great
divisions, each occupying a period of time and having
a distinctive place in the heavenly sanctuary, so the
typical ministration consisted of two divisions, the
daily and the yearly service, and to each a department of the tabernacle was devoted.

“The grand judgment is taking place, and has
been going on for some time. Now the Lord says,
Measure the temple and the worshipers thereof. Remember when you are walking the streets about
your business, God is measuring you; when you are
attending your household duties, when you engage
in conversation, God is measuring you. Remember
that your words and actions are being daguerreo-

191

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ing. Every name is mentioned, every case closely investigated. Names are accepted, names rejected.
When any have sins remaining upon the books of
record, unrepented of and unforgiven, their names
will be blotted out of the book of life, and the record
of their good deeds will be erased from the book of
God’s remembrance. The Lord declared to Moses:
‘Whosoever hath sinned against Me, him will I blot out
of My book.’ Ex. 32:33. And says the prophet Ezekiel:
‘When the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity,... all his righteousness
that he hath done shall not be mentioned.’ Ezekiel
18:24.
“All who have truly repented of sin, and by
faith claimed the blood of Christ as their atoning
sacrifice, have had pardon entered against their
names in the books of heaven; as they have become
partakers of the righteousness of Christ, and their
characters are found to be in harmony with the law
of God, their sins will be blotted out, and they themselves will be accounted worthy of eternal life. The
Lord declares, by the prophet Isaiah: ‘I, even I, am He
that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake,
and will not remember thy sins.’ Isaiah 43:25. Said
Jesus: ‘He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed
in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out
of the book of life, but I will confess his name before
My Father, and before His angels.’ ‘Whosoever therefore shall confess Me before men, him will I confess
also before My Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny
before My Father which is in heaven.’ Revelation 3:5;
Matthew 10:32,33.
“The deepest interest manifested among men in
the decisions of earthly tribunals but faintly represents
the interest evinced in the heavenly courts when the
names entered in the book of life come up in review
before the Judge of all the earth. The divine Intercessor presents the plea that all who have overcome
through faith in His blood be forgiven their transgressions, that they be restored to their Eden home,
and crowned as joint heirs with Himself to ‘the first
dominion.’ Micah 4:8.” Great Controversy, 482-484.

typed [photographed] in the books of heaven, as the
face is reproduced by the artist on the polished
plate....
“Here is the work going on, measuring the temple
and its worshipers to see who will stand in the last day.
Those who stand fast shall have an abundant entrance
into the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
When we are doing our work remember there is One
that is watching the spirit in which we are doing it.
Shall we not bring the Saviour into our everyday lives,
into our secular work and domestic duties? Then in the
name of God we want to leave behind everything that
is not necessary, all gossiping or unprofitable visiting,
and present ourselves as servants of the living God.
7BC, 972.
“There is an unerring register kept of all sins
committed. All man’s impiety, all his disobedience
to Heaven’s commands, are written in the books of
heaven with unerring accuracy. The figures of guilt
rapidly accumulate, yet the judgments of God are tempered with mercy, until the figures have reached their
appointed limit. God bears long with the transgression
of human beings, and continues through His appointed
agencies to present the gospel message, until the set
time has come. God bears with divine patience with
the perversity of the wicked; but He declares that He
will visit their transgressions with a rod. He will at last
permit the destructive agencies of Satan to bear sway to
destroy (MS 17, 1906).
“Accurately recorded in the books of heaven are
the sneers and trivial remarks made by sinners who pay
no heed to the call of mercy when Christ is represented
to them by a servant of God. As the artist takes on
the polished glass a true picture of a human face, so
God daily places upon the books of heaven an exact
representation of the character of every individual
(MS 105, 1901). 4BC, 1171.
“The righteous dead will not be raised until after
the judgment at which they are accounted worthy of
‘the resurrection of life.’ Hence they will not be present in person at the tribunal when their records are
examined and their cases decided.
“Jesus will appear as their advocate, to plead in
their behalf before God. ‘If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous."
1 John 2:1. ‘For Christ is not entered into the holy
places made with hands, which are the figures of the
true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.’ ‘Wherefore He is able also to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by Him,
seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them.’
Hebrews 9:24; 7:25.
“As the books of record are opened in the judgment, the lives of all who have believed on Jesus come
in review before God. Beginning with those who first
lived upon the earth, our Advocate presents the cases
of each successive generation, and closes with the liv-

“The amount of good which may be accomplished by comparatively obscure but devoted Christians cannot be estimated until the life records shall
be made known, when the judgment shall sit and the
books be opened.” Sanctified Life, 40.
Biblical Teaching of the Judgment.—
“There is a day of judgment to come. Dan. 7: 9,
10; Rev. 14:6,7; Acts 17:31.
“Men will be judged according to their deeds
which are recorded. Rev. 20:12; 2 Cor. 5:10; Eccl.
12:14.
“Jesus is the Advocate for His people at the
judgment. 1 John 2:1.

192

DANIEL 7
“The sins of those found righteous will be blotted
out. Acts 3:19.
“The names of God’s children are recorded in the
book of life, and if they are found worthy by God, their
names will not be blotted out. Rev. 3:5.
“All are doomed whose names are not in the book
of life. Revelation 20:15.
“A time will come when every case has been decided. Rev. 22:11.
“After Christ’s work as priest at the judgment is
finished, He will return to the earth as king to give rewards to His children in accord with their deeds. Heb.
9:27,28; Matthew 25:31-41; Luke 1:32,33; Rev. 11:15;
15:5,8; 16:17; 19:2,11-16; 22:12; Dan. 2:44;
7:13,14,18,22,27.” Thiele, OSID, 105.

into their very souls, and at the same moment every
word and action of their lives passed before their
minds as clearly as though traced before their vision
in letters of fire. Trembling seized them, and their
faces turned pale. Their first appearance when around
the throne was that of careless indifference. But how
changed their appearance now! The feeling of security
is gone, and in its place is a nameless terror. A dread
is upon every soul, lest he shall be found among
those who are wanting. Every eye is riveted upon the
face of the One upon the throne; and as His solemn,
searching eye sweeps over that company, there is a
quaking of heart; for they are self-condemned without
one word being uttered. In anguish of soul each declares his own guilt and with terrible vividness sees
that by sinning he has thrown away the precious boon
of eternal life.
“One class were registered as cumberers of the
ground. As the piercing eye of the Judge rested upon
these, their sins of neglect were distinctly revealed.
With pale, quivering lips they acknowledged that they
had been traitors to their holy trust. They had had
warnings and privileges, but they had not heeded nor
improved them. They could now see that they had
presumed too much upon the mercy of God. True,
they had not such confessions to make as had the vile
and basely corrupt; but, like the fig tree, they were
cursed because they bore no fruit, because they had not
put to use the talents entrusted to them.
“This class had made self supreme, laboring only
for selfish interests. They were not rich toward God,
not having responded to His claims upon them. Although professing to be servants of Christ, they brought
no souls to Him. Had the cause of God been dependent
on their efforts, it would have languished; for they not
only withheld the means lent them of God, but they
withheld themselves. But these could now see and feel
that in occupying an irresponsible position in reference
to the work and cause of God they had placed themselves on the left hand. They had had opportunity, but
would not do the work that they could and should have
done.
“The names of all who profess the truth were
mentioned. Some were reproved for their unbelief,
others for having been slothful servants. They had
allowed others to do the work in the Master’s vineyard,
and to bear the heaviest responsibilities, while they
were selfishly serving their own temporal interests.
Had they cultivated the abilities God had given them,
they could have been reliable burden bearers, working
for the interest of the Master. Said the Judge: ‘All will
be justified by their faith and judged by their works.’
How vividly then appeared their neglect, and how wise
the arrangement of God in giving to every man a work
to do to promote the cause and save his fellow men.
Each was to demonstrate a living faith in his family
and in his neighborhood, by showing kindness to the
poor, sympathizing with the afflicted, engaging in
missionary labor, and by aiding the cause of God

A Vision of the Judgment.—
“On the morning of October 23, 1879, about two
o’clock, the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I
beheld scenes in the coming judgment. Language fails
me in which to give an adequate description of the
things which passed before me and of the effect they
had upon my mind.
“The great day of the execution of God’s judgment seemed to have come. Ten thousand times ten
thousand were assembled before a large throne, upon
which was seated a person of majestic appearance.
Several books were before Him, and upon the covers of
each was written in letters of gold, which seemed like a
burning flame of fire: ‘Ledger of Heaven.’ One of these books, containing the names of those who claim to
believe the truth, was then opened. Immediately I lost
sight of the countless millions about the throne, and
only those who were professedly children of the light
and of the truth engaged my attention. As these persons were named, one by one, and their good deeds
mentioned, their countenances would light up with a
holy joy that was reflected in every direction. But this
did not seem to rest upon my mind with the greatest
force.
“Another book was opened, wherein were recorded the sins of those who profess the truth. Under the
general heading of selfishness came every other sin.
There were also headings over every column, and underneath these, opposite each name, were recorded, in
their respective columns, the lesser sins.
“Under covetousness came falsehood, theft, robbery, fraud, and avarice; under ambition came pride
and extravagance; jealousy stood at the head of malice,
envy, and hatred; and intemperance headed a long list
of fearful crimes, such as lasciviousness, adultery, indulgence of animal passions, etc. As I beheld I was
filled with inexpressible anguish and exclaimed: ‘Who
can be saved? who will stand justified before God?
whose robes are spotless? who are faultless in the sight
of a pure and holy God?’
“As the Holy One upon the throne slowly turned
the leaves of the ledger, and His eyes rested for a moment upon individuals, His glance seemed to burn

193

GEMS FROM DANIEL
with his means. But, like Meroz, the curse of God
rested upon them for what they had not done. They
had loved that work which would bring the greatest
profit in this life; and opposite their names in the ledger
devoted to good works there was a mournful blank.
“The words spoken to these were most solemn:
‘You are weighed in the balances, and found wanting. You have neglected spiritual responsibilities because of busy activity in temporal matters, while your
very position of trust made it necessary that you should
have more than human wisdom and greater than finite
judgment. This you needed in order to perform even
the mechanical part of your labor; and when you disconnected God and His glory from your business, you
turned from His blessing.’
“The question was then asked: ‘Why have you
not washed your robes of character and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb? God sent His Son into
the world, not to condemn the world, but that through
Him it might be saved. My love for you has been more
self-denying than a mother’s love. It was that I might
blot out your dark record of iniquity, and put the cup of
salvation to your lips, that I suffered the death of the
cross, bearing the weight and curse of your guilt. The
pangs of death, and the horrors of the darkness of the
tomb, I endured, that I might conquer him who had the
power of death, unbar the prison house, and open for
you the gates of life. I submitted to shame and agony because I loved you with an infinite love, and
would bring back my wayward, wandering sheep to
the paradise of God, to the tree of life. That life of
bliss which I purchased for you at such a cost, you
have disregarded. Shame, reproach, and ignominy,
such as your Master bore for you, you have shunned.
The privileges He died to bring within your reach have
not been appreciated. You would not be partaker of
His sufferings, and you cannot now be partaker with
Him of His glory.’
“Then were uttered these solemn words: ‘He that
is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy,
let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him
be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy
still.’ The book then closed, and the mantle fell from
the Person on the throne, revealing the terrible glory of
the Son of God.
“The scene then passed away, and I found myself
still upon the earth, inexpressibly grateful that the day
of God had not yet come, and that precious probationary time is still granted us in which to prepare for eternity.” 4 Testimonies, 384-387.

DANIEL 7:11
I beheld then because of the voice of
the great words which the horn spake: I
beheld even till the beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning
flame.
I Beheld Then.—
“When the Ancient of Days was shown to Daniel
in vision, sitting in judgment, preparatory to the advent
of his Son to execute that judgment, the words of the
little horn, spoken at that very time, attracted the
prophet’s attention: [Dan. 7:11 quoted]. The Hebrew
word rendered ‘then’ is very emphatic in the signification of ‘at that time.’ Gesenius renders it, ‘at that time,
thereupon, then,’ And it is specially worthy of notice
that at this very time the head of the Romish apostasy had assembled at Rome the entire body of popish bishops [at the Vatican 1 Council in 1870], almost
equal in number to Belshazzar’s lords (Daniel 5),
and expected and required of them to pronounce
him infallible! It is evident, indeed, that for this very
purpose he assembled them, and they obeyed his behest. We have, therefore, heard the great words of the
little horn, which even arrested the attention of the
prophet while in vision he beheld the tribunal of the
Father.” Andrews, JEO, 128.
The Voice of the Great Words of the Little Horn.—
“The life of the fourth beast, especially of the little horn, is prolonged beyond the time of the investigative judgment. Even after the thrones were set and the
work in the holy of holies was begun, the great words
of the little horn attracted the attention of the prophet.
If 1844 was the opening of the judgment, we would
expect some outstanding statements from the ‘the little
horn’ after 1844.
“1849: Pope Pius IX proclaimed the doctrine of
the Immaculate Conception. ‘That the most blessed
Virgin Mary in the first instant of her conception
…was kept immune from any contamination of original sin.’
“1864: Pope Pius IX promulgates the Syllabus
of Errors in his encyclical Quanta Cura. Separation of
church and state denounced as a pestilential error.
“1870: Declaration of the Infallibility of the
Pope. What greater words has the church ever spoken? This was an attempt to seat a man on a throne
beside the Son of God. While Christ stood as a slain
Lamb before the Father, pleading for the salvation of
the world, poor, frail man was exalting his throne
above the stars of God. These ‘great words’ were
spoken just after the judgment began in heaven. We
can be sure of our foundation. Prophecy is fulfilled.
The judgment has begun.
“1885: Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical Immortale Dei condemns freedom of religion and freedom
of the press as threats to civil society and true religion.

Why This Judgment Before the Second Coming.—
“The investigation is not conducted for the information of God or of Christ, but for the information of
the universe at large—that God may be vindicated
in accepting some and rejecting others.” 4SDABC,
828.

194

DANIEL 7
“1894, June 20: ‘We hold upon this earth the
place of God almighty.’ Pope Leo XIII, Encyclical
letter, The Great Encyclical Letters of Leo XIII, 304.”
Burnside, DPUF, 169; Haskell, SDP, 102; Thiele,
OSID, 66; Wolff, LN, 7/2009.

has been styled ‘Lord God the Pope’, and has been
declared infallible. He demands the homage of all
men. The same claim urged by Satan in the wilderness
of temptation is still urged by him through the Church
of Rome, and vast numbers are ready to yield him
homage.
“But those who fear and reverence God meet this
heaven-daring assumption as Christ met the solicitations of the wily foe: ‘Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and Him only shalt thou serve.’ Luke 4:8. God
has never given a hint in His word that He has appointed any man to be the head of the church. The
doctrine of papal supremacy is directly opposed to the
teachings of the Scriptures. The pope can have no
power over Christ’s church except by usurpation.”
Great Controversy, 50,51.

“The two doctrines—the Immaculate Conception
and the Infallibility of the Pope are sign posts telling
the student of scripture that the judgment has already started.” Taylor, CSB, 75.
“In verses 9 and 10 judgment of another kind is
brought to view: the investigative Judgment of the
Heavenly Sanctuary, commencing in 1844. In connection with that a special utterance of great words is
heard by the prophet. The great Ecumenical Council
held in Rome in 1870, furnishes a marked fulfillment. There by a deliberate vote of the highest dignitaries of all the Catholic world, 538 against 2, July
21, 1870, the pope was decreed to be infallible. In
two months from that time, Sept.20, 1870, Rome surrendered to the troops of Victor Emanuel, and the last
vestige of the pope's temporal power departed. His
destruction in the burning flame must be at hand.”
Biblical Institute, 44.

Even Till the Fourth Beast Was Slain—Given to the
Burning Flames.—
“And to you who are troubled rest with us, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, 8 In flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 9 Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power; 10 When
he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe (because our testimony
among you was believed) in that day.” 2 Thessalonians 1:7-10.
“And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.”
2Thessolonians 2:8.
“And the beast was taken, and with him the
false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These
both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone.” Revelation 19:20.
“The ‘burning flame’ that destroys the beast is
first, that which proceeds from the glory of Christ
at His second advent; and second, the final lake of
fire. 2 Thess. 2:8; Rev. 19:20.” Bunch, BOD, 108.

Pope Benedict XVI, Joseph Ratzinger, proclaimed
the Roman Catholic Church the only true church.

“Following the first scene in the heavenly court,
the prophet’s view is transferred back to earth. There
he see the first result of that judgment—the destruction of the fourth beast with its little horn (vss.
11-12).” BRI, 2SOD, 501.

“It is one of the leading doctrines of Romanism
that the pope is the visible head of the universal church
of Christ, invested with supreme authority over bishops
and pastors in all parts of the world. More than this,
the pope has been given the very titles of Deity. He

Destruction of Little Horn not the Same as Taking
Away Its Dominion.—
“The destruction of the Papacy is not the same
event as the taking away of his dominion. Compare
Dan.7:11 and 26. The one follows after the sitting of

195

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the Ancient of Days in judgment; but the other precedes it by a certain space of time. Yet, if we read the
chapter without strict attention, we would be very likely to conclude that not the little horn alone, but each of
the first three beasts, had their dominion taken away at
the judgment. See verses 11,12,26. This, however,
cannot be. For the dominion of the first beast was
taken away by the second, though his life was
spared; and so of each one to the last. But the little
horn has a special dominion over the saints for ‘a time
and times and the dividing of time,’ or 1,260 prophetic
days (see verse 25; Rev.12:6,14), which is taken away
at the end of that period. There remains even then a
space of time to ‘the end,’ during which his dominion is consumed and destroyed. He wars against the
saints, however, and prevails until the judgment is given to the saints at the advent of Christ. (1Cor.4:5;
6:2,3; Rev.20:4), when he is given to the burning
flames. Dan.7:11; 2Thess.2:8.” Andrews, JEO, 32,33.

‘beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to
the burning flame.’
“This shows that the little horn is but another
phase of the original fourth, or dreadful and terrible, beast—that the little horn is but the continuation of the dreadful and terrible beast, in its very
disposition, spirit, and aims, only under a variant
form. And as the fourth world power, the dreadful and
terrible beast in its original form was Rome; so the
little horn in its workings is but the continuation of
Rome—of the spirit and working of Rome, under this
form.” Jones, CWCP, 89.

DANIEL 7:12
As concerning the rest of the beasts,
they had their dominion taken away: yet
their lives were prolonged for a season and
time.

“There are those who believe in a thousand years’
reign of righteousness over all the world before the
coming of Christ. There are others who believe in probation after the Lord comes, during which the immortal
righteous still proclaim the gospel to mortal sinners,
and lead them into the way of salvation. Neither of
these theories can be substantiated from the Bible, as
we shall see.
“The fourth terrible beast continues without
change of character, and the little horn continues to
utter its blasphemies, holding its millions of votaries in
the bonds of blind superstition, until the beast is given
to the burning flame. This is not its conversion, but
its destruction. (See 2 Thessalonians 2: 8.)
“The life of the fourth beast is not prolonged after
its dominion is gone, as were the lives of the preceding
beasts. Their dominion was taken away, but their lives
were prolonged for a season. The territory and subjects of the Babylonian kingdom still existed, though
made subject to the Persians. So with the Persian
kingdom in respect to Greece, and Greece in respect
to Rome. But what succeeds the fourth kingdom? No
government or state in which mortals have any part,
follows it. Its career ends in the lake of fire, and it
has no existence beyond. The lion was merged with
the bear, the bear into the leopard, the leopard into the
fourth beast. But the fourth beast is not merged into
another beast. It is to be cast into the lake of fire.”
Smith, DR, 113,114.

As Concerning the Rest of the Beasts—Lion, Bear,
and Leopard.—
“Their dominion was taken away, but their lives
were prolonged for a season. The territory and subjects of the Babylonian kingdom still existed, though
made subject to the Persians. So with the Persian
kingdom in respect to Greece, and Greece in respect
to Rome.” Smith, DR, 113,114.
“The angel had said to Daniel, ‘As concerning the
rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away;
yet their lives were prolonged.’ Each one, before being destroyed, was merged into the succeeding one.
The same truth was represented in chapter four when
the tree representing Babylon was cut down, but the
roots remained in the ground. The roots represented the
foundation principles upon which Babylon was built,
and they have remained in the earth ever since. When
Medo-Persia fell, she left her principles of government,
education, and religion still alive, transmitting them to
her posterity, the nations of earth. Greece did likewise,
and with each succeeding empire, those foundation
principles which were so clearly portrayed in Babylon,
which were placed there by the prince of the power of
the air, instead of appearing in a weakened state,
sprung into life with renewed vigor. …Rome in religion renewed all the religious errors of Babylon,
and in education she followed in the footsteps of her
great mother.” Haskell, SDP, 93.

Pagan and Papal Rome—One Entity, Same Spirit.—
“The prophet beheld the little horn from the time
of its rise clear through to the time when ‘the judgment
was set, and the books were opened.’ ..And he continued to behold that same thing—that same little horn—
until the end and till its destruction. But when its destruction comes, the word that describes it is not that
the little horn was broken or destroyed, but that the

“How could the lion, the bear and the leopard
cease to reign, and yet continue to live? The answer is
evident: While the kingdoms were conquered, the pagan cultures and religions continued to live on in the
little horn. The Papal roman Church, under the guise
of Christianity, is in reality a continuation of ancient
Babylonian, Persian and Greek paganism. It is understandable then that Revelation would describe the

196

DANIEL 7

nations, and languages, should serve him:
his dominion is an everlasting dominion,
which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

Papacy as an amalgamation of the leopard, the
bear, and the lion. The religio-political system is the
embodiment of all the kingdoms from which it succeeded.” Light Bearers, UOD-9.
“Daniel 7:12 says that the lives of the first three
beasts of chapter 7, unlike that of the fourth beast, were
to be ‘prolonged for a season and a time’ after their
dominion had been taken away. In a symbolic gesture
Alexander married a Bactrian princess, Roxane, and he
enthusiastically endorsed the marriages of 10,000 of
his Greek soldiers to Persian wives. Indeed Alexander
revealed remarkably cosmopolitan statesmanship. He
creatively set in motion a blending of the old Babylonian and Persian cultures with the Greek (or ‘Hellenic’)
culture, which was to stamp civilization as ‘Hellenistic’
for centuries to come. Thus elements of Babylonian,
Persian, and Greek civilizations persisted ‘for a season and a time.’ Indeed many of them influence us
today.” Maxwell, 1GC, 152.

The Son of Man.—
“Christ is the Son of man. This expression concerning Him is found throughout the gospels. See Matthew 16:13, 17, 18; 17:9, 22; John 1:51; 3:13,14, etc.”
Thiele, OSID, 59.
“The NT expression ‘Son of man,’ most commentators agree, is based on Dan. 7:13.
“At the incarnation the Son of God took upon
Himself the form of humanity (John 1:1-4,12,14; Phil.
2:7; Heb. 2:14; etc.) and became the Son of man, so
uniting divinity with humanity by a tie never to be
broken. Thus, repentant sinners have as their representative before the Father ‘one like’ themselves, One
who was in all points tempted like as they are and who
is touched with the feeling of their infirmities. (Heb.
4:15). Comforting thought!” 4SDABC, 829.

“Verse 12 is doubtless a parenthetical statement
to show the contrast between the downfall of the nations represented by the first three beasts and the Roman beast and especially Papal Rome. Babylon,
Medo-Persia, and Grecia lost their dominion when they
were overthrown although they continued to live as a
part of the state that supplanted them. Not so with
the papacy.” Bunch, BOD, 108.

“Jesus, our Substitute, consented to bear for man
the penalty of the law transgressed. He clothed His
divinity with humanity and thus became the Son of
man, a Saviour and Redeemer.” Faith & Works, 30.
“Man’s substitute and surety must have man’s
nature, a connection with the human family whom
he was to represent, and, as God’s ambassador, he
must partake of the divine nature, have a connection
with the Infinite, in order to manifest God to the world,
and be a mediator between God and man.
“These qualifications were found alone in Christ.
Clothing His divinity with humanity, He came to
earth to be called the Son of man and the Son of God.
He was the surety for man, the ambassador for
God—the surety for man to satisfy by His righteousness in man’s behalf the demands of the law,
and the representative of God to make manifest His
character to a fallen race.” 1 Selected Messages, 257.

“The territory of Babylon was made subject to
Persia, yet the subjects of Babylon were allowed to live
on. Similarly, when Macedonia conquered Persia and
when Rome conquered Macedonia, the inhabitants of
the conquered countries were not destroyed. With the
final destruction of the little-horn power the whole
world will be depopulated.” 4SDABC, 829.
“Babylon was conquered by Persia in 539 BC, but
it lasted as a city until AD 75. Greece still exists today,
but not with the power of Alexander’s empire. Until
recent years Iran (Persia) was ruled by Shahs who considered themselves direct descendants of the Persian
kings (the Achaemenids) of the sixth through the fourth
centuries BC. In this way, each of these powers lived
on after its dominion was taken away.” Shea,
DARG, 216.

“For four thousand years the race had been decreasing in physical strength, in mental power, and in
moral worth; and Christ took upon Him the infirmities of degenerate humanity. Only thus could He
rescue man from the lowest depths of his degradation.
“Many claim that it was impossible for Christ to
be overcome by temptation. Then He could not have
been placed in Adam’s position; He could not have
gained the victory that Adam failed to gain. If we have
in any sense a more trying conflict than had Christ,
then He would not be able to succor us. But our Saviour took humanity, with all its liabilities. He took
the nature of man, with the possibility of yielding to
temptation. We have nothing to bear which He has
not endured.” Desire of Ages, 117.

DANIEL 7:13,14
I saw in the night visions, and, behold,
one like the Son of man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient
of days, and they brought him near before
him.
And there was given him dominion,
and glory, and a kingdom, that all people,
197

GEMS FROM DANIEL
engage in the last acts of His ministration in behalf of
man—to perform the work of investigative judgment
and to make an atonement for all who are shown to be
entitled to its benefits.” Great Controversy, 479,480.

The Clouds of Heaven.—
“Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the
waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind: Who maketh his
angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire. Psalm
104:3,4.
“The chariots of God are twenty thousand,
even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them, as
in Sinai, in the holy place. Psalm 68:17.

“I saw that while Jesus was in the most holy
place He would be married to the New Jerusalem;
and after His work should be accomplished in the holiest, He would descend to the earth in kingly power and
take to Himself the precious ones who had patiently
waited His return.
“I was shown what did take place in heaven at the
close of the prophetic periods in 1844. As Jesus ended
His ministration in the holy place and closed the door
of that apartment, a great darkness settled upon those
who had heard and rejected the message of His coming, and they lost sight of Him. Jesus then clothed
Himself with precious garments. Around the bottom of
His robe was a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate. A breastplate of curious work was suspended from His shoulders. As He moved, this glittered like diamonds, magnifying letters which looked
like names written or engraved upon the breastplate.
Upon His head was something which had the appearance of a crown. When fully attired, He was surrounded by angels, and in a flaming chariot He
passed within the second veil.” Early Writings, 251.

“That this ‘Son of man’ also partakes of divine
characteristics is evident from the fact that he comes
with ‘the clouds of heaven.’ Such phraseology is reserved elsewhere in Scripture for theophanies [a visible
manifestation of a deity to a human person].” Shea,
SSPI, 106.
“He came before the Father surrounded by the
clouds of heaven; that is, with thousands of angels
who, as ministering spirits, have watched the lives
of men, recording their every word and deed and
thought. Characters have been formed, and whether
they are good or ill, they have been mirrored in the
books of heaven. When Christ came before the Father,
the books were opened and the cases of the dead were
investigated. The deeds may have been committed in
the light of day, or in the darkness of night, yet they are
all open and manifest before him with whom we have
to do. Heavenly intelligences have witnessed each sin,
and have faithfully recorded the same. Sin may be
concealed from friends, relatives, and our most intimate associates. None but the guilty actors may have
the least knowledge of wrong deeds, but these things
are all laid bare before the angels and the inhabitants of other worlds.” Haskell, SDP, 101,102.

“[Dan. 7:13 quoted.] No words could be framed
which give a more vivid view of the opening of the
judgment which occurred at the time of the announcement, ‘The hour of his judgment is come.’ In Daniel
seven is the only description found in the Bible of
the judgment scene announced by the first angel of
Revelation fourteen. The message itself is the only
announcement in the Bible that the time had arrived;
and the fourteenth verse of the eighth chapter of Daniel
is the only prophetic period given in the Bible which
marks the time of the beginning of God’s judgment.
That period is the twenty-three hundred days or literal
years which began in the year 457 BC, with the decree
to build and restore Jerusalem, and expired in 1844
AD. It was at this latter date that the first angel of
Revelation fourteen proclaimed the hour of God’s
judgment. The message went to all lands, and the island of the sea heard it. When God had taken his position over his law in the most holy place in the heavenly
sanctuary, then Christ came in to plead before him for
his people. This coming could not be when he ascended up on high; for then he ascended to the Father, and
the judgment was in the future. It cannot refer to his
second coming to this earth; for then he comes from the
Father: It was his coming before the Father when he
took his position in the judgment at the end of the
twenty-three hundred days.” Haskell, SDP, 100.

The Son of Man Came to the Ancient of Days.—
“The coming of Christ as our high priest to the
most holy place, for the cleansing of the sanctuary,
brought to view in Daniel 8:14; the coming of the Son
of man to the Ancient of Days, as presented in Daniel
7:13; and the coming of the Lord to His temple, foretold by Malachi, are descriptions of the same event;
and this is also represented by the coming of the bridegroom to the marriage, described by Christ in the parable of the ten virgins, of Matthew 25.” Great Controversy, 426.
“[Daniel 7:13,14 quoted]. The coming of Christ
here described is not His second coming to the earth.
He comes to the Ancient of Days in heaven to receive dominion and glory and a kingdom, which will
be given Him at the close of His work as a mediator.
It is this coming, and not His second advent to the
earth, that was foretold in prophecy to take place at the
termination of the 2300 days in 1844. Attended by
heavenly angels, our great High Priest enters the holy
of holies and there appears in the presence of God to

“Following the first scene in the heavenly court,
the prophet’s view is transferred back to earth. There
he see the first result of that judgment—the destruction

198

DANIEL 7
of the fourth beast with its little horn (vss. 11-12). Following this his view is transferred back to heaven
where he views a second scene, also a result of the
conclusion of this judgment. This time he sees the
coronation of the Son of man as the ruler of God’s
eternal kingdom (vss. 13-14). The vision concludes
with this second scene in heaven. The rest of the chapter records the dialog between Daniel and the angel
messenger who interprets the vision for him.” BRI,
2SOD, 501.

kingdom were made up. The marriage of the Lamb
was consummated. And the kingdom, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven,
was given to Jesus and the heirs of salvation, and
Jesus was to reign as King of kings and Lord of
lords.” Early Writings, 280.
Christ Receives Kingdom Before Second Coming.—
“The Saviour closes his priesthood with the acquittal of his people at his Father’s bar. For the act of
God, the Father, in sitting as judge, enables the Son to
appear as the advocate of his people, and to obtain decision in their favor. That acquittal involves the virtual
condemnation of all others. The last act of the Father
in the work of the judgment in Daniel 7, is to crown
his Son king, that he may execute its decision. It is
at the close of this session, therefore, that our Lord
terminates his office of priest-king upon his Father’s
throne, and takes his own throne to execute the decision of the Father. For it is the part of the Son to show
from the record of the books who have overcome, and
to confess the names of such before his Father.
Rev.3:5. It pertains to the Father to give decision that
such persons shall have immortality. And the execution of the judgment will consist in making these
persons immortal, and in destroying all the rest.
The decision of the judgment does therefore rest wholly with the Father. But the execution of the judgment
pertains alone to the Son, who is crowned king at
his Father's tribunal for this very purpose.” Andrews, JEO, 102.

Given Him Dominion, Glory, and a Kingdom..—
“In Luke 19:12-15, Christ is represented as a
nobleman who took his journey into a far country to
receive for himself a kingdom and to return. At the
close of His priestly ministry in the sanctuary, while
still in heaven Christ receives the kingdom from His
Father and then returns to earth for His saints.”
4SDABC, 830.
“And all who through the testimony of the
Scriptures accept the same truths, following Christ
by faith as He enters in before God to perform the last
work of mediation, and at its close to receive His kingdom—all these are represented as going in to the
marriage.
“In the parable of Matthew 22 the same figure of
the marriage is introduced, and the investigative
judgment is clearly represented as taking place before the marriage. Previous to the wedding the king
comes in to see the guests, to see if all are attired in the
wedding garment, the spotless robe of character
washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb.
Matt. 22:11; Rev. 7:14. He who is found wanting is
cast out, but all who upon examination are seen to have
the wedding garment on are accepted of God and accounted worthy of a share in His kingdom and a seat
upon His throne. This work of examination of character, of determining who are prepared for the kingdom
of God, is that of the investigative judgment, the closing of work in the sanctuary above.” Great Controversy, 427,428.

“The scene here described is not the second coming of Christ to this earth, for the Ancient of days is not
on this earth, and the coming here spoken of is to the
Ancient of days. There, in the presence of the Father,
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom are given to the
Son of man. Christ receives His kingdom before His
return to this earth. (See Luke 19: 10-12.) Therefore,
this is a scene which takes place in heaven, and is
closely connected with that brought to view in verses 9
and 10. Christ receives His kingdom at the close of
His priestly work in the sanctuary. The people and
nations that shall serve Him are the redeemed (Revelation 21: 24), not the wicked nations of the earth, for
these are destroyed at the second advent of Christ by
the brightness of His coming. (Psalm 2: 9; 2 Thessalonians 2: 8.) Out of all nations, tribes, and kindreds of
the earth will come those who serve God with joy and
gladness. They shall inherit the kingdom of our Lord.”
Smith, DR, 114,115.

“Then He raised His right arm, and we heard His
lovely voice saying, ‘Wait here; I am going to My Father to receive the kingdom; keep your garments spotless, and in a little while I will return from the wedding and receive you to Myself.’ Then a cloudy chariot, with wheels like flaming fire, surrounded by angels,
came to where Jesus was. He stepped into the chariot
and was borne to the holiest, where the Father sat.”
Early Writings, 55.

All People, Nations, & Languages, Should Serve
Him.—
“And I saw another angel fly in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto
them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people, Saying with a loud
voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of

“Every case had been decided for life or death.
While Jesus had been ministering in the sanctuary, the
judgment had been going on for the righteous dead,
and then for the righteous living. Christ had received
His kingdom, having made the atonement for His people and blotted out their sins. The subjects of the

199

GEMS FROM DANIEL
his judgment is come: and worship him that made
heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of
waters.” Revelation 14:6,7.

this. So he told me, and made me know the
interpretation of the things.
These great beasts, which are four, are
four kings, which shall arise out of the
earth.
But the saints of the most High shall
take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom
for ever, even for ever and ever.

“The Hebrew word can be translated ‘to serve’ or
‘to worship.’” E-Sword, Hebrew Dictionary.
“After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes,
and palms in their hands; And cried with a loud voice,
saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb.” Revelation 7:9,10.

One of Them That Stood By.—
“To ‘Joshua’ it was said, ‘Thus saith the Lord of
hosts: If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt
keep my charge... I will give thee places to walk among
these that stand by.’ And who are “these that stand
by”? They are the angels of God. Joshua must have
a living, confiding trust in God every day; and then
angels would walk with him, and the power of God
would rest upon him in all his labors.” Signs of the
Times, 1/14/1886.

“And it shall come to pass, that from one new
moon to another, and from one sabbath to another,
shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the
LORD.” Isaiah 66:23.
Jesus and Daniel 7’s “Son of Man”—
“Jesus referred to His return in terms borrowed
from the judgment vision of Daniel 7. He described
Himself as the ‘Son of Man’ who came from heaven
(see John 3:13, 31,32; 6:50,51, 62) and who will return
‘on the clouds of heaven,; meaning on clouds of angels
(see Dan. 7:13, 9, 10). Jesus added that He would
come as the Son of Man ‘with power and great glory’
(Matt. 24:30), referring to His celestial glory spoken of
in Daniel 7:14, 27. He summed up all three references
to Daniel 7 in His climactic announcement: ‘They will
see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky,
with power and great glory.’
“The connection with Daniel 7 is essential for understanding the specific sign of His appearance. Jesus
not only borrowed the sign of His parousia from Daniel
7:13, He applied it to His coming to the earth after He
had come to the Father to receive the authority to rule
over the earth (Dan. 7:9-14). Take a closer look at Jesus’ application of His coming ‘with the clouds’:
“Under oath, Jesus solemnly declared before the
high priest that He was the Messiah of prophecy and
would come again as the celestial ‘Son of Man’ of
Daniel 7 who was escorted by a cloud of angels to God
the Father: ‘In the future you will see the Son of Man
sitting at the right hand of the Mighty One and coming
on the clouds of heaven’ (Matt. 26:64). Clearly, Jesus
understood His mission in the light of the victorious
Judgment of Daniel 7!” LaRondelle, LFTLD, 17,18.

It was Gabriel That Stood By.—
“Gabriel is referred to in Daniel 9:21 as the one
whom Daniel had seen in the vision ‘at first’…. Which
vision was that? Daniel 8:1 refers back to the vision of
ch. 7 as the vision ‘at first.’ Since the same Hebrew
word is used in Daniel 8 and 9, we may assume that the
mention of the vision give ‘at first’ in Daniel 9 refers to
the vision of Daniel 7. Thus it must have been Gabriel who appeared to Daniel in the vision of ch. 7 as
his angel interpreter.” Shea, SSPI, 98.
Beasts = Earthly Governments, Not Heavenly.—
“The germ in the seed grows by the unfolding of
the life-principle which God has implanted. Its development depends upon no human power. So it is with
the kingdom of Christ. It is a new creation. Its principles of development are the opposite of those that rule
the kingdoms of this world. Earthly governments
prevail by physical force; they maintain their dominion by war; but the founder of the new kingdom
is the Prince of Peace. The Holy Spirit represents
worldly kingdoms under the symbol of fierce beasts of
prey; but Christ is ‘the Lamb of God, which taketh
away the sin of the world.’ John 1:29. In His plan of
government there is no employment of brute force
to compel the conscience.” Christ’s Object Lessons,
77.
Vision Interpreted to Daniel.—
“We should be no less concerned than was Daniel
to understand the truth of these things. We have the
assurance that when we inquire with sincerity of heart,
we shall find the Lord as ready now as in the days of
the prophet to lead to a correct understanding of these
important truths. The beasts and the kingdoms which
they represent, have already been explained. We have

DANIEL 7:15-18
I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the
midst of my body, and the visions of my
head troubled me.
I came near unto one of them that
stood by, and asked him the truth of all
200

DANIEL 7
followed the prophet through the course of events, even
to the destruction of the fourth beast, the final overthrow of all earthly governments. Then the scene
changes, for we read, ‘The saints... shall take the kingdom.’ Vs. 18. The saints! despised, reproached, persecuted, cast out; looked upon as the least likely of
all men ever to realize their hopes—these shall take
the kingdom, and possess it forever. The usurpation
and misrule of the wicked shall come to an end. The
inheritance forfeited because of sin shall be redeemed.
Peace and righteousness shall reign eternally over all
the fair expanse of the earth made new.” Smith, DR,
115.

High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever, even forever and ever.’ Daniel 7:18.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 342.
“Although the resurrection is primarily a demonstration of divine sovereignty it is also a defense of
God’s goodness and power. It assures the pious that
present or future ignominy, injustice, or even death
cannot eclipse the divine goal for them. In the end
the ‘saints of the Most High shall receive the kingdom,
and possess the kingdom for ever, for ever and ever’
(7:18).” BRI, 2SOD, 57.
“A deep sense of our need, and a great desire for
the things for which we ask, must characterize our
prayers, else they will not be heard. But we are not to
become weary, and cease our petitions because the
answer is not immediately received. ‘The kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by
force.’ Mt. 11:12. The violence here meant is a holy
earnestness, such as Jacob manifested. We need not
try to work ourselves up into an intense feeling; but
calmly, persistently, we are to press our petitions at
the throne of grace. Our work is to humble our souls
before God, confessing our sins, and in faith drawing
nigh unto God.” R&H, 2/9/1897.

The Saints Shall Take and Possess the Kingdom.—
“When invited to inherit the kingdom, it is said to
be that prepared for them from the foundation of the
world. This cannot signify that they are at once to inherit the new earth, for the new earth cannot exist till
the sentence has been passed upon the wicked, and
executed upon them, as the lake of fire, where the
wicked are punished, is our earth in its final conflagration. 2Pet.3:7-13; Mal.4:1-3; Prov.11:31; Rev.20; 21.
Indeed, the new earth can hardly be said to have been
prepared from the foundation of the world. But Paradise, which contains the tree of life, and is now in
the third heaven (2Cor.12:2-4), was prepared for
mankind in their innocency, when the earth itself was
founded (Gen.2:8-15; 3:1-24), and is to be given as a
part of the overcomer’s reward, and will be reached
by their entrance within the walls of the heavenly Jerusalem (Rev.2:7; 22:2,14). The giving of the kingdom
to the saints begins with the capital of that kingdom,
but will not be finished till they take the kingdom
under the whole heaven, to possess it forever, even
forever and ever. Dan.7:18,27; Rev.21. The Saviour’s act of giving the kingdom to his saints is a part
of the work of executing the decision of the Father respecting his people; for it is the Father’s good pleasure
to give them the kingdom. Luke 12:32.” Andrews,
JEO, 113.

For Ever, Even For Ever and Ever.—
“The repetition of the phrase emphasizes the
idea of perpetuity. There is nothing transitory about
the occupancy of the restored earth. The lease will
never expire, and the inhabitants will be secure in their
own dwelling places.” 4SDABC, 830.
“They shall not build, and another inhabit;
they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of
a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall
long enjoy the work of their hands.” Isaiah 65:22.

DANIEL 7:19,20
Then I would know the truth of the
fourth beast, which was diverse from all
the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth
were of iron, and his nails of brass; which
devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the
residue with his feet;
And of the ten horns that were in his
head, and of the other which came up, and
before whom three fell; even of that horn
that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very
great things, whose look was more stout
than his fellows.

“The great work before us all, as Christians, is to
extend Christ’s kingdom as rapidly as possible, in accordance with the divine commission. The gospel is to
advance from conquest to conquest, from victory to
victory. The greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven shall be given to the people of the
saints of the Most High, and they shall take the
kingdom and possess the kingdom forever and ever.” 9 Testimonies, 219.
“The great plan of redemption results in fully
bringing back the world into God’s favor. All that was
lost by sin is restored. Not only man but the earth is
redeemed, to be the eternal abode of the obedient.
For six thousand years Satan has struggled to maintain
possession of the earth. Now God’s original purpose in
its creation is accomplished. ‘The saints of the Most

Truth of the Fourth Beast.—

201

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Of the first three beasts in this vision, Daniel had
a clear understanding. But he was astonished at the
fourth beast, because of its unnatural and dreadful
character. It was of this beast and its ten horns, more
particularly of the little horn which came up last,
‘whose look was more stout than his fellows,’ that he
desired further information. …Nature furnishes no
symbol which can fitly illustrate the fourth kingdom.
The vision therefore introduces a beast the likeness of
which was never before seen, a beast dreadful and terrible, with nails of brass, and teeth of iron, so cruel,
rapacious, and fierce that from mere love of oppression
it devoured, and broke in pieces, and trampled its victims beneath its feet.
“Astounding as all this was to the prophet,
there was something still more remarkable that
gripped his attention. A little horn came up, and
true to the nature of the beast from which it sprang,
thrust aside three of its fellows. Lo, the horn had
eyes, not the uncultivated eyes of a brute, but the keen,
shrewd, intelligent eyes of a man. Stranger yet, it had a
mouth, and with that mouth it uttered proud sayings,
and put forth preposterous and arrogant claims. No
wonder the prophet made special inquiry respecting
this monster, so unearthly in its instincts, so fiendish
in its works and ways.” Smith, DR, 116.

och and Alexandria, but also by the See of Constantinople. Eventually this move of the capital became an
advantage to the bishop of Rome. He was no longer
overshadowed by the emperor or even the imperial
representatives, and as a result gained prestige. He
became increasingly a person to be reckoned with in
the affairs of the city. The bishop of Rome took over
‘vacated imperial prerogatives; it left him, for long
periods, without a political rival in the West; as the
imperial power in the West broke down, he emerged as
the sole remaining symbol and source of authority.’
The absence of the emperor left Rome in the hands of
the popes who gradually developed the temporal power
and the States of the Church.
“…Pope Gregory the Great, AD 590-604, was not
only the spiritual head of Western Europe, but also
virtually king of Italy.
“…The further development of papal supremacy
is closely related to the Islamic conquest. …The Islamic conquest [in the 7th and 8th centuries] reduced
to insignificance three of the four eastern apostolic
Sees: Antioch, Jerusalem, and Alexandria. The See
of Constantinople was weakened and the African
church, long crippled came utterly to an end. As the
Eastern Empire and the Eastern Church were thus diminished, the See of Rome became the main representative of Christendom, and this position was further strengthened as the church gained new territory in the West.
“…The breakdown of the Roman Empire and the
rapid spread of Christianity finally led to a situation in
which the bishop of Rome, now head of the Western
Church, had at times more prestige and power than
the kings of the Christian nations. Thus it was that
in the Middle Ages the Church was not a State, it was
the State; the State, or rather the civil authority (for a
separate society was not recognized), was merely the
police department of the Church.
“…The image of the pope was further enhanced
by the coronation of the emperors by the pope. It gave
the appearance that the pope bestowed the imperial
power on the one of his choice. Thus the coronation
of Charlemagne on Christmas Day of the year AD
800 is called ‘the central event of the Middle Ages,’
and ‘one of those very few events of which, taking
them simply, it may be said that if they had not
happened, the history of the world would have been
different.’” Olsen, PSAD, 35.

Diverse From All the Others.—
“As these horns denote kingdoms, the little horn
must denote a kingdom also, yet not of the same nature, because it was diverse from the others. They
were political kingdoms. Now we have but to inquire
if, since AD 476, any kingdom has risen among the ten
division of the Roman Empire which was diverse from
them all; and if so, what one? The answer is, Yes, the
spiritual kingdom of the papacy.” Smith, DR, 117.
“While this power is symbolized by a horn and
was thus a kingdom, it was declared to be ‘diverse’
from the others. …This new empire claimed dominion over the spirits and souls of men as well as their
bodies. It exercised its sovereign authority through
popes instead of kings; through bishops instead of
princes. The Pope maintains a royal court where nations must be represented by ambassadors and ministers of state just as other earthly governments. There
has been nothing else like it in all human history.”
Bunch, BOD, 99.

“This represents a bold, arrogant, pompous
and pretentious attitude. The arrogancy of the popes,
cardinals, bishops and priests in their dealings with
kings and civil governments is a well authenticated
characteristic. Claiming to be the vicegerent of
Christ on earth, and therefore the ‘King of kings
and lord of lords,’ popes have compelled kings to
hold their stirrups when they mounted their horses,
serve them at table, and prostrate themselves before
them as slaves before their masters. The way Pope

More Stout Than His Fellows.—
“Aramaic rab, ‘large,’ ‘great,’ ‘big.’ The clause
reads literally, ‘whose appearance was bigger than that
of its companions.’ Though small at the beginning,
this little horn grew until it became greater than any of
the other horns.” 4SDABC, 830.
“In AD 326 Constantine moved to his new capital, Constantinople, and for some time the authority of
the bishop of Rome was threatened not only by Anti-

202

DANIEL 7
Gregory VII humiliated Henry IV of Germany at the
fortress of Canossa in the Alps is an example of the
haughty arrogancy of papal rulers. The king was compelled to wait three days before the pope would grant
him an audience and then he fell prostrate before the
pontiff who placed his foot on his neck indicating
complete submission as the only road to a restoration to
his favor.” Bunch, BOD, 103.

“ ‘After the signal of open martyrdom had been
given in the Canons of Orleans, there followed the extirpation of the Albigenses under the form of a crusade,
the establishment of the Inquisition, the cruel attempts
to extinguish the Waldenses, the martyrdoms of the
Lollards, the cruel wars to exterminate the Bohemians, the burning of Huss and Jerome, and multitudes
of other confessors, before the Reformation; and afterwards, the ferocious cruelties practiced in the Netherlands, the martyrdoms of Queen Mary’s reign, the extinction by fire and sword of the Reformation in Spain
and Italy, by fraud and open persecution in Poland, the
Massacre of Bartholomew, the persecution of the
Huguenots by the League, the extirpation of the Vaudois, and all the cruelties and prejudices connected
with the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. These are
the more open and conspicuous facts which explain the
prophecy, besides the slow and secret murders of the
holy tribunal of the Inquisition.’ The First Two Vision
of Daniel, R.R. Birks, London, 1845, pp. 248,249.”
Bunch, BOD, 104,105.

“By crossing the Alps in the dead of winter and
standing outside the castle at Canossa in the cold for
three days waiting for an audience with Gregory VII,
Henry was admitting that the Pope was the lord of
kings. Even though Henry was king of Germany, the
whole of Europe was really under his control because
he was Holy Roman Emperor. By humbling himself,
Henry was thus admitting that the pope was sovereign over all the kings of Europe.
“Pope Alexander III (1159-81) also wielded
enormous power over Frederick I, Holy Roman
Emperor and king of Germany and Italy. Frederick’s attempt to chastise the pope backfired when his
armies were defeated by the papal forces. For his rebellion, Frederick was promptly excommunicated and
deposed by the pope. In penitence and humiliation, the
emperor had to travel to Venice to beg for Alexander’s
forgiveness and absolution. The scene is described by
Roman Catholic historian, Fortunatus Ulmas:
“‘When the emperor arrived in the presence of the
pope, he laid aside his imperial mantle, and knelt on
both knees, with his breast on the earth. Alexander
advanced and placed his foot on his neck, while the
cardinals thundered forth in loud tones, ‘Thou shalt
tread upon the cockatrice, and crush the lion and the
dragon.... The next day Frederick Barbarossa.... kissed
the feet of Alexander, and, on foot, led his horse by the
bridle as he returned from solemn mass, to the pontifical palace…. The papacy had now risen to a height of
grandeur and power which it had never reached before.
The sword of Peter had conquered the sword of Caesar!’ (Quoted in Dave Hunt, A Woman Rides the
Beast, pp. 29-30).” Bohr, ND7, 74,75.

Persecuting Power to be Restored.—
“From his retreat, like Bunyan’s aged pope in his
cave, he growls out at those who despise his pretensions, ‘You will never mend till more of you be burnt;’
for his one ambition is the restoration of the papacy
to its former power.
“Whether this dream will ever be fully realized is not indicated in the prophecy under consideration; yet that before the end, the power of the papacy
will increase far beyond what it is at the present, is
plainly set forth in these words: [Daniel 7:21,22 quoted].” Waggoner, PL, 102.

DANIEL 7:22
Until the Ancient of days came, and
judgment was given to the saints of the
most High; and the time came that the
saints possessed the kingdom.
Until the Ancient of Days Came.—
“During the thousand years between the first
and the second resurrection the judgment of the wicked
takes place. The apostle Paul points to this judgment
as an event that follows the second advent. ‘Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
will make manifest the counsels of the hearts.’ 1 Corinthians 4:5. Daniel declares that when the Ancient of
Days came, ‘judgment was given to the saints of the
Most High.’ Daniel 7:22. At this time the righteous
reign as kings and priests unto God. John in the Revelation says: ‘I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and
judgment was given unto them.’ ‘They shall be
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with

DANIEL 7:21
I beheld, and the same horn made war
with the saints, and prevailed against them;
Little Horn Made War With the Saints.—
“The amazing wrath of this little horn against the
saints particularly attracted the attention of Daniel….
Daniel beheld this power making war upon the saints.
Has such a war been waged by the papacy? Millions
of martyrs answer, Yes. Witness the cruel persecutions of the Waldenses, the Albigenses, and
Protestants in general, by the papal power.” Smith,
DR, 117.

203

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Him a thousand years.’ Revelation 20:4,6.” Great
Controversy, 660,661.

“There is in this statement respecting thrones,
an evident allusion to Daniel 7:9, which speaks of
thrones being ‘cast down,’ or, more correctly rendered, ‘were placed,’ as many able critics inform us.
These thrones were placed for the judgment work,
when entered upon, as we have seen, in the second
apartment of the heavenly temple by God the Father.
And when the judgment is given to the immortal saints,
and they are able to enter the temple after the outpouring of the plagues (Rev. 15:8), it appears that they sit
upon the thrones thus placed for them, and with the
Saviour at their head finish the work of the judgment as
indicated in the text examined.” J.N. Andrews, The
Judgment, 123,124.

Judgment Was Given to the Saints.—
“Not only would judgment be given in favor of
the saints, but according to Paul (1 Cor. 6:2,3) and John
(Rev. 20:4) the saints will assist in the work of judgment during the 1000 years.” 4SDABC, 830.
“The judgment that is given to the saints, that
is, the time when the saints sit with Christ in judgment a thousand years, following the first resurrection (Rev. 20:1-4), apportioning to the wicked the punishment due for their sins. The martyrs will then sit
in judgment upon the great persecuting power,
which, in the days of their trial, hunted them like the
beasts of the desert, and poured out their blood like
water.” Smith, DR, 117,119.

“Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing
aloud upon their beds. 6 Let the high praises of God be
in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand;
7 To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and
punishments upon the people; 8 To bind their kings
with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; 9 To
execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all his saints. Praise ye the LORD.” Psalm
149:5-9.

“Daniel declares that when the Ancient of Days
came, ‘judgment was given to the saints of the Most
High.’ Daniel 7:22. At this time the righteous reign
as kings and priests unto God. John in the Revelation says: ‘I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and
judgment was given unto them.’ ‘They shall be priests
of God and of Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand years.’ Revelation 20:4,6. It is at this time that, as
foretold by Paul, ‘the saints shall judge the world.’ 1
Corinthians 6:2. In union with Christ they judge the
wicked, comparing their acts with the statute book,
the Bible, and deciding every case according to the
deeds done in the body. Then the portion which the
wicked must suffer is meted out, according to their
works; and it is recorded against their names in the
book of death.
“Satan also and evil angels are judged by
Christ and His people. Says Paul: ‘Know ye not
that we shall judge angels?’ Verse 3. And Jude declares that ‘the angels which kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation, He hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the
great day.’ Jude 6.
“At the close of the thousand years the second
resurrection will take place. Then the wicked will be
raised from the dead and appear before God for the
execution of ‘the judgment written.’ Thus the revelator, after describing the resurrection of the righteous,
says: ‘The rest of the dead lived not again until the
thousand years were finished.’ Revelation 20:5.”
Great Controversy, 660,661.

“This judgment by ‘the saints,’ as Christ’s
great grand jury, will take place during the ‘thousand years,’ commonly known as the millennium,
which begins with ‘the first resurrection,’ (Rev. 20:6).
This begins when ‘the Lord Himself’ returns and ‘the
dead in Christ shall rise first.’ 1 Thess. 4:16. Therefore
as the little horn power continues ‘until the Judgment
was given to the saints’ and that takes place at our
Lord’s return, the papacy continues to the end of the
world.” Burnside, DPUF, 112.
Time That The Saints Possessed the Kingdom.—
“The time that the saints possess the kingdom,
that is, the time of their entrance upon the possession of the new earth. Then the last vestige of the
curse of sin, and of sinners, root and branch, will have
been wiped away, and the territory so long misruled by
the wicked powers of earth, the enemies of God’s people, will be given to the righteous, to be possessed by
them forever and ever. (1 Cor. 6: 2, 3; Matthew 25:
34.)” Smith, DR, 119.

DANIEL 7:23,24
Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be
the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall
be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it
down, and break it in pieces.
And the ten horns out of this kingdom
are ten kings that shall arise: and another
shall rise after them; and he shall be di-

“This text (‘I saw thrones, and they sat upon
them, and judgment was given unto them.’ Rev.
20:4) relative to this judgment by the saints is very
remarkable. It shows that the resurrection of the just
precedes the work of judgment by them. It elevates
them to thrones of judgment, where they live and
reign with Christ, during the period between their own
resurrection and that of ‘the rest of the dead.’…

204

DANIEL 7
the papacy. It is a matter of both interest and importance, therefore, to inquire into the causes which
resulted in the development of this arrogant power.
“The first pastors, or bishops, of Rome enjoyed
a respect proportionate to the rank of the city in
which they resided. For the first few centuries of the
Christian Era, Rome was the largest, richest, and most
powerful city in the world. It was the seat of empire,
the capital of the nations. ‘All the inhabitants of the
earth belong to here,’ said Julian; and Claudian declared her to be the ‘fountain of laws.’ ‘If Rome is the
queen of cities, why should not her pastor be the
king of bishops?’ was the reasoning these Roman pastors put forth. ‘Why should not the Roman Church be
the mother of Christendom? Why should not all nations be her children, and her authority their sovereign
law? It was easy,’ says d’Aubigne, from whom we
quote these words, ‘for the ambitious heart of man to
reason thus. Ambitious Rome did so.’ [Jean Henri
Merle d’Aubigne, History of the Reformation of the
Sixteenth Century, Vol. I, p.8.]
“The bishops in the different parts of the Roman
Empire felt a pleasure in yielding to the bishop of
Rome some of that honor which that city received from
the nations of the earth. There was originally no dependence implied in the honor thus paid. ‘But,’ continues D’Aubigne, ‘usurped power increases like an
avalanche. Admonitions, at first simply fraternal, soon
became absolute commands in the mouth of the pontiff.... The Western bishops favored this encroachment
of the Roman pastors, either from jealousy of the Eastern bishops, or because they preferred submitting to the
supremacy of a pope rather than to the dominion of a
temporal power.’ [Ibid., p. 9.] Such were the influences clustering around the bishop of Rome, and
thus was everything tending toward his speedy elevation to the spiritual dominance of Christendom.”
Smith, DR, 119,120.

verse from the first, and he shall subdue
three kings.
Fourth Beast Shall be the Fourth Kingdom.—
“In the history of the world since the time of Daniel, there are just four world empires that touch God’s
people. Rome is the fourth, but it would have two
phases—Pagan Rome and Papal Rome. Jesus Christ
lived during the time of Pagan Rome. Today we live in
the time of resurgence (after the deadly wound of
1798) of Papal Rome. What are the goals of Papal
Rome today? To control every mind, every soul, every
person in the world.” PJ
The Ten Horns are Ten Kings that Shall Arise.—
“One might as first take this literally and look for
ten Caesars to come out of Rome. However, it should
be noted that there is a precedent in Daniel for using
the word, ‘king,’ to mean ‘kingdom.’ …The same parallel usage is found in Daniel 7. In his first and more
simple explanation the angel said to Daniel, ‘the four
great beasts are four kingdoms [literally, ‘kings’] that
will rise from the earth’ (vs. 17, NIV). Then later in
the chapter the angel tells Daniel, ‘The fourth beast is a
fourth kingdom that will appear on earth.’ (vs. 23).
Thus in the original Aramaic text of Daniel 7 there is
an example of ‘king’ and ‘kingdom’ being used with
parallel meanings just as in Daniel 2:26,28,29.” Shea,
DARG, 205.
“As already noticed in comments on Daniel 2,
Rome was divided into ten kingdoms. These divisions have ever since been spoken of as the ten kingdoms of the Roman Empire.” Smith, DR, 110.
“The fourth great and terrible beast had ten
horns. These are declared to be ten kingdoms which
should arise out of this empire. Dan.7:24. These correspond to the ten toes of the image. Rome was divided
into ten kingdoms between the years AD356 and 483,
as follows: Huns, AD356, Ostrogoths, 377, Visigoths,
378, Franks, 407, Vandals, 407, Suevi, 407, Burgundians, 407, Heruli, 476, Anglo-Saxons, 476, Lombards,
483. This enumeration of the ten kingdoms is given by
Machiavelli in his History of Florence, lib.1. The dates
are furnished by Bishop Lloyd, and the whole is approved by Bishop Newton, Faber and Dr. Hales.”
Smith, Biblical Institute, 42.

Characteristics of the Little Horn.—
“Since the little horn figures so prominently in the
prophecy of chapter 7, it is appropriate to propose an
identification on the basis of the characteristics noted
there. These include:
“1. Arises among the 10 horns of the fourth beast,
indicating its arrival is after the division of the fourth
power.
“2. Three horns to be plucked up before it.
“3. Has eyes like a man.
“4. Has a mouth speaking great things against the
Most High.
“5. Persecutes the saints of the Most High.
“6. Has dominion especially for a period of 3 ½
times.
“7. Attempts to change times and law.
“8. Will be destroyed finally through a decision of
the divine court.
“The most important characteristics for identifying this entity historically are its general nature and the

(See comments under Daniel 7:7).
Rise and Work of the Little Horn.—
“Perhaps enough has already been said respecting
the fourth beast (Rome) and the ten horns, or ten kingdoms, which arose out of this power. The little horn
now more particularly demands attention. As stated in
comments on verse 8, we find the fulfillment of the
prophecy concerning this horn in the rise and work of

205

GEMS FROM DANIEL
place and time of its origin. Several of its activities
point to its distinctly religious nature (Nos. 4, 5, 7).
Since the fourth beast has been identified above as Imperial Rome, it is evident that this horn power was to
arise out of it, but not until its horns or divisions
had appeared (No. 1).
“The particular religious power that arose out of
Imperial Rome after the empire had broken up was the
religious phase of Rome that centered in the papacy.
The three horns that were plucked up before it—
historically by civil power and authorities—have
commonly been identified by Seventh-day Adventist
interpreters as the Heruli, the Vandals, and the Ostrogoths (No. 2). The motivation for the removal of
these powers was not merely political; it was also theological because they were Arian by religious convictions.
“Although it lingered on for a few more years, the
military force of the third of these opposing powers or
horns was decimated by the plague that struck the Ostrogothic camp during the siege of Rome in 537-538.
When they withdrew, the bishop of Rome and his city
stood independent of barbarian control for the first time
in two-thirds of a century—since the sack of Rome in
476. In the political vacuum that developed through
the next two decades following the lifting of the siege,
the bishop of Rome acquired civil responsibility for
the city as well. Thus the year 538 can be seen as an
important turning point in the development of the medieval papacy.” BRI, 2SOD, 180.

ern, Vol. I, p. 412; Arthur P. Stanley, Lectures on the
History of the Eastern Church, pp. 239, 240.]
“The controversy itself, however, was not to be
disposed of in this summary manner. For ages it continued to agitate the Christian world, the Arians everywhere becoming the bitter enemies of the pope and of
the Roman Catholic Church. It was evident that the
spread of Arianism would check the onward march
of Catholicism, and that the possession of Italy and
it renowned capital by a people of the Arian persuasion would be fatal to the supremacy of a Catholic
bishop. The prophecy, however, had declared that this
horn symbolizing the papacy would rise to supreme
power, and that in reaching this position it would subdue three kings.” Smith, DR, 120,121.
He Shall Subdue.—
“In Daniel 7:24 when the ‘little horn’ (papacy)
was to ‘subdue three kings,’ it did not say the papacy
was to engage itself in a military conflict, for of itself it
had no such army. Just the same, the little horn was to
‘subdue.’ Webster’s primary definition for “subdue” is
‘to bring into subjection’ and, as we will see, this
description is precisely the intent of the scriptures.
Subdue can also mean to suppress, hold back, check,
discipline, conquer, vanquish, overcome, or control. In
other words, the little horn would work from behind
the scenes to accomplish her means. The emphasis
of the scriptures on the uprooting of the three horns
prior to the fulfilling role of the little horn according to
the prophecy is certainly implied but was not denied
nor established on the basis of time. Although heaven
could have easily specified the exact time of the downfall of these three kingdoms, it chose not to do this, so
we would not misplace the central emphasis on a horizontal plane or on earthly events rather than the vertical
plane or main heavenly event of the prophecy to which
the scriptures are directing us. Heaven knew that the
uprooting of the three horns would naturally bring the
inquisitive reader to comprehend why those kingdoms
were subdued or brought into subjection to the little
horn, and that history would supply the exact dating for
the three uprooted horns.” Heiks, AD538, 36,37.

Challenge of Arianism.—
“But the fourth century was destined to witness
an obstacle thrown across the path of this ambitious
dream. The prophecy had declared that the power represented by the little horn would ‘subdue three kings.’
In the rise and development of Arianism early in the
fourth century and the challenge it presented to
papal supremacy, we find the causes leading to the
plucking up of three of the kingdoms of Western
Rome by the papal power.
“Arius, parish priest of the ancient and influential
church of Alexandria, promulgated his doctrine to the
world, occasioning so fierce a controversy in the Christian church that a general council was called at Nicaea,
by the emperor Constantine in AD 325, to consider and
rule upon its teaching. Arius maintained ‘that the Son
was totally and essentially distinct from the Father; that
He was the first and noblest of those beings whom the
Father had created out of nothing, the instrument by
whose subordinate operation the Almighty Father
formed the universe, and therefore inferior to the Father, both in nature and dignity.’ This opinion was
condemned by the council, which decreed that
Christ was of one and the same substance with the
Father. Hereupon Arius was banished to Illyria, and
his followers were compelled to give their assent to the
creed composed on that occasion. [See John L.
Mosheim, An Ecclesiastical History, Ancient and Mod-

(See also comments on “plucked up by the roots”
in Daniel 7:8.)
Little Horn Subdues Three Arian Powers.—
“It was previously thought that the Heruli was the
first horn to be uprooted in 493 AD, but new research
is showing that the Odoacer was leader, not of the Heruli tribe, but of a mob from various tribes that had conquered Rome. It was the Visigothic kingdom in Gaul
that was first uprooted in 508 AD. We will give the
older position below, followed by the new research.”
PJ.
“The position is here confidently taken that
the three powers, or horns, plucked up by the roots

206

DANIEL 7
were the Heruli, the Vandals, and the Ostrogoths;
and this position rests upon reliable historical data.
Odoacer, the leader of the Heruli, was the first of the
barbarians who reigned over the Romans. He took the
throne of Italy, AD 476. Of his religious belief Gibbon
says: ‘Like the rest of the barbarians he had been instructed in the Arian heresy; but he revered the monastic and episcopal characters; and the silence of the
Catholics attests the toleration which they enjoyed.’
[Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire, Vol. III, chap. 36, pp. 515,516.]
“The same author says: ‘The Ostrogoths, the Burgundians, the Suevi, and the Vandals, who had listened
to the eloquence of the Latin clergy, preferred the more
intelligible lessons of their domestic teachers; and Arianism was adopted as the national faith of the warlike
converts who were seated on the ruins of the Western
Empire. This irreconcilable difference of religion was
a perpetual source of jealousy and hatred; and the reproach of barbarian was embittered by the more odious epithet of heretic. The heroes of the north, who
had submitted with some reluctance to believe that all
their ancestors were in hell, were astonished and exasperated to learn that they themselves had only changed
the mode of their eternal condemnation.’ [Ibid., chap.
37, p. 547.]
“The Arian doctrine had a marked influence on
the church at that time, as will be observed in the following paragraphs: ‘The whole of the vast Gothic
population which descended on the Roman Empire, so
far as it was Christian at all, held to the faith of the
Alexandrian heretic. Our first Teutonic version of the
Scriptures was by an Arian missionary, Ulfilas. The
first conqueror of Rome, Alaric, the first conqueror
of Africa, Genseric, were Arians. Theodoric the
Great, king of Italy, and hero of the 'Nibelungenlied,' was an Arian. The vacant place in his massive
tomb at Ravenna is a witness of the vengeance which
the Orthodox took on his memory, when on their triumph they tore down the porphyry vase in which his
Arian subjects had enshrined his ashes.’ [Arthur P.
Stanley, Lectures on the History of the Eastern Church,
p. 151.]
“Ranke states: ‘But she [the church] fell, as was
inevitable, into many embarrassments, and found herself in an entirely altered condition. A pagan people
took possession of Britain; Arian kings seized the
greater part of the remaining West; while the Lombards, long attached to Arianism, and as neighbors
most dangerous and hostile, established a powerful
sovereignty before the very gates of Rome. The Roman bishops, meanwhile, beset on all sides, exerted
themselves, with all the prudence and pertinacity which
have remained their peculiar attributes, to regain the
mastery—at least in their patriarchal diocese.’ [Leopold Ranke, History of the Popes, Vol. I, p. 9.]
“Machiavelli says: ‘Nearly all the wars which the
northern barbarians carried on in Italy, it may be here
remarked, were occasioned by the pontiffs; and the

hordes with which the country was inundated, were
generally called in by them.’ [Niccolo Machiavelli,
History of Florence, p.14.]
“The relation which these Arian kings sustained
to the pope is shown in the following testimony from
Mosheim in his church history:
“ ‘On the other hand, it is certain, from a variety
of the most authentic records, that both the emperors
and the nations in general were far from being disposed
to bear with patience the yoke of servitude which the
see of Rome was arrogantly imposing upon the Christian church. The Gothic princes set bounds to the
power of the bishop of Rome in Italy, permitted
none to be raised to the pontificate without their
approbation, and reserved to themselves the right of
judging concerning the legality of every new election.’ [John L. Mosheim, An Ecclesiastical History,
Ancient and Modern, Vol. I, p. 113,114.]
“An instance in proof of this statement occurs in
the history of Odoacer, the first Arian king above mentioned. [See Archibald Bower, The History of the
Popes, Vol. I, p. 257.] When, on the death of Pope
Simplicius, AD 483, the clergy and people had assembled for the election of a new pope, suddenly Basilius,
lieutenant of King Odoacer, appeared in the assembly,
expressed his surprise that any such work as appointing
a successor to the deceased pope should be undertaken
without him, in the name of the king declared all
that had been done null and void, and ordered the
election to be begun anew.
“Meanwhile, Zeno, the emperor of the East, and
friend of the pope, was anxious to drive Odoacer out of
Italy, a movement which he soon had the satisfaction
of seeing accomplished without trouble to himself.
Theodoric had come to the throne of the Ostrogothic
kingdom in Moesia and Pannonia. Being on friendly
terms with Zeno, he wrote him, stating that it was impossible for him to restrain his Goths within the impoverished province of Pannonia, and asking his permission to lead them to some more favorable region
which they might conquer and possess. Zeno gave him
permission to march against Odoacer and take possession of Italy. Accordingly, after a five years’ war, the
Herulian kingdom in Italy was overthrown, Odoacer
was treacherously slain, and Theodoric established his
Ostrogoths in the Italian peninsula. As already stated,
he was an Arian, and the law of Odoacer subjecting
the election of the pope to the approval of the king,
was still retained.
“The following incident will show how completely the papacy was in subjection to his power. The
Catholics in the East having begun a persecution
against the Arians, AD 523, Theodoric summoned Pope
John into his presence and thus addressed him: ‘ “If
the emperor [Justin, the predecessor of Justinian] therefore does not think fit to revoke the edict which he has
lately issued against those of my persuasion [that is, the
Arians], it is my firm resolution to issue the like
edict against those of his [that is, the Catholics]; and

207

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the victorious legions of Belisarius dealt a crushing
blow to Arianism, so much so that its final supporters
were vanquished.
“Procopius relates that the African war was undertaken by Justinian for the relief of the Christians
(Catholics) in that quarter, and that when he expressed
his intention in this respect, the prefect of the palace
came very near dissuading him from his purpose. But
a dream appeared to him in which he was bidden
‘not to shrink from the execution of his design; for
by assisting the Christians he would overthrow the
power of the Vandals.’ [Theodoret and Evagrius, A
History of the Church, p. 399.]
“Mosheim declares: ‘It is true, the Greeks who
had received the decrees of the Council of Nice [that is,
from the Catholics], persecuted and oppressed the Arians wherever their influence and authority could reach;
but the Nicenians, in their turn, were not less rigorously
treated by their adversaries [the Arians], particularly in
Africa and Italy, where they felt, in a very severe manner, the weight of the Arian power, and the bitterness
of their resentment. the triumphs of Arianism were,
however, transitory; and its prosperous days were entirely eclipsed when the Vandals were driven out of
Africa, and the Goths out of Italy, by the arms of Justinian.’ [John L. Mosheim, An Ecclesiastical History,
Ancient and Modern, Vol. I, p. 142,143.]
“Elliot summarizes: ‘I might cite three that were
eradicated from before the pope out of the list first given, viz., the Heruli under Odoacer, the Vandals, and
the Ostrogoths.’ [Edward B. Elliott, Horae, Apocalypticae, Vol. III, p. 139, Note 1.]
“From the historical testimony above cited, we
think it clearly established that the three horns plucked
up were the powers named: the Heruli, AD 493, the
Vandals, in 534, and the Ostrogoths finally in 553,
though effective opposition by the latter to the decree of Justinian ceased when they were driven
from Rome by Belisarius in 538 [See Student’s Gibbon, pp. 309-319].” Smith, DR, 123-128.

to see it everywhere executed with the same rigor.
Those who do not profess the faith of Nice, are heretics
to him, and those who do are heretics to me. Whatever can excuse or justify his severity to the former,
will excuse and justify mine to the latter. But the emperor,” continued the king, “has none about him who
dare freely and openly speak what they think, or to
whom he would hearken if they did. But the great
veneration which he professes for your See , leaves
no room to doubt but he would hearken to you. I
will therefore have you to repair forthwith to Constantinople, and there to remonstrate, both in my name and
your own, against the violent measures in which that
court has so rashly engaged. It is in your power to divert the emperor from them; and till you have, nay, till
the Catholics [this name Theodoric applies to the Arians] are restored to the free exercise of their religion,
and to all the churches from which they have been
driven, you must not think of returning to Italy.”’
[Ibid., Vol. I, p. 325.]
“The pope who was thus peremptorily ordered
by the Arian emperor not to set foot again upon
Italian soil until he had carried out the will of the
king, certainly could not hope for much advancement
toward any kind of supremacy until that power was
taken out of the way.
“The feelings of the papal party toward Theodoric
may be accurately estimated, according to a quotation
already given, by the vengeance which they took on his
memory. They tore from his tomb the vase in which
his Arian subjects had enshrined his ashes. These feelings are put into language by Baronius, who inveighs
‘against Theodoric as a cruel barbarian, as a barbarous
tyrant, as an impious Arian.’ [Ibid., p. 328.]
“While the Catholics were thus feeling the restraining power of an Arian king in Italy, they were
suffering a violent persecution from the Arian Vandals
in Africa. [Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire, Vol. III, chap. 37, pp. 548-552.] Elliot
says: ‘The Vandal kings were not only Arians, but
persecutors of the Catholics; in Sardinia and Corsica
under the Roman Episcopate, we may presume, as well
as in Africa.’ [Edward B. Elliott, Horae, Apocalypticae, Vol. III, p. 139, Note 3.]
“Such was the position of affairs, when, AD
533, Justinian entered upon his Vandal and Gothic
wars. Wishing to obtain the influence of the pope and
the Catholic party, he issued that memorable decree
which was to constitute the pope the head of all the
churches, and from the carrying out of which [AD 538],
the period of papal supremacy is to be dated. And
whoever will read the history of the African campaign,
533-534, and the Italian campaign, 534-538, will notice
that the Catholics everywhere hailed as deliverers the
army of Belisarius, the general of Justinian.
“But no decree of this nature could be carried into
effect until the Arian horns which stood in its way were
overthrown. A turn came, however, in the tide of affairs, for in the military campaign in Africa and Italy

NEW RESEARCH shows the Visigoths as the first of
the Three Uprooted Horns.—
“If it is agreed that two of the three horns uprooted by the little horn (vs. 8) were the Vandals (AD 534)
and the Ostrogoths (AD 538/555), there is less agreement among historians about which was the third uprooted power. …The evidence seems to be in favor of
the Visigoths as the third horn. For a time this tribe
lived in southern France. There the Visigoths were
eventually defeated by Clovis, king of the Franks
around AD 508. Although their power was largely
destroyed at this time, the survivors were pushed into
Spain where they were subjugated at last by a Moslem
invasion in the eight century AD. Because the Visigoths were not eradicated by the Franks, some Bible
historians have felt they should not be identified as the
third horn uprooted before the little horn in Daniel’s
vision. It is not clear, however, that the prophecy re-

208

DANIEL 7
quires total eradication to fulfill the symbol of being
uprooted. …All three had been in theological opposition to Rome over the nature of Christ’s divinity.”
Shea, DARG, 116,117.

and most corrupt of the barbarian tribes. [Procopius, History of the Wars, …VI. Xiii. 16-xiv. 1-7.]
“…‘But as time went on they [The Heruli] became superior to all the barbarians who dwelt about
them both in power and in numbers, and, as was natural, they attacked and vanquished them severally and
kept plundering their possessions by force. And finally
they made the Lombards, who were Christians, together with several other nations, subject and tributary to
themselves, though the barbarians of that region were
not accustomed to that sort of thing; but the Eruli were
led to take this course by love of money and lawless
spirit.’ [Ibid., VI. Xiii. 16-xiv. 8-11.]
“The conduct of the Heruli was a threat to everyone, Catholic, Arian, and even the pagans themselves. Therefore, it brought upon them the contempt
of all classes of people and faiths. In light of these
events, Theodoric the Great petitioned the Eastern Roman Emperor Zeno, reminding him of the “tyranny”
(unlawful rule) of the city of Rome by Turcilingi and
Rugii. Jordanes, a 6th century Roman bureaucrat
turned historian who wrote the only remaining classical
work dealing with the early history of the Goths, gives
us the record of that account between Theodoric the
Great and the Eastern Roman Emperor Zeno:
“ ‘When the Emperor Zeno heard that Theodoric
had been appointed king over his own people, he received the news with pleasure and invited him to come
and visit him in the city, appointing an escort of honor.
Receiving Theodoric with all due respect, he placed
him among the princes of his palace. After some time
Zeno increased his dignity by adopting him as his sonat-arms and gave him a triumph in the city at his expense. …Now while Theodoric was in alliance by treaty with the Empire of Zeno and was himself enjoying
every comfort in the city, he heard that his tribe, dwelling as we have said in Illyricum, was not altogether
satisfied or content. So he chose rather to seek a living
by his own exertions, after the manner customary to his
race, rather than to enjoy the advantages of the Roman
Empire in luxurious ease while his tribe lived in want.
After pondering these matters, he said to the Emperor: “Though I lack nothing in serving your Empire, yet
if Your Piety deem it worthy, be pleased to hear the
desire of my heart.” And when as usual he had been
granted permission to speak freely, he said: “The
western country, long ago governed by the rule of your
ancestors and predecessors, and that city which was
the head and mistress of the world—wherefore is it
now shaken by the tyranny of the Torcilingi and the
Rugi? Send me there with my race. Thus if you but
say the word, you may be freed from the burden of
expense here, and, if by the Lord's help I shall conquer,
the fame of Your Piety shall be glorious there. For it is
better that I, your servant and your son, should rule that
kingdom, receiving it as a gift from you if I conquer,
than that one whom you do not recognize should oppress your Senate with his tyrannical yoke and a part of
the republic with slavery. For if I prevail, I shall retain

“Since the Heruli are believed by some to be the
first of the three Arian kingdoms to have been subdued
by the little horn after AD 476, we will start there to
see if the Heruli will withstand the test of investigation.
“ ‘After an adventurous and heroic career, passed
chiefly amid the din of battle (he had distinguished
himself under Ricimer in the war against Anthemius),
Odoacer had become the foremost leader in the
motley company of mercenaries. These homeless
warriors, Rugians, Heruli, Scyrri, and Turcilingians, persuaded by him that it would be more to
their advantage to become settled masters of this
beautiful land of Italy than to wander in the pay of
miserable emperors, impatiently demanded from Orestes [the emperor] the third part of the soil of Italy. On
his refusal to comply, they rose in indignant rebellion
and ranged themselves under the standard of Odoacer.
…Having been proclaimed King by his motley army,
he immediately proceeded to Ticinum or Pavia, where
Orestes had stationed himself. The town was stormed
and Orestes beheaded soon after at Piacenza, while the
last Emperor of Rome, Romulus Augustulus, fell at
Ravenna into the hands of the first real King of German descent who reigned in Italy. Odoacer assumed
the title of King,’
“…Even though Odoacer had been proclaimed
King by his motley army, his followers did not form a
nation in Italy that was viewed as such by the populace of the day. They simply saw them as a hoard of
homeless warriors or mercenaries (though Procopius
has informed us that from time to time they did have a
king). Odoacer’s military camp or coup consisting of
the Heruli, Rugians, Scyrri, and Turcilingians was,
thereby, established but detested and hated by all:
“ ‘He was not, however, King of Italy. Pallman
justly terms him a King of Mercenaries – a German
King, and Felix Dahn speaks of his followers not as a
race or people, but as an army of henchmen….’ [Ferdinand Gregorovius, … History of the City of Rome in
the Middle Ages, …1:248-254.]
“While it is true that history confirms Odoacer as
an Arian, it is also true that history and credible historians the world over recognize Odoacer’s motley
army as pagans, heathen mercenaries of a military
camp. They were not Arians and neither were they of
any one race or people, nor were they considered to
be a nation by the populace of the day. With the Heruli (Eruli) becoming gradually superior to the Rugians,
Scyrri, and Turcilingians, we, then, naturally ask who
and what type of people they were. Procopius, a Byzantine scholar-historian and of the orthodox faith, was
an eye witness to many of the events of the early 6 th
century, and he answers this question succinctly:
“The Eruli, or Heruli, were one of the wildest

209

GEMS FROM DANIEL
it as your grant and gift; if I am conquered, Your Piety
will lose nothing—nay, as I have said, it will save the
expense I now entail.”’ [Jordanes, The Origins and
Deeds of the Goths, LVII. 289-296.]
“…The statement of Theodoric the Great to Emperor Zeno, ‘Send me there with my race’ cements the
fact that the Arians formed no part of Odoacer’s
henchmen. Another critical point is that the little
horn or the papacy can in no wise be said to have
had a part in subduing Odoacer and his military
camp, for this was an act of Zeno on behalf of Theodoric alone. Equally significant is the fact that,
though this campaign was against the heathen or
pagans, this was a political warfare, not a religious
one. Our understanding is to be further enriched from
the following which shows that the Emperor Zeno had
his own motives for agreeing to dispatch Theodoric to
the west:
“ ‘The Byzantine Emperor regarded him [Odoacer] as a usurper, and only awaited the first opportunity
to set him aside. For this undertaking there was at hand
a yet greater tribal leader of German race, and an entire
people who had forsaken their devastated homes on the
slopes of the Haemus, to descend upon the fertile
plains of Italy. These were the warlike Ostrogoths,
ruled at that time by Theodoric. The Emperor Zeno,
fearing that in his repeated incursions across the frontiers of the Eastern Empire the Gothic King might prepare for Byzantium the fate which Italy had suffered at
the hands of Odoacer, constituted Theodoric his ally,
bestowing on the barbarian the titles of Consul and
Patrician. In order to remove him from the East, the
Emperor exhorted him to turn the thirst of his people
for spoil and adventure towards the West and to snatch,
the land of Italy from the ‘tyrant’ Odoacer. By virtue
of a formal treaty Zeno made over to him and his people the investiture of this province of the Empire.
Theodoric accordingly led his entire tribe across the
Alps in 488, and appeared in formidable power on
the banks of the Isonzo, in the summer of 489. The
Goths of Theodoric had been more or less imbued with
the influences of the civilizations both of East and
West, and although judged by the standard of Latin
culture, they may have been deemed barbarians, they
were not altogether barbarians, such as the followers of
Alaric had been. They formed moreover a nation
which presented to the enervated and effeminate Italians the unusual spectacle of heroic manhood. It was
in short the conviction of their own superiority as free
men to which the Goths owed the subjugation of the
ancient, world.
“The struggle of the two military leaders for the
possession of the beautiful and unhappy country was
long and fierce. Defeated on the Isonzo and afterwards
at Verona, Odoacer in despair threw himself on his last
stronghold, Ravenna. …The Roman Senate, whose
adhesion had been gained by the Byzantine Emperor,
had already arrived at a secret understanding with Theodoric, and, after Odoacer had been driven to bay at

Ravenna, had openly declared in favor of the Gothic
King. As early as the year 490 Theodoric, therefore,
was able to send the Patrician Festus, the head of the
Senate, to Zeno to request the royal mantle.
For three years Odoacer made a gallant resistance
at Ravenna. At length, reduced by want, he opened
the gates to Theodoric (March 5, 493). A few days
later the victor faithlessly broke the treaty he had made
with his valiant enemy, stabbing Odoacer with his own
hand, and causing all his followers to be slain. Without
waiting for the ratification of Anastasius, who, on the
death of Zeno (April 9, 491) had succeeded to the Imperial throne, Theodoric had already adopted the title
and insignia of King of Italy. Not until 498 did he receive recognition, the Emperor then surrendering all
the jewels of the Imperial palace previously sent by
Odoacer to Constantinople. Theodoric was by right of
his people King of the Goths; by that of conquest, the
election of his followers and the allegiance of the conquered also King of Italy; by the surrender of the insignia of Empire, he now received the Imperial ratification of this right—the right, that is to say, to govern
Italy as it had been previously governed by the Emperors of the West. [Ferdinand Gregorovius, … History of the City of Rome in the Middle Ages, …1:248254.]
“…While it has been assumed by some that the
Heruli were fully uprooted in AD 493 by Theodoric the
Great, that was simply not the case. Latest academic
scholarship has recognized that the final overthrow of
the remaining Heruli was in A.D. 508 by the Lombards. [Rouche, Michel. Clovis. (Fayard, France
1996), 323.]
“…The historical accounts from the primary
sources regarding this battle reveal that it was political
and do not provide any substance for the involvement of the little horn. For those who fought against
the Heruli, it was never about religion, rather it was
always about further restraining the heathens from
plundering their possessions, lands, and women.
From this point in time, the Heruli fused and splintered
off into various tribes, regions and militaries of various
kingdoms. Some of these small remaining bands of
Heruli mercenaries were described by Procopius as
having joined Justinian’s army, as well.” Heiks,
AD538, 45-60.
NEW RESEARCH On The Visigoths—The First
Horn To Be Uprooted:
“Some have erroneously concluded that the Visigoths were pagans and that, therefore, the conflict in
the West was over paganism. In fact, though, the
Visigoths were Arian Christians. Similarly, a few
decades later, the issue in the East between the Vandals
and Ostrogoths (also Arian Christians) and Justinian
was not about paganism, nor was it solely a political
conflict. It was a religious war, as well, that would
ultimately decide the dominance of the Catholic or
Arian faith in Eastern Europe.

210

DANIEL 7
“…Procopius unveils how the Visigoths came into dominance of this entire territory [of Gaul]:
“ ‘...But when Odoacer [in Rome] changed the
government into a tyranny, then, since the tyrant yielded to them, the Visigoths took possession of all Gaul
as far as the alps which mark the boundary between
Gaul and Liguria.” [Procopius, History of the Wars,
…VI. Xiii. 16-xiv. 1-7.]
“As Procopius has rightly informed us, the Visigoths were one of the main Arian kingdoms in opposition to the principles or government of the
Catholic Church. Gregory of Tours confirms that the
Visigoths embraced the principles of religious liberty. The Visigoth Agilan once admonished Gregory of
Tours declaring:
“ ‘You must not blaspheme against a faith which
you yourself do not accept. You notice that we who do
not believe the things which you believe nevertheless
do not blaspheme against them. It is no crime for
one set of people to believe in one doctrine and another
set of people to believe in another...’ [Thorpe, L. Trans.
Gregory of Tours - The History of the Franks (Harmondsworth, 1974), 309-10….]
“The Catholic Church now had two powerful
‘heretical’ Arian tribes largely in control of all of
Gaul and Italy with a mutual ideology diametrically
opposed to the government of the papacy.
“On the surface it looked bleak, but behind the
scenes the Catholic Church was working to achieve her
means. …[A] letter, addressed to Clovis in 481 from
the Bishop St. Remi …salutes Clovis who just took
over the administration of the Second Belgium and
urges him to govern well. This was not a military victory but a political achievement. This letter also establishes that the prestige of the kingdom of the Franks
began with Clovis with the working of St. Remi behind the scenes.
“A second letter from St. Remi to Clovis
…reveals St. Remi trying to console King Clovis on
the death of his sister Albochlede. This takes us behind
the scenes and reveals the very close relationship
between Clovis and the Catholic Church.
“…The efforts from the papacy were soon to
bear fruit and in Clovis the church was to find a refuge.
Clovis prepares for war against the Arian Visigoth
King Alaric II in 507/8:
“‘...In the early 6th C., the Franks were united politically by Clovis (Chlodovechus, 481½ -511), who extended Frankish rule over the whole of Roman Gaul
with the exception of Septimania and Provence. Clovis
also converted to Orthodox [Catholic] Christianity,
the first barbarian king to do so. This conversion
and his victory over the VISIGOTHS (508) contributed to a Byz. perception of the Franks as
potential allies against the Arian Gothic kingdoms
and later the Lombards in Italy. Merovingian
kings from Clovis onward were fre quently honored
by Constantinople with the titles consul and patrikios.’
“ ‘…In a letter written after Vouille [Vougle],

Clovis announced to his bishops that en route for the
battle he had promulgated an edict protecting widows, clerics and those whom the church wished to
defend.’ That is the only authentic document that has
come to us from Clovis which is from a manuscript of
the monastery of Corbie dating from the 6 th -7th centuries. The battle between Clovis and the Visigoths
was a religious war:
“ ‘It is evident, from the language of Gregory of
Tours, that this conflict between the Franks and Visigoths was regarded by the orthodox party of his own
preceding ages as a religious war, on which, humanly
speaking, the prevalence of the Catholic or the Arian
creed in Western Europe depended.’ [Walter C.
Perry, The Franks (London: Longman, Brown, Green,
Longmans, and Roberts, 1857), 85. Perry quotes from
Gregory of Tours’ The History of the Franks, trans. O.
M. Dalton (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1927), 2:36-43.
The authority on Clovis, Gregory lived from AD 538 to
594.]
““Clovis fought his last campaign, against the
Visigoths in 507, [508] as a Catholic.’ [J. M. WallaceHadrill, The Long Haired Kings (New York: Barnes
and Noble, 1962), 173.]
“ ‘It was a religious war that Clovis declared
against them. The war against the Visigoths was the
big event of the reign of Clovis. Reconciled with
Gondebaud, he made him an ally, and after having
beaten the Visigoths at Vouille where their king Alaric
was killed, he pursued them without stopping.’ [On the
war of Clovis against the Visigoths,… Paris, 1978;
ZÖLLNER, op. cit., 67. Pontal, Odette. Histoire des
Conciles Mérovingiens.N.p.: Éditions du Cerf, 1989,
38.]
“ ‘Chlodowech [Clovis] already had not held back
on gifts to the church. It is not improbable that he had
granted the bishops the necessary possessions to improve poorer churches’ facilities. After the Goth War
he conferred the former Arian chapels upon the
Catholic Church, doubtless along with the Arian
church’s possessions. [Con. Aurel. I (a. 511) can. 10.]
He also began the freeing of individual churches and
ecclesiastical persons from the burdens of state. [Cf.
Con. Aurel. I (a. 511) can. 5…] Chrodechilde [Clovis’
wife] did not remain in his shadow; Gregory of Tours
is full of her praise: she richly gave churches, monasteries, and other holy places; one could have held her
not for a queen but for a maiden of God.’ [Hist. Franc.
III, 18; cf. IV 1.]
“…The central contentious issue between the
Catholic Church and the Arian Christians: religious
liberty. The religion that did not have the “arms” of
Clovis backing it was destined to be nothing but a
memory of history. And that was exactly what happened to the Visigoths as nearly all of Gaul was now
under the jurisdiction of Catholic Clovis except for two
provinces that were under the rule of Theodore the
Great. Here is illustrated the very reason why heaven
did not provide definitive dating for the uprooting of

211

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the three horns. It is indisputable that there was a war
between Catholic Clovis and the Arian King Alaric II.
And it goes without argument that Gaul changed hands
from Arian jurisdiction to that of Catholic jurisdiction.
However, all the Visigoths from other provinces, including Spain, were not uprooted at all during this
time. In fact, these peoples existed for many more
years thereafter until the “Visigothic monarchy adopted
Catholicism in 587.” [Scott, S. P., trans., ed. The Visigothic Code (Forum Judicum). Boston: Boston Book,
1910, xxxix.] By the introduction of the 8th century
they had faded into oblivion. This fact and principle
will be reinforced and repeated when we contend with
the Ostrogoths, for that is the whole point. The emphasis of the scriptures was not focused on the end
of a race because all who would renounce their former faith and succumb to Catholicism could live out
their lives in peace. This is confirmed by a letter sent
from Pope Vigilius (537-555) to Bishop Menna on
October 15, 540.
“The real emphasis of the scriptures [Daniel 7:24]
was the removal of Arian jurisdiction from the
three main and distinct Arian kingdoms as stated
by Procopius and having it replaced with Catholic
jurisdiction. As long as that Arian principle of religious liberty (which was diametrically opposed to
the government of the Catholic Church) was still in
place and upheld judicially by those Arian powers
and enforced by civil means, the scriptures could
not yet be fulfilled:
“Daniel 7:24 ‘... And he shall subdue three kings.’
“It was Alaric II, the Arian Christian King, that
undertook the compilation of the Lex Romana Visigothorum law code, commonly called ‘Breviaricum Alaricianum,’ in part to ‘conciliate his Catholic subjects’
since bishops participated in its formulation and in its
approval. But with Alaric II and his army put out of
the way and replaced with Catholic Clovis and his military forces, there was no longer a need to just ‘conciliate his [Alaric II] Catholic subjects.’ As the Arians
were now legally and methodically being driven out of
Gaul, the following legislation now applied to them, as
well, when and where it could be enforced:
“ …‘It is Our will that the edict regarding unity
which Our Clemency dispatched throughout the districts of Africa shall be posted, throughout various regions, in order that all men may know that the one and
true Catholic faith in Almighty God, as confessed by
right belief, shall be preserved.
“…We abolish the new superstition, and We
command that those regulations in regard to the Catholic law shall be preserved unimpaired and inviolate as
they were formerly ordained by antiquity or established
by the religious authority of Our Fathers or confirmed
by Our Serenity. [Clyde Pharr, The Theodosian Code
and Novels and the Sirmondian Constitutions (Clark,
New Jersey: Lawbook Exchange, 2001), 476. Clyde
Pharr lists the Breviary of Alaric law codes in his footnotes for title 11 on pg. 476. See also pg. 600.]

“…While the Arian Christians of the West and
East were not at all free from some entanglements of
church and state as we know and understand today,
nevertheless, they never crossed the red line by resorting to force in religious matters against the will of an
individual whether he be of the Arian or Catholic faith.
This could hardly be said of the Catholic Church. It
is here, in the issue of religious liberty that the war
between two completely different ideologies climaxes in 538. …When Clovis overthrew the Visigoths at
Vougle in AD 508, religious intolerance reared her
ugly head. This came about slowly at first but, nevertheless, methodically. Hereby, it has been demonstrated from the primary and judicial sources that this was
a religious war and that the Visigoths were the first
of the three horns to be ‘plucked up by the roots.’”
Heiks, AD538, 61-89.
“ ‘It is evident, from the language of Gregory of
Tours, that this conflict between the Franks and Visigoths was regarded by the orthodox party of his
own preceding ages as a religious war, on which,
humanly speaking, the prevalence of the Catholic or
the Arian creed in Western Europe depended.’ [Walter
C. Perry, The Franks (London: Longman, Brown,
Green, Longmans, and Roberts, 1857), 85. Perry
quotes from Gregory of Tours’ The History of the
Franks, trans. O. M. Dalton (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1927), 2:36-43. The authority on Clovis, Gregory lived
from AD 538 to 594.]” Heiks, AD508, 75.
“The Visigoths possessed all the southwestern
portion of Gaul. They too were Arians; and the mutual conspiracy of the Catholics in the Gothic dominions, and the crusade of the Franks from the side of
Clovis, soon brought on another holy war. At the
assembly of princes and warriors at Paris, A.D. 508.
Clovis complained: ‘It grieves me to see that the Arians
still possess the fairest portion of Gaul. Let us march
against them with the aid of God; and, having vanquished the heretics, we will possess and divide their
fertile province.’ Clotilda added her pious exhortation
to the effect ‘that doubtless the Lord would more readily lend his aid if some gift were made;’ and in response, Clovis seized his battle-ax and threw it as far as
he could, and as it went whirling through the air, he
exclaimed, ‘There, on that spot where my Francesca
shall fall, will I erect a church in honor of the holy
apostles.’ [Gibbon's Decline and Fall,, chap. xxxviii,
par. 11.]
“War was declared; and as Clovis marched on his
way, he passed through Tours, and turned aside to consult the shrine of St. Martin of Tours, for an omen. ‘His
messengers were instructed to remark the words of the
Psalm which should happen to be chanted at the precise
moment when they entered the church.’ And the oracular clergy took care that the words which he should
‘happen’ to hear at that moment—uttered not in Latin,
but in language which Clovis understood—should be

212

DANIEL 7
the following from Psalm xviii: ‘Thou hast girded me,
O Lord, with strength unto the battle; thou hast subdued unto me those who rose up against me. Thou hast
given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me.’ The oracle was satisfactory,
and in the event was completely successful. ‘The Visigothic kingdom was wasted and subdued by the
remorseless sword of the Franks.’ [Idem, par. 12, and
Milman's "History of Latin Christianity," Book iii,
chap. ii, par. 29.]
…Thus was the bloody course of Clovis glorified
by the Catholic writers, as the triumph of the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity over Arianism.” Jones,
A.T., American Sentinel, 2/15/1894.

fest to Our Lord Jesus Christ; for We have previously
received many benefits from God, and acknowledge
that We have obtained many favors from Him, for
which We admit that We have done nothing to render
Us worthy; and now what Almighty God has deemed
proper to manifest by Our agency for His own praise,
and the glory of His Name, exceeds by far all the
wonderful occurrences which have taken place during this century; as Africa through Our efforts has
received her freedom within a short time, after having for ninety years previously been held in captivity by the Vandals, who are at the same time enemies of both the soul and the body, since by rebaptism they have brought to their perfidious belief such
souls as were not able to endure the tortures and punishments inflicted upon them; …and some of the Holy
Churches of God were profaned with their perfidy, and
others were turned into stables. …In what terms, and
with what labor could We give proper thanks to God,
who rendered Me, the most humble of His servants,
worthy to avenge the wrongs of His Church, and to
rescue the people of so many provinces from the bond
of servitude?
“Our predecessors did not deserve this favor of
God, as they were not only not permitted to liberate
Africa, but even saw Rome itself captured by the
Vandals, and all the Imperial insignia taken from
thence to Africa. Now, however, God, in his mercy,
has not only delivered Africa and all her provinces into
Our hands, but the Imperial insignia as well, which,
having been removed at the capture of Rome, He has
restored to us.
“Therefore after Divinity has conferred upon Us
so many benefits, We implored the mercy of our Lord
God, to keep firm and unimpaired the provinces which
He deigned to restore to Us, and that He would enable
Us to govern them according to His will and pleasure;
so that all Africa might experience the mercy of the
Almighty, and its inhabitants might realize from what a
severe captivity and barbaric yoke they had been released, and with what freedom they were entitled to
remain under Our most fortunate Empire.
“With the intercession of the Holy, Glorious,
and Immortal Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, We
implore and pray that God will, in His Name, through
Us the most humble of His servants, restore everything
which has been taken from Our Empire, and will render Us worthy of serving Him.[ Scott, S. P., trans., ed.
The Civil Law [of Justinian] (Union, NJ: Lawbook Exchange, 2001), Codex I. XXVII, 12:130-137.]” Heiks,
AD538, 95-97.

(Read Uriah Smith’s very interesting account of
the victory of the Franks over the Visigoths in 508 AD
at the end of the comments under Daniel 12:11.)
Letter from Justinian to the Pope, March 15, 533.—
“The subsequent excerpt is taken from a letter by
Justinian that he wrote to Pope John II on March 15,
533. This documents the ecclesiastical “voice” behind
the code of Justinian:
“ ‘For we do not suffer anything which has reference to the state of the Church, even though what causes the difficulty may be clear and free from doubt, to
be discussed without being brought to the notice of
Your Holiness, because you are the head of all the
Holy Churches, for We shall exert Ourselves in every way (as has already been stated), to increase the
honor and authority of your See.’ [Scott, S. P., trans.,
ed. The Civil Law [of Justinian] (Union, NJ: Lawbook
Exchange, 2001), Codex I. 1.4, 12:12.]
“We shall exert Ourselves in every way” is legally confirmed by the legislative support from the
state that the church canons received. Codex I.3.44 of
Justinian’s law codes, for example, was implemented
on October 18, A.D. 530, thereby giving total authority
to the canons of the synods.
“ ‘Whatever the holy canons prohibit, these
also we by our own laws forbid.’ [Paul Krueger, Corpus Iuris Civilis, Codex Iustinianus, I.3.44 (decreed
Oct.18, A.D. 530) (Berolini Apud Weidmannos, 1888),
2:30. See also Asterios Gerostergios, Justinian The
Great The Emperor And Saint (Belmont, MA: Institute
for Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies), 163-4.]
“This codex alone was sufficient to elevate the
laws of the church to equality with the laws of the
state. Having been accorded this political backing,
church canons had to be obeyed by all. This serves as
the only explanation as to why the papacy claims that
Justinian’s Corpus Juris Civilis is the basis of all Roman Catholic canon law:” Heiks, AD538, 115,116.

Ostrogoths Upheld Religious Liberty.—
“With Clovis coming into power and ascending to
the Catholic faith, Theodore the Great, the Arian King
of the West, decreed between the years 507-511 a most
remarkable decree. This decree was honored by the
majority of the Arians, but was diametrically opposed
to the principals and government of the Catholic

Catholic Emperor Justinian Issues Edict of AD 534—
About Uprooting the Arian Vandals.—
“ ‘Our mind cannot conceive nor Our tongue express the thanks and the praise which We should mani-

213

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Church:
“‘We cannot order a religion, because no one is
forced to believe against his will.’ [Cassiodorus,
Magnus Aurelius, Hodgkin, Thomas, The Letters of
Cassiodorus. London: Henry Frowde, 1886, Book II,
27.]” Heiks, AD508, 9.

evangelical doctrine, we should believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit constitute a single Deity,
endowed with equal majesty, and united in the Holy
Trinity.
“ ‘(1) We order all those who follow this law to
assume the name of Catholic Christians, and considering others as demented and insane, We order that
they shall bear the infamy of heresy; and when the Divine vengeance which they merit has been appeased,
they shall afterwards be punished in accordance with
Our resentment, which we have acquired from the
judgment of Heaven.
“ ‘Dated at Thessalonica, on the third of the Kalends of March, during the Consulate of Gratian, Consul
for the fifth time, and Theodosius.
“ ‘2. The Same Emperors to Eutropius, Prætorian
Prefect.
“ ‘Let no place be afforded to heretics for the
conduct of their ceremonies, and let no occasion be
offered for them to display the insanity of their obstinate minds. Let all persons know that if any privilege has been fraudulently obtained by means of any
rescript whatsoever, by persons of this kind, it will not
be valid. Let all bodies of heretics be prevented from
holding unlawful assemblies, and let the name of the
only and the greatest God be celebrated everywhere,
and let the observance of the Nicene Creed, recently
transmitted by Our ancestors, and firmly established by
the testimony and practice of Divine Religion, always
remain secure.
“ ‘(1) Moreover, he who is an adherent of the Nicene Faith, and a true believer in the Catholic religion,
should be understood to be one who believes that Almighty God and Christ, the Son of God, are one person, God of God, Light of Light; and let no one, by
rejection, dishonor the Holy Spirit, whom we expect,
and have received from the Supreme Parent of all
things, in whom the sentiment of a pure and undefiled
faith flourishes, as well as the belief in the undivided
substance of a Holy Trinity.... These things, indeed,
do not require further proof, and should be respected.

“The Bible was not accepted [by the papists] as
the standard of faith. The doctrine of religious freedom was termed heresy, and its upholders were hated
and proscribed.” Great Controversy, 45.
Uprooting the Ostrogoths.—
“The deciding factor that would establish Justinian’s judicial authority in the west would be the outcome of the first siege of Rome that began on February
21, 537, and ended in a massive defeat of the Ostrogoths on March 1, 538. It was the outcome of that
battle alone that secured for Justinian his judicial
authority in the west. Novel 69, issued June 1, 538,
confirms that this was the first time in 62 years that
a Catholic Emperor had held legal jurisdiction in
Italy.” Heiks, AD538, 152.
Justinian Codes Reveal the Purpose of Uprooting the
Three Arian Horns—to Support the Trinity Doctrine
of the Nicean Creed.—
“ ‘SECOND PREFACE.
CONCERNING THE CONFIRMATION OF THE
CODE OF JUSTINIAN.
“ ‘The maintenance of the integrity of the government depends upon two things, namely, the force of
arms and the observance of the laws:....
“Included in the 534 code of Justinian was his
famous letter he wrote to Pope John II on March 15,
533. In the same year, on March 25, he wrote to
Epiphanius, Patriarch of Constantinople, confirming
that the pope was now the head of the church and
the corrector of heretics, and giving the pope all
ecclesiastical power and authority….
THE CODE OF OUR LORD
THE MOST SACRED EMPEROR JUSTINIAN.
SECOND EDITION.
BOOK I.
TITLE I.
CONCERNING THE MOST EXALTED TRINITY
AND THE CATHOLIC FAITH, AND PROVIDING THAT NO ONE SHALL DARE TO
PUBLICLY OPPOSE THEM
“ ‘1. The Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and
Theodosius to the people of the City of Constantinople.
“ ‘We desire that all peoples subject to Our benign Empire shall live under the same religion that
the Divine Peter, the Apostle, gave to the Romans, and
which the said religion declares was introduced by
himself, and which it is well known that the Pontiff
Damasus, and Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, a man of
apostolic sanctity, embraced; that is to say, in accordance with the rules of apostolic discipline and the

“ ‘…4. John, Bishop of the City of Rome, to his
most Illustrious and Merciful Son Justinian.
“ ‘Among the conspicuous reasons for praising
your wisdom and gentleness, Most Christian of Emperors, and one which radiates light as a star, is the fact
that through love of the Faith, and actuated by zeal for
charity, you, learned in ecclesiastical discipline, have
preserved reverence for the See of Rome, and have
subjected all things to its authority, and have given
it unity. The following precept was communicated to
its founder, that is to say, the first of the Apostles, by
the mouth of the Lord, namely: “Feed my lambs.”
“ ‘This See is indeed the head of all churches,
as the rules of the Fathers and the decrees of Emperors assert, and the words of your most reverend
piety testify. It is therefore claimed that what the

214

DANIEL 7
Scriptures state, namely, “By Me Kings reign, and the
Powers dispense justice;” will be accomplished in you.

Word of God, and another Son whom he calls
Christ….’ [Scott, S. P., trans., ed., The Civil Law [of
Justinian] (Union, NJ: Lawbook Exchange, 2001),
Codex I. 1. 12:9-15.]” Heiks, AD538, 182-189.

“ ‘…The following is the text of the letter of the
Emperor Justinian, Victorious, Pious, Happy, Renowned, Triumphant, always Augustus, to John, Patriarch, and most Holy Archbishop of the fair City of
Rome:
“ ‘With honor to the Apostolic See, and to Your
Holiness, which is, and always has been remembered
in Our prayers, both now and formerly, and honoring
your happiness, as is proper in the case of one who is
considered as a father, We hasten to bring to the
knowledge of Your Holiness everything relating to the
condition of the Church, as We have always had the
greatest desire to preserve the unity of your Apostolic
See, and the condition of the Holy Churches of God, as
they exist at the present time, that they may remain
without disturbance or opposition. Therefore, We
have exerted Ourselves to unite all the priests of the
East and subject them to the See of Your Holiness,
and hence the questions which have at present arisen,
although they are manifest and free from doubt, and,
according to the doctrine of your Apostolic See, are
constantly firmly observed and preached by all priests,
We have still considered it necessary that they should
be brought to the attention of Your Holiness. For we do
not suffer anything which has reference to the state of
the Church, even though what causes the difficulty may
be clear and free from doubt, to be discussed without
being brought to the notice of Your Holiness, because
you are the head of all the Holy Churches, for We
shall exert Ourselves in every way (as has already
been stated), to increase the honor and authority of
your See.
“ ‘(1) Therefore, We present to Your Holiness the
fact that certain infidels and persons who do not
belong to the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church
of God have, like Jews and apostates, dared to dispute
matters which are properly accepted, glorified, and
preached by all priests in accordance with your doctrines, denying that Our Lord Jesus Christ is the only
begotten Son of God, and that Our Lord was born of
the Holy Spirit and of the Holy, Glorious, and always
Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, and became a man
and was crucified, and that he is one of the persons of
the Holy Trinity, who are all of one substance, and
who should be adored and exalted along with the
Father and the Holy Spirit, and that he is consubstantial with the Father according to divinity, and
consubstantial with ourselves according to humanity,
and susceptible of the sufferings of the flesh, but not
susceptible of the same as a deity. For these persons
refusing to acknowledge Our Lord Jesus Christ as
the only begotten Son of God, and Our Lord as one
of the Holy Trinity, and of the same substance with
the other persons composing it, appear to follow the
evil doctrine of Nestor, who asserts that there is one
Son of God according to grace, whom he styles the

Justinian Calls the Roman Catholic Church, The
Mother, Forbids Home Churches, and Defines Heretics.—
“Ironically, Justinian applied the following terms
to the Catholic Church: ‘The mother of religion,’ ‘the
mother of our piety, the source of the orthodox religion of all Christians,’ ‘the Mother of Our Empire.’
[Scott, S. P., trans., ed., The Civil Law [of Justinian]
(Union, NJ: Lawbook Exchange, 2001), Codex I. 2.14.
12:20; Codex I. 2.15. 12:26; Ibid., The Novels, 3- chapter I. Vol. 16:17, March 16, 535.]
“TITLE III.
CONCERNING BISHOPS AND OTHER
MEMBERS OF THE CLERGY, SUPERINTENDENTS OF ORPHAN ASYLUMS, OF HOSPITALS
AND OF CHARITABLE FOUNDATIONS, MONASTERIES OF ASCETICS AND MONKS AND
THEIR PRIVILEGES; CASTRENSE PECULIUM;
THE REDEMPTION OF CAPTIVES; AND FORBIDDEN OR PERMITTED MARRIAGES OF ECCLESIASTICS.
“…15. We forbid persons to hold religious assemblies in private houses, even outside the Church,
under the penalty of confiscation of the house, if the
owner of the same permitted ecclesiastics to hold new
and tumultuous meetings therein outside the church.’
“ ‘...Hence We very properly call persons heretics who do not receive the holy sacraments from
the reverend bishops in the Catholic Church; for
although they may give themselves the name of Christians, still they are separated from the belief and communion of Christians, even when they acknowledge
that they are subject to the judgment of God.’ [Ibid.,
The Novels-109, Preface, 17:27, May 7, 541.]” Heiks,
AD538, 194, 198, 201.
“In AD 538, thanks to the emperor’s troops, the
Roman bishop was in a position to assume the headship
of the church in fact and not just on paper. Another
decree by Justinian given in 555, the year of the final
defeat of the Ostrogoths, cemented both the religious
and political authority of the papacy.” Shea, DARG,
124.
“Justinian did not appoint another emperor to rule
in the west, thus allowing the papacy to assume this
position.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 26.
Zealous Work of the Papacy Not Inspired by God.—
“It is no part of Christ's mission to compel
men to receive Him. It is Satan, and men actuated by
his spirit, that seek to compel the conscience. Under
a pretense of zeal for righteousness, men who are con-

215

GEMS FROM DANIEL
federate with evil angels bring suffering upon their
fellow men, in order to convert them to their ideas of
religion; but Christ is ever showing mercy, ever seeking to win by the revealing of His love. He can admit
no rival in the soul, nor accept of partial service; but
He desires only voluntary service, the willing surrender
of the heart under the constraint of love. There can be
no more conclusive evidence that we possess the
spirit of Satan than the disposition to hurt and destroy those who do not appreciate our work, or who
act contrary to our ideas.
“Every human being, in body, soul, and spirit, is
the property of God. Christ died to redeem all. Nothing can be more offensive to God than for men,
through religious bigotry, to bring suffering upon
those who are the purchase of the Saviour's blood.”
Desire of Ages, 487, 488.

DANIEL 7:25
And he shall speak great words against
the most High, and shall wear out the
saints of the most High, and think to
change times and laws: and they shall be
given into his hand until a time and times
and the dividing of time.
Against the Most High.—
“The word ‘against’ has the meaning of ‘to the
side of,’ meaning self-exaltation to a place alongside of
God. …‘He shall speak as if he were God.’ Who can
fulfill this prediction but the one and only ruler who
claims to be God on earth?” Bunch, BOD, 103.

Shall Speak Great Words.—
“The ‘speaking’ of the nation is the action of its
legislative and judicial authorities.” Great Controversy, 442.
Fact: The legislative, judicial, and executive
powers of the Papal See, under which is Vatican City,
reside in one man, the pope.

Little Horn’s Great Words Against Most High.—
“This prophecy, too, has been unhappily fulfilled
in the history of the pontiffs. They have sought, or at
least have permitted to be applied to them, titles which
would be hyperbolical and blasphemous if applied to
an angel of God.
“Lucius Ferraris, in his Prompta Bibliotheca
which the Catholic Encyclopedia refers to as ‘a veritable encyclopedia of religious knowledge’ and ‘a precious mine of information,’ declares, in its article on
the pope, that ‘the pope is of so great dignity and so
exalted that he is not a mere man, but as it were God,
and the vicar of God.... The pope is of such lofty and
supreme dignity that, properly speaking, he has not
been established in any rank of dignity, but rather has
been placed upon the very summit of all ranks of dignities.... The pope is called most holy because he is
rightfully presumed to be such...’
“ ‘The pope alone is deservedly called by the
name “most holy,” because he alone is the vicar of
Christ, who is the fountain and source and fullness of
all holiness.... “He is likewise the divine monarch and
supreme emperor, and king of kings.” ...Hence the
pope is crowned with a triple crown, as king of heaven

“It was legislation that ultimately ‘set up’ the little horn in AD 508 and it was legislation that brought
down the little horn in AD 1798, and it will be legislation that sets up or resurrects again the beast power in
the form of the image to the beast.” Heiks, AD538, 39.
“The doctrine of the pope conflicts in many ways
with the Gospel, and the pope arrogates to himself a
threefold divine authority. First, because he assumes
for himself the right to change the doctrine of
Christ and the worship instituted by God, and he
wishes to have his own doctrine and worship observed as divine. Second, because he assumes for
himself …the jurisdiction over souls after this life.
Third, because the pope is unwilling to be judged by
the church or by anybody, and he exalts his authority
above the decisions of councils and the whole church.
Such unwillingness to be judged by the church or by
anybody is to make himself out to be God. Finally,
he defends such horrible errors and such impiety with
the greatest cruelty and puts to death those who dissent.” LaRondelle, LFTLD, 30,31.

216

DANIEL 7
and of earth and of the lower regions.... Moreover the
superiority and the power of the Roman Pontiff by no
means pertain only to heavenly things, to earthly
things, and to things under the earth, but are even over
angels, than whom he is greater.... So that if it were
possible that the angels might err in the faith, or might
think contrary to the faith, they could be judged and
excommunicated by the pope.... For he is of so great
dignity and power that he forms one and the same
tribunal with Christ....
“ ‘The pope is as it were God on earth, sole
sovereign of the faithful of Christ, chief king of kings,
having plenitude of power, to whom has been entrusted
by the omnipotent God direction not only of the earthly
but also of the heavenly kingdom.... The pope is of so
great authority and power that he can modify, explain, or interpret even divine laws.’ [Translated
from Lucius Ferraris, Prompta Bibliotheca, art. "Papa,"
II, Vol. VI, pp. 26-29.]
“Christopher Marcellus, at the fourth session of
the fifth Lateran Council in an oration to the Pope, exclaimed: ‘Thou are the shepherd, thou art the physician, thou art the director, thou art the husbandman;
finally, thou art another God on earth.’ [P. Joannis
Harduin, Acta Conciliorum, Vol. IX, p. 1651.]
“Again, Adam Clarke says on verse 25: ‘ “He
shall speak as if he were God.” So St. Jerome quotes
from Symmachus. To none can this apply so well or so
fully as to the popes of Rome. They have assumed
infallibility, which belongs only to God. They profess to forgive sins, which belongs only to God.
They profess to open and shut heaven, which belongs only to God. They profess to be higher than all
the kings of the earth, which belongs only to God. And
they go beyond God in pretending to loose whole nations from their oath of allegiance to their kings, when
such kings do not please them. And they go against
God when they give indulgences for sin. This is the
worst of all blasphemies.’ [Adam Clarke, Commentary
on the Old Testament, Vol. IV, p. 596, note on Daniel
7:25.]” Smith, DR, 128-130.

thou art the Husbandman, finally, thou art another
God on earth.’” Maxwell, 1GC, 125.
“Alphonsus Maria de Liguori, reputed to be one
of the greatest Catholic writers of the eighteenth century, makes the following claim with respect to the
priests—and it goes without saying that what is true of
the priests is true of any member of the papal hierarchy, including the pope. Says Liguori:
“‘We find that in obedience to the words of his
priests—hoc est corpus meum [This is my body]—
God himself descends on the altar, that He comes
whenever they call Him, and as often as they call Him,
and places Himself in their hands, even though they
should be his enemies.’ [Dignities and Duties of the
Priest, p. 26.]
“What a startling declaration! God is oblige to
descend from heaven in obedience to a priest’s words
even when that priest is an enemy of God! If this does
not put Rome’s sacerdotal system above God, what
would?” Mansell, OSOA, 19.
Little Horn Wears Out the Saints of the Most High.—
“In the sixth century the papacy had become
firmly established. Its seat of power was fixed in the
imperial city, and the bishop of Rome was declared
to be the head over the entire church. Paganism had
given place to the papacy. The dragon had given to the
beast ‘his power, and his seat, and great authority.’
Revelation 13:2. And now began the 1260 years of
papal oppression foretold in the prophecies of Daniel
and the Revelation. Daniel 7:25; Rev. 13:5-7. Christians were forced to choose either to yield their integrity and accept the papal ceremonies and worship, or to
wear away their lives in dungeons or suffer death by
the rack, the fagot, or the headsman’s ax. Now were
fulfilled the words of Jesus: ‘Ye shall be betrayed both
by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends;
and some of you shall they cause to be put to death.
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s sake.’
Luke 21:16,17. Persecution opened upon the faithful
with greater fury than ever before, and the world
became a vast battlefield. For hundreds of years the
church of Christ found refuge in seclusion and obscurity. Thus says the prophet: ‘The woman fled into
the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand two
hundred and three-score days.’ Revelation 12:6.”
Great Controversy, 54,55.

“In an encyclical letter, ‘On the Chief Duties of
Christians as Citizens,’ dated January 10, 1890, [Pope]
Leo VIII asserted that ‘the supreme teacher in the
Church is the Roman Pontiff. Union of minds, therefore, requires …complete submission and obedience
of will to the Church and to the Roman Pontiff, as
to God Himself.’ On June 20. 1894, in ‘The Reunion
of Christendom,’ Leo claimed further that ‘we [that is,
we popes] hold upon this earth the place of God
Almighty.’
“Grand as these claims may appear today, even
they are not quite so exalted as the status attributed to
Pope Julius II at the Fifth Lateran Council in 1512,
when Christopher Marcellus told the pope—and the
pope did not rebuke him for it—‘Thou art the Shepherd, thou art the Physician, thou art the Governor,

“The man of sin, who thought to change times
and laws, and who has always oppressed the people
of God, will cause laws to be made enforcing the observance of the first day of the week. But God’s people are to stand firm for Him. And the Lord will work
in their behalf, showing plainly that He is the God of
gods.” 7BC, 975

217

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Amid the ransomed throng are the apostles of
Christ, the heroic Paul, the ardent Peter, the loved and
loving John, and their truehearted brethren, and with
them the vast host of martyrs; while outside the walls,
with every vile and abominable thing, are those by
whom they were persecuted, imprisoned, and slain.
…There are papist priests and prelates, who
claimed to be Christ’s ambassadors, yet employed
the rack, the dungeon, and the stake to control the
consciences of His people.” Great Controversy,
667,668.

and fifty thousand perished by the Inquisition in thirty
years. In the Low Countries fifty thousand persons
were hanged, beheaded, burned, and buried alive, for
the crime of heresy, within the space of thirty-eight
years from the edict of Charles V against the
Protestants, to the peace of Chateau Cambreses in
1559. Eighteen thousand suffered by the hand of the
executioner in the space of five years and a half during
the administration of the Duke of Alva. Indeed, the
slightest acquaintance with the history of the papacy will convince anyone that what is here said of
“making war with the saints” (verse 21), and “wearing out the saints of the Most High” (verse 25), is
strictly applicable to that power, and will accurately
describe its history.’ [Albert Barnes, Notes on Daniel,
p. 328, comment on Daniel 7:25.]
“These facts are confirmed by the testimony of
W. E. H. Lecky. He declares:
“ ‘That the Church of Rome has shed more innocent blood than any other institution that has
ever existed among mankind, will be questioned by
no Protestant who has a complete knowledge of history. The memorials, indeed, of many of her persecutions are now so scanty that it is impossible to form a
complete conception of the multitude of her victims,
and it is quite certain that no powers of imagination can
adequately realize their sufferings.... These atrocities
were not perpetrated in the brief paroxysms of a reign
of terror, or by the hands of obscure sectaries, but were
inflicted by a triumphant church, with every circumstance of solemnity and deliberation.’ [William
E. H. Lecky, History of the Rise and Influence of the
Spirit of Rationalism in Europe, Vol. II, pp. 35, 37.]
“It makes no difference that in numerous instances the victims were turned over to the civil authorities. It was the church that made the decision upon
the question of heresy, and it then passed the offenders over to the secular court. But in those days
the secular power was but the tool in the hands of
the church. It was under its control and did its bidding. When the church delivered its prisoners to the
executioners to be destroyed, with fiendish mockery it
made use of the following formula: ‘And we do leave
and deliver thee to the secular arm, and to the power of
the secular court; but at the same time do most earnestly beseech that court so to moderate its sentence as not
to touch thy blood, or to put thy life in any danger.’
[Michael Geddes, "A View of the Court of Inquisition
in Portugal," Miscellaneous Tracts, Vol. I, p. 408. See
also Philip Limborch, The History of the Inquisition,
Vol. II, p.289.] Then, as intended, the unfortunate victims of popish hate were immediately executed.
“The testimony of Lepicier is to the point in this
connection: ‘The civil power can only punish the
crime of unbelief in the manner and to the extent that
the crime is judicially made known to it by ecclesiastical persons, skilled in the doctrine of the faith. But the
church taking cognizance by herself of the crime of
unbelief, can by herself decree the sentence of death,

“ ‘In the Bull “Ad Exstirpanda” (1252) Innocent
IV says: “When those adjudged guilty of heresy
have been given up to the civil power by the bishop
or his representative, or the Inquisition, the podesta
or chief magistrate of the city shall take them at once,
and shall, within five days at the most, execute the laws
made against them.” …Nor could any doubt remain as
to what civil regulations were meant, for the passages
which ordered the burning of impenitent heretics
were inserted in the papal decretals from the imperial
constitutions “Commissis nobis” and “Inconsutibilem
tunicam.” …The civil authorities, therefore, were
enjoined by the popes, under pain of excommunication to execute the legal sentences that condemned impenitent heretics to the stake.’ (Joseph Blotzer, art.
‘Inquisition,’ Vol. VIII, p.34).” 4SDABC, 831.
“It requires but little historical investigation to
prove that Rome, both in the times of antiquity and
during the Dark Ages, carried forward a work of destruction against the church of God. Abundant evidences can be given showing that prior to and following the great work of Reformation, wars, crusades, massacres, inquisitions, and persecutions of
all kinds were the methods adopted to compel all to
submit to the Roman yoke.
“The story of medieval persecution is a frightful
one, and we dread to dwell upon its detail. Yet for a
proper understanding of this passage it is necessary that
we recall some of the happenings of these unhappy
times. Albert Barnes, in his comment on this passage,
remarks:
“ ‘Can anyone doubt that this is true of the papacy? The Inquisition, the “persecutions of the Waldenses;” the ravages of the Duke of Alva; the fires of
Smithfield; the tortures at Goa—indeed, the whole history of the papacy may be appealed to in proof that this
is applicable to that power. If anything could have
“worn out the saints of the Most High”—could have
cut them off from the earth so that evangelical religion
would have become extinct, it would have been the
persecutions of the papal power. In the year 1208, a
crusade was proclaimed by Pope Innocent III
against the Waldenses and Albigenses, in which a
million of men perished. From the beginning of the
order of the Jesuits, in the year 1540, to 1580, nine
hundred thousand were destroyed. One hundred

218

DANIEL 7
Rome could slay the infants, but spare the mothers; but
papal Rome slew both mothers and infants together.
No age, no sex, no condition in life, was exempt from
her relentless rage.” Smith, DR, 130-135.

yet not execute it; but she hands over the execution
of it to the secular arm.’ [Alexius M. Lepicier, The
Stability and Progress of Dogma, p.195.]
“…Alfred Baudrillart, rector of the Catholic Institute of Paris, when referring to the attitude of the
church toward heresy, remarks:
“ ‘When confronted by heresy, she does not content herself with persuasion; arguments of an intellectual and moral order appear to her insufficient, and she
has recourse to force, to corporal punishment, to torture. She creates tribunals like those of the Inquisition,
she calls the laws of state to her aid, if necessary she
encourages a crusade, or a religious war, and all her
“horror of blood” practically culminates into urging the
secular power to shed it, which proceeding is almost
more odious—for it is less frank—than shedding it
herself.
“‘Especially did she act thus in the sixteenth century with regard to Protestants. Not content to reform
morally, to teach by example, to convert people by
eloquent and holy missionaries, she lit in Italy, in the
Low Countries, and above all in Spain, the funeral
piles of the Inquisition. In France under Francis I and
Henri II, in England under Mary Tudor, she tortured
the heretics, while both in France and Germany, during
the second half of the sixteenth, and first half of the
seventeenth centuries, if she did not actually begin, at
any rate she encouraged and actively aided the religious wars.’ [Alfred Baudrillart, The Catholic Church,
the Renaissance, and Protestantism, pp. 182,183.]
“In a letter of Pope Martin V (AD 1417-1431), are
the following instructions to the King of Poland:
“ ‘ “Know that the interest of the Holy See, and
those of your crown make it a duty to exterminate the
Hussites. Remember that these impious persons dare
proclaim principles of equality, they maintain that all
Christians are brethren, and that God has not given to
privileged men the right of ruling nations; they hold
that Christ came on earth to abolish slavery; they call
the people to liberty, that is, to the annihilation of kings
and priests! Whilst there is still time, then, turn your
forces against Bohemia; burn, massacre, make deserts everywhere, for nothing could be more agreeable to God, or more useful to the cause of kings,
than the extermination of the Hussites.” ’ L. M. de
Cormenin, The Public and Private History of the Popes
of Rome, Vol. II, pp.116,117.]
“All this was in harmony with the teaching of the
church. Heresy was not to be tolerated, but to be destroyed.
“Pagan Rome persecuted the Christian church relentlessly. It is estimated that three million Christians
perished in the first three centuries of the Christian Era.
Yet it is said that the primitive Christians prayed
for the continuance of imperial Rome, for they
knew that when this form of government should
cease, another far worse persecuting power would
arise, which would literally ‘wear out the saints of
the Most High,’ as this prophecy declares. Pagan

“The right to suppress heresy has long been
claimed by leading Roman Catholics. The church
maintains that it has the right not only to censure and
punish, but even to put to death those it believes to be
guilty of heresy. The history of the church is a history
of persecution wherever she has been able to attain
positions of power. Unequaled in infamy and horror
are the despicable papal attacks on Christian saints of
God. The following are a few details of the persecutions of the Dark Ages:
“1198 Wide, wholesale slaughter of saints begun
under Innocent III.
“1207 Bishop of Mentz resolves to exterminated
the Waldenses.
“1220 Albigenses murderously persecuted.
“1227 Rise of the Inquisition.
“1233 Gregory IX grants full persecuting power
to Dominican friars
“1237 Vaudois persecuted in France, take refuge
in Alps.
“1294 Boniface VIII lays France and Denmark
under Interdict.
“1530 Massacre of Vaudois.
“1553 Queen Mary restores popery, violent persecution in England.
“1567 Duke of Alva commissioned to exterminate Protestants in the Netherlands.
“1572 St. Bartholomew’s Massacre—40,000
Protestants slaughtered in France.
“[1588 Spanish Armada sent to destroy England.
“1605 Gunpowder plot to blow up parliament.]
“1631 20,000 Protestants massacred in Magdeburg.
“1685 400,000 Protestants flee from France in
persecutions.” Thiele, OSID, 72.
“Whatever the statistics, numbers alone convey
little about personal anguish—such as the suffering of
Englishman John Brown, when they barbecued his feet
before tying him to the stake; and of Helen Stark, when
they sentenced her to be stuffed with her baby into a
sack and drowned; and of eight-year-old Billy Fetty,
when they cudgeled him to death for sympathizing
with his father, who for two weeks had been suspended
by an arm and a leg. (From John Foxe, Book of Martyrs, chaps. on persecutions in Scotland under Henry
VIII and in England under Mary.)
“Nor can statistics convey the searing pain of legal torture. Can you conceive the excruciation of having your hands tied behind your back, then having
them lifted slowly outward and upward, your shoulder
joints popping apart, your arms being stretched straight
up, your whole body weight finally hanging from your
wrists, while the inquisitor, in the name of Jesus Christ

219

GEMS FROM DANIEL
and Holy Church, demands repeatedly, ‘Will you recant? Will you recant?’
“…In the twelfth century someone discovered ancient volumes containing the laws of the Roman Empire. This discovery stimulated a great revival of Roman law and with it a revival of the Roman practice of
legal torture. …In 1252 [Pope] Innocent IV sanctioned
the infliction of torture by the civil authorities upon
heretics, and torture came to have a recognized place in
the procedure of the inquisitorial courts.” Maxwell,
1GC, 126,127.

City of God , presented a radically unbiblical view of
the kingdom. For him, the kingdom of God would be
established when the church conquered the whole
world for Christ. In other words, the kingdom would be
established from within history rather than from without. Concerning this concept, Merrill C. Tenney remarks:
“‘In his famous work, The City of God, he [Augustine] advanced the doctrine that the city or commonwealth of the world was doomed to perish, whereas the ‘city of God,’ the church, was continuing and
taking its place. He taught that the ‘city of God’ was
identical with the church, and that as the latter grew in
power and influence it would gradually bring all men
under its sway and would introduce the reign of righteousness.
“‘This doctrine of Augustine became the basis for
the temporal claims of the Roman church. If the kingdom was to grow irresistibly until it dominated the
earth, and if the visible church was identical with the
kingdom, then the visible church could rightfully assume political power, and could make its conquests by
force.’ Merrill C. Tenney, Interpreting Revelation
(Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdman’s, 1957), pp. 147,
148.” Bohr, ND7, 31.

“On reaching Madrid, I went with Mr. William
Green to see the newly opened Quemadero. Some
workmen employed in cutting a road across the summit
of a low hill close to the city had inadvertently dug into
a broad bank of ashes, which had been buried for one
or two centuries. Mingled with the ashes they had
found a large quantity of charred human bones, together with fragments of rusted iron, and melted lead. The
spot was speedily verified as the famous Quemadero, or place of burning, one of twelve places where
so called ‘heretics’ were annually burned in Spain,
during the reign of the Inquisition. I found the road
had been cut through the center of this bank of blackened bones and ashes. The strange stratum displayed
seemed about six feet in depth, and covered quite a
large area There, then, exposed to the light of day were
the ashes of Spanish martyrs. I stood in silence and
looked at the ghastly monument.’ History Unveiling
Prophecy, p.303-397.
“The most fiendish of the numberless crusades of
persecution ever launched by one religion against another was the Inquisition. The following statements are
made by Professor of History, University of Sydney, in
his History of Modern Europe.” Burnside, DPUF,
115,116.

Roman Catholic Decrees on the Use of Force.—
“We now move on to the pontificate of Pope
Nicholas I (858-867). The attitude of the Roman
Church is now much bolder! Pope Nicholas encouraged the King of Bulgaria, a new convert to ‘Christianity’, to force the religion of his new church upon his
subjects. Notice the words of Pope Nicholas:
‘I glorify you for having maintained your authority by putting to death those wandering sheep who
refuse to enter the fold; and... congratulate you upon
having opened the kingdom of heaven to the people
submitted to your rule. A king need not fear to command massacres, when these will retain his subjects in
obedience, or cause them to submit to the faith of
Christ; and God will reward him in this world, and in
eternal life, for these murders.’ (Quoted in, R.W.
Thompson, The Papacy and the Civil Power, p. 244).
“We must now examine the origin and mechanism of the Holy Office of the Inquisition. The origins
of this organism can be clearly traced to 1227-1233
AD, during the pontificate of Gregory IX. In 1229 the
church council of Tolouse condemned the Albigenses
in France and gave orders to exterminate them. In
1231 Gregory IX in his bull, Excommunicamus, condemned all heretics and proclaimed specific laws on
how to deal with them. Among the provisions were the
following:
“1) Delivery of heretics to the civil power.
“2) Excommunication of all heretics as well as
their defenders, followers, friends, and even those who
failed to turn them in.
“3) Life imprisonment for all impenitent heretics.

Augustine’s Influence to Use Force.—
“It was St. Augustine who laid the foundation for
the persecutions of the middle ages. In his own words:
“‘Originally my opinion was that no one should
be coerced into the unity of Christ, that we must act
only by words, fight only by arguments, and prevail by
force of reason, lest we should have those whom we
knew as avowed heretics feigning themselves to be
Catholics. But this opinion of mine was overcome
not by the words of those who controverted it, but by
the conclusive instances to which they could point.
For, in the first place, there was set over against my
opinion my own town [Hippo], which, although it was
once wholly on the side of Donatus [a heretic who was
leader of a group known as the Donatists], was brought
over to the Catholic unity by fear of the imperial
edicts’. [St. ‘Augustine, Letter 93 (to Vincentius),
chapter 5, section 17, translated in Nicene and PostNicene Fathers, first series, volume I, p. 388.]-bold is
mine.
“In short, Augustine’s monumental work The

220

DANIEL 7
“4) Heretics were denied the right to appeal
their sentence.
“5) Those suspected of heresy had no right to
be defended by counsel.
“6) Children of heretics were disqualified from
holding a church office until the second generation.
“7) Heretics who had died without being punished were to be exhumed and their bodies burned.
“8) The homes of convicted heretics were to be
demolished. (See, G. Barraclough, The Medieval Papacy, London, 1968, edited by Thames and Hudson, p.
128; and R. I Moore, ‘The Origins of Medieval Heresy’, in History, vol. 55 (1970), pp. 21-36).
“…During the pontificate of Innocent IV (12411253), the mechanism of the Inquisition was further
developed. In the papal bull Ad Extirpanda (1252), the
following provisions were given the force of law:
“1) Torture must be applied to heretics so as to
secure confessions.
“2) Those found guilty must be burned at the
stake.
“3) A police force must be established to serve
the needs of the Inquisition.
“4) A proclamation of a crusade against all heretics in Italy. Those participating in this crusade were to
be extended the same privileges and indulgences as
those who went on crusades to the Holy Land.
“5) The heirs of heretics were to have their goods
confiscated as well.
“The savagery of Innocent the IV has led the Roman Catholic historian, Peter de Rosa, to state:
“‘In [Pope] Innocent’s view, it was more wicked
for Albigenses to call him the antichrist than for him
to prove it by burning them—men, women, and
children by the thousands.’ (Peter de Rosa, Vicars of
Christ, p. 225).
“It was during this same period that one of the
greatest dogmatic theologians in the history of the Roman Catholic Church added his support to the idea of
exterminating heretics. Let’s allow St. Thomas Aquinas to speak for himself:
“‘With regard to heretics two elements are to be
considered, one element on their side, and the other on
the part of the church. On their side is the sin whereby
they have deserved, not only to be separated from the
church by excommunication, but also to be banished
from the world by death. …If the man is still found
pertinacious, the church, having no hope of his conversion, provides for the safety of others, cutting him off
from the church by the sentence of excommunication;
and further she leaves him to the secular tribunal to be
exterminated from the world by death.’ (Joseph
Rickaby, S. J. (R. C.), Aquinas Ethicus; or, The Moral
Teaching of St. Thomas, Vol. I, pp. 332, 333. London:
Burns and Oates, 1892).
“…The fourteenth century inquisitor, Bernard
Gui explained the purpose of the Inquisition:
“...The objective of the Inquisition is to destroy
heresy; it is not possible to destroy heresy unless you

eradicate the heretics; and it is impossible to eradicate the heretics unless you also eradicate those who
hide them, sympathize with them and protect them.’
(Salim Japas, Herejia, Colon y la Inquisicion (Siloam
Springs, Arkansas: Creation Enterprises, 1992), p. 20.
“…Notice the words of Pope Martin V (1417-31),
written in 1429 to the King of Poland commanding him
to exterminate the Hussites:
“‘Know that the interests of the Holy See, and
those of your crown, make it a duty to exterminate the
Hussites. Remember that these impious persons dare
proclaim principles of equality; they maintain that all
Christians are brethren, and that God has not given to
privileged men the right of ruling the nations; they hold
that Christ came on earth to abolish slavery, they call
the people to liberty, that is to the annihilation of kings
and priests.
“While there is still time, then, turn your forces
against Bohemia; burn, massacre, make deserts everywhere, for nothing could be more agreeable to God,
or more useful to the cause of kings, than the extermination of the Hussites.’ (Quoted in, Dave Hunt,
A Woman Rides the Beast, p. 247). These words were
written by Martin V in 1429.
“The story of John Hus is very well known. In
1415 he was burned at the stake even though King
Sigismund had guaranteed him safe conduct to defend
himself at the Council of Constance (1414-1418). The
remarkable fact is that Sigismund was encouraged to
break his word by the Roman Catholic religious leaders.
“Also in the fifteenth century, Pope Innocent VIII
proclaimed a Bull against the Waldenses (1487).
…Ellen White, in The Great Controversy, p. 77 quotes
a portion of this bull in the following words:
“‘Therefore the pope ordered “that malicious
and abominable sect of malignants,” if they “refuse
to abjure, to be crushed like venomous snakes.”’
“…In 1492 Columbus discovered America.
Shortly after this time, the Inquisition was planted on
its shores. The atrocities committed by the Spanish
Conquistadors are legendary. Indians were savagely
murdered in order to force them to adopt the Roman Catholic religion. Many of these atrocities are
well documented in the book by Salim Japas, Heresy,
Columbus and the Inquisition.
“One of the most infamous acts in the history of
Roman Catholicism was the St. Bartholomew Massacre. It took place on August 24, 1572 with the gleeful
approval of Pope Gregory XIII and the priesthood.
Ellen White calls this the ‘blackest in the black catalog
of crime, most horrible among the fiendish deeds of all
the dreadful centuries’ (The Great Controversy, p.
272). …In the course of two months, over 70,000 men,
women and children perished. …A medal was struck
to commemorate the massacre. On one side of the
medal was the face of Gregory XIII and on the other is
the image of the destroying angel. (For more on this
savage event, read, The Great Controversy, pp. 272-

221

GEMS FROM DANIEL
273).

lishing an earthly kingdom by employing force. The
kingdom could only be established by implanting the
Holy Spirit in the heart of His disciples.
“It is a sobering fact that the trial and crucifixion of Jesus followed the same pattern as was later
used by the Holy Office of the Inquisition. Notice
the following points: 1) Jesus was arrested because He
refused to accept the traditions and authority of the
apostate church of His day, 2) Jesus was interrogated
[inquisitioned?] by the religious power in a devious
manner. 3) Though no fault was found in Him, He was
delivered to the secular power of Rome to be killed.
“This is the precise method which was used by
the Inquisition. Those who did not agree with the hierarchy of the church and refused to accept tradition
above Scripture, were brought before the inquisitor and
grilled mercilessly. Then they were delivered to the
civil power to be punished (later in this study we will
review some of the specific methods which were used
by the Inquisition). It is significant that Satan offered
Jesus the kingdoms of this world and Jesus refused
them. But Satan offered the Bishop of Rome these
same kingdoms and he accepted them. This makes the
Bishop of Rome the vice-regent of Satan. If Jesus had
accepted, he would have become the vice-regent of
Satan.
“When the mob came to arrest Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, Peter took out a sword and tried to
defend the cause of Jesus by force. The words of Jesus
are very telling: ‘Put up again thy sword into his place:
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the
sword’ (Matthew 26:51-52).
“In Luke 9:51-56 we are told the story of James
and John who wanted to incinerate those who lived in
certain Samaritan villages because they refused to accept Jesus. The words of Jesus to the ‘sons of thunder’
are very telling: ‘Ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of, for the Son of Man is not come to destroy
men’s lives, but to save them.’ Clearly Jesus refused to
employ force to advance the cause of His kingdom.
“The prophecies of Daniel and Revelation clearly
reveal that God’s people are always the persecuted
not the persecutors.” Bohr, ND7, 29,30.

“How could one forget the Piedmont Massacre
of the year 1655? On January 25 of this year, the
Duke of Savoy gave an edict that the Waldenses must
convert to the Catholic faith or leave the valleys and
have their properties confiscated within a few days. If
they did not leave, they were subject to a death decree.
The edict was proclaimed in the middle of the winter.
On April seventeenth, 15,000 soldiers invaded the valleys of the Piedmont. Thousands of Waldenses were
murdered, tortured and enslaved. Hundreds who
were able to escape to the most rugged areas of the
mountains were caught and thrown off the jagged
cliff of Mount Catelluzo near Torre Pellice.’ Salim
Japas, Herejia, Colon y la Inquisicion (Siloam Springs,
Arkansas: Creation Enterprises, 1992), pp. 62-63.”
Bohr, ND7, 32-40.
Catholic vs. Bible Position on the Use of Force.—
“Roman Catholic authors frequently employ two
passages to defend the view that it has a right to use the
sword to preserve the integrity of the faith: Matthew
10:34-37 and Matthew 16:16-18. In the first passage
Jesus says He has not ‘come to bring peace but a
sword’. Many Catholic authors employ this to justify
their church’s use of the sword to punish dissenters.
But a careful reading of this text shows that the sword
is not used by believers against unbelievers but rather
by unbelievers against believers. The keys in the second passage are interpreted as the right to exercise
spiritual power and temporal power. In other words,
the church not only has the right to rule in spiritual
matters but also in civil affairs. According to Roman
Catholic theology, this gives the church the right to
employ the civil power to punish those who dissent
from its theology and practice.
“A close examination of the Bible indicates that
Jesus intended the civil and religious powers to be separate. God is not a God of coercion but of persuasion. God does not violate the conscience of man.
This means that God gives every man the right to believe according to the dictates of his own conscience
when matters of religion are in play. In this realm, God
even gives man the right to be wrong!! A few biblical
texts will suffice to prove the above view:
“Matthew 22:21 unequivocally states that we are
to render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s and unto
God that which belongs to God. A close examination
of the text in the light of the totality of Scripture indicates that the realm of Caesar is in civil matters (the
second table of the Ten Commandments) and the realm
of God is in spiritual matters (the first table of the Ten
Commandments).
“When Jesus was dragged before Pilate He was
asked if He was a king. Jesus assured Pilate that His
kingdom was not of this world (John 19:36). He
even told Pilate that if His kingdom were of this world,
His disciples would fight to deliver Him from the Jews.
This clearly shows that Jesus had no intention of estab-

Little Horn Thinks.—
“‘The pope is of such great authority and power that he can modify, explain, or interpret even
divine laws. The pope can modify divine law, since
his power is not of man, but of God, and he acts as
vicegerent of God upon the earth with most ample
power of binding and losing his sheep.’ Ecclesiastical
Dictionary (Catholic), by Ferraris, art. ‘Pope.’
“ ‘For he can dispense with the law, he can
turn injustice into justice by correcting and changing
the law, and he has the fullness of power.’—decretals
of Gregory, book 1, title 7, ch. 3.” Bunch, BOD, 105.
“It should be noted that, to the Papacy, the law
is not binding! It can be—according to them—

222

DANIEL 7
changed by the Pope: hence Sunday worship. To the
Papacy, Jesus’ crucifixion was not substitutionary, but
was a ‘sacrifice’—as in a Heathen ‘appeasement sacrifice.’ From this horrid misconception comes the notion of ‘doing penance;’ of ‘self-flagellation;’ ‘vows of
silence;’ ‘pilgrimages;’ the continual ‘sacrifice of the
mass’ and other rites of ‘appeasement’ as practiced in
Romanism.
“Furthermore, by “repudiating the teaching that
Jesus died as man’s Substitute upon the cross” the
Papacy “consequently... ignored the exalted place given to the Decalogue [including the fourth commandment] by the crucifixion of Christ.” Mellor, FDOT
manuscript, “History of Trinitarianism.”

power, namely, the laws of the Most High. And has
the papacy attempted this?—Yes, even this.
“It has added the second commandment of the
Decalogue to the first, making them one, and divided the tenth into two, making the ninth forbid the
coveting of a neighbor’s wife, and the tenth that of a
neighbor’s property—thus making up the full number ten. While the full wording of the second commandment is retained in the Roman Catholic Bible and
in the Roman Catechism authorized by the Council of
Trent, painstaking explanation is made that in the case
of images and likenesses of any kind except that of
God Himself, their making and use are not forbidden
by the commandment when employed only to venerate
the virtues of the saints and not to worship them as
gods, which latter is expressly forbidden in the commandment. The same principle is applied also to ashes,
bones, and other relics of saints, and to representations
of angels.
“As to the fourth commandment, numbered as the
third in their arrangement, the catechism of highest
authority in the Roman Catholic Church retains the
commandment entire, and urges punctilious observance
of the Sabbath in the personal life and in public worship as a sacred privilege and duty. Nevertheless the
position is taken that the particular day on which the
Sabbath is to be observed, was connected with the ceremonial ordinances of the Jews, and was with them
done away in Christ. Reasons are then given why the
Sabbath should be observed on the first day of the
week commonly called Sunday.
“In support of the foregoing brief statement on
the changing of ‘times and laws’ by the papacy, we
draw evidence from the catechism of highest authority
in the Roman Catholic Church, cited hereafter. According to The Catholic Encyclopedia, ‘the authority of
this catechism is higher than that of any other, but is, or
course not on a level with that of the canons and decrees of a council.’ [Catholic Encyclopedia, art. "Doctrine, Christian," Vol. V, p. 79.]
“Before making quotations, it should be first stated that in the polity of the Roman Catholic Church, the
canons and decrees of an ecumenical church council
are both official and supreme. Outstanding among such
ecumenical church councils is the Council of Trent,
held at Trent, Italy, from 1545 to 1563. Since that
council, called to counteract the spreading influence of
the Protestant Reformation, dealt so widely with the
doctrines and usages of the church, it officially decreed
the following: ‘The holy synod commands all bishops... [to explain the sacraments] according to the form
to be prescribed by the holy synod for all the sacraments in a catechism, which bishops will take care to
have faithfully translated into the vulgar tongue, and
expounded to the people by the parish priests.’ [J. Donovan, quoting from “council of Trent, Sess. xxiv, c.
vii, on Reformation,” Catechism of the Council of
Trent, p.4.]

Times.—
“The Aramaic word for ‘times’ is zimmin, the plural form of man. When used in the singular, this
word refers to a point in time, but as a plural, it refers
to repeated points in time. These repeated points in
time are connected in the very same Bible verse with
God’s law.
“What law is this?
“God has given various laws in the Old Testament, but the law of God par excellence is the law of
the Ten Commandments (see Exodus 34:28; Deuteronomy 4:13; 10:4). The only provision regarding time
in this most special law of God appears in the fourth
commandment which deals with the Sabbath, the
seventh day (See Exodus 20:8-11).” Shea, DARG,
120.
Times and Laws.—
“The juxtaposition of ‘times’ and ‘law’ in this
verse (v 25) represents a case of hendiadys, a grammatical construction in which two coordinate words connected by ‘and’ express a single idea, and in which one
of the terms defines the other.
“It is in regard to the law that the little horn will
attempt to change times. Since, according to our poetic
analysis, this is the law of the Most High, and since the
Ten Commandments are the highest expression of His
law, and since the fourth precept of that moral code is
the particular one that has to do with time, an attempt
by the little horn to tamper with the sabbath would
fulfill that aspect of its work described here.” Shea,
SSPI, 112.
Little Horn Thinks to Change Times and Laws.—
“What laws and whose? Not the laws of other
earthly governments; for it was nothing marvelous or
strange for one power to change the laws of another,
whenever it could bring such power under its dominion. Not human laws of any kind; for the little horn
had power to change these so far as its jurisdiction extended; but the times and laws in question were such as
this power should only think to change, but not be able
to change. They are the laws of the same Being to
whom the saints belong who are worn out by this

223

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“In pursuance of this command, a catechism was
composed in Latin for the Roman Catholic Church by
St. Charles Borromeo and other theologians, in 1566,
and published in Rome by the Vatican Congregation
for Propagation of the Faith…. From the fifth edition
of this Roman Catechism published in Rome in 1796,
we quote the following from Donovan’s English Translation, in regard to the fourth (Catholic third) commandment:
“ ‘It pleased the church of God, that the religious
celebration of the Sabbath day should be transferred to
the Lord’s day [meaning Sunday]; for as on that day
light first shone on the world; so by the resurrection of
our Redeemer on that day, who opened to us the gate to
life eternal, our life was recalled out of darkness into
light; whence also the Apostles would have it named
“the Lord’s day.” We also observe in the Sacred Scriptures that this day was held sacred because on that day
the creations of the world commenced, and the Holy
Ghost was given to the apostles.’ [Catechism of the
Council of Trent, p. 347.]
“Here is the declaration of the papacy that the
Roman Catholic Church changed the time for observing the Sabbath from the seventh day according
to the Decalogue to the first day of the week, which
it here erroneously calls ‘the Lord’s day.’ [See comment on Rev. 1:10.] It will be observed that the apostles are here charged with making the change from seventh day to the first, but without any proof whatsoever
from the Scriptures, because there is no such proof.
All the reasons for the change given in this declaration,
are purely of human and ecclesiastical invention.
“The foregoing testimony is sufficient to show
how the papacy has thought to change times and laws.
…Later Roman Catholic catechisms for instruction of
‘the faithful’ come out boldly in declaring that the
church changed the day, and even taunt Protestants
with acceptance and observance of the change…
“The reader needs only to be reminded that the
ten-commandment law was written with God’s finger
on tables of stone, while the ceremonial laws were
written by Moses in a book. More than this, the Decalogue was written by Moses in a book. More than this,
the Decalogue was written before the ceremonial laws
were given to Moses. Shall we charge God with mixing in one ceremonial command with the nine of the
moral law, and leave it to a presumptuous ecclesiastical
body to make the correction? The reason also for the
observance of the seventh-day Sabbath, as given in the
commandment itself, is that the Creator Himself rested
on that day, and set it apart as a memorial of His work
of creation, but with no intimation whatever of its being ‘a shadow of things to come’ in Christ, to whom all
ceremonial ordinances pointed forward.
“One more quotation from the Roman Catechism
is worth noticing:
“ ‘The Apostles, therefore, resolved to consecrate
the first day of the seven to divine worship, which they
called “the Lord’s day;” for St. John, in his Apoca-

lypse, makes mention of “the Lord’s day” (Apocalypse
i,10); and the Apostle orders collections to made ‘on
the first day of the week’ (1 Corinthians xvi,2), which
is, as St. Chrysostom interprets, the Lord’s day; to give
us to understand, that even the Lord’s day was kept
holy in the church.’ [Ibid., pp. 343,344.]
“In addition to falsely charging the apostles with
changing the day of the Sabbath, it is here represented
that the business reckoning of one’s accounts on the
first day of the week is a reason for its observance as
the Sabbath contrary to God’s unchangeable law.
“This quotation also reveals the fact that the practices and interpretations of the Fathers, such as ‘St.
Chrysostom,’ here mentioned, are relied on rather than
the Scriptures themselves for proof that the Sabbath of
God's law was changed to Sunday.
“One more observation is appropriate here, especially for Protestant clergy and laymen to consider. In
this Roman Catechism, composed by order of Pope
Pius V about the middle of the sixteenth century, is
contained virtually every argument used by Protestants
in our day to support the change of the Sabbath from
the seventh to the first day of the week. Note these:
“ ‘They assume without proof that the seventhday Sabbath was part of the ceremonial law (though
embodied in the very heart of the moral law written by
the finger of God), and therefore done away in Christ.’
“ ‘They boldly claim that the apostles ordained
that the first day of the week be observed in place of
the seventh, citing John’s use of the term “Lord’s day”
in Revelation 1:10, despite the fact that the only day
God ever set apart as holy and claimed as His own by
resting on it Himself was the seventh day of the fourth
commandment.’
“ ‘They claim that the Sabbath law of rest “agrees
with the law of nature” requiring cessation of labor and
a period for meditation and worship, but assert that the
time of its observance is “susceptible of change,” since,
according to their argument, it does not “belong to the
moral but ceremonial law,” and was therefore changed
by the apostles, by the Fathers, and by the church to the
first day of the week.
“The arguments they use for such change are that
light first shone on the world on the first day of the
week, the resurrection of Christ took place on that day,
the Holy Spirit descended on the apostles on the same
day of the week, Paul admonished Christians to reckon
their business accounts and lay aside a portion for the
Lord on the first day of the week—all of human invention and without Scriptural authority as reasons for
such a change. The only reasons given by the Creator
and Lord of the Sabbath, are that He created the world
in six days, rested on the seventh, and set apart that day
for holy use on the same permanent and unalterable
basis as He created all other things on the other days of
creation week.
“Protestants may not be aware that in defense of
the Sunday sabbath they are using the Roman Catholic
arguments contained in the Catechism of the Council of

224

DANIEL 7
Trent published in the sixteenth century, but every one
of them mentioned above is found in that work. Our
appeal to every Protestant is to break away fully from
the papacy, and hold to the Bible and the Bible only in
his belief and practice.” Smith, DR, 135-143.

ing the sanctification of Sunday. The Scriptures enforce the religious observance of Saturday, a day
which we never sanctify.’ Cardinal Gibbons (for
many years head of the Catholic Church in America).
The Faith of Our Fathers.
“2—‘Nowhere in the Bible do we find that Christ
or the Apostles ordered that the Sabbath be changed
from Saturday to Sunday. We have the commandment
of God given to Moses to keep holy the Sabbath Day,
that is the 7th day of the week, Saturday. Today most
Christians keep Sunday because it has been revealed to
us by the (Catholic) Church outside the Bible.’ ‘To
Tell You the Truth,’ The Catholic Virginian, 22 (October 3, 1947), 9.’”
“3—‘Q: Have you any other way of proving that
the (Catholic) Church has power to institute festivals of
precept?
“ ‘A: Had she not such power, she could not have
done that in which all modern religionists agree with
her; …she could not have substituted the observance of
Sunday the first day of the week, for the observance of
Saturday the seventh day, a change for which there is
no Scriptural authority.’ Stephen Keenan, A Doctrinal
Catechism.
“4—‘It was the Catholic Church which, by the
authority of Jesus Christ, has transferred this (Sabbath) rest to the Sunday in remembrance of the resurrection of our Lord. Thus the observance of Sunday by the Protestants is an homage they pay, in spite
of themselves, to the authority of the (Catholic)
Church,’ Louis Gaston de Segur, Plain Talk About the
Protestantism of Today, p. 225.
“5—‘The (Catholic) Church changed the observance of the Sabbath to Sunday by right of the divine, infallible authority given to her by her Founder,
Jesus Christ. The Protestant, claiming the Bible to be
the only guide of faith, has no warrant for observing
Sunday. In this matter the Seventh-day Adventist is
the only consistent Protestant.’ ‘The Question Box,’
The Catholic Universe Bulletin, 69 (August 14, 1942),
4.” Burnside, DPUF, 120-122.

“With regard to God, the little horn does not confine itself to presumptuous words against the Most
High (vs. 8), it also wants ‘to change times and law.’
In Daniel’s language, this implies an attempt at
usurping God, for to Daniel, only God can change
the times (cf. Daniel 2:21). Actually the Bible explains the prerogative of God on the basis that, as the
Creator, He is the only one who can control time (cf.
Jer. 31:35; cf. Gen. 1:4, 14). By saying that the little
horn would change times and law, Daniel may well
then point to the law, which is, through the memory of
Creation it conveys, the very sign of God’s control on
time, through the law of the Sabbath (Ex. 20:8-11).
Moreover, the association ‘time-law’ is also significant
in this connection since it alludes to the Sabbath, a
law which brings a dimension of time into the life of
worship.” Doukhan, DVE, 20.
“There is one regular, repeated, appointed, and
fixed time (the meaning of the Aramaic word zimnin
used in Daniel 7:25c) that belongs to the Most High,
upon which this power has had a major hand in attempting to change. That attempt has had to do with the
transfer of the obligation of the fourth commandment from the seventh day of the week to the first.”
BRI, 2SOD, 181.
“The Church made a sacred day of Sunday, partly
because it was the day of the resurrection, but largely
because it was the weekly festival of the sun; for it was
a definite Christian policy to take over the pagan
festivals endeared to the people by tradition, and to
give them a Christian significance. But, as a solar
festival, Sunday was the sacred day of Mithra; and it is
interesting to notice that since Mithra was addressed
as Dominus, “Lord,” Sunday must have been “the
Lord’s Day” long before Christian times.’ Arthur
Weigall, The Paganism in Our Christianity, 145.”
Thiele, OSID, 69.

“Around the year 1400 Petrus de Ancharano
made the claim that ‘the pope can modify divine law,
since his power is not of man, but of God, and he
acts in the place of God upon earth, with the fullest
power of binding and loosing his sheep.’
“This astonishing assertion came to practical
fruitage during the Reformation. Luther claimed that
his conscience was captive only to Holy Scripture.
Sola Scriptura was his slogan, ‘The Bible and the Bible
only.’ No churchly tradition would be allowed to
guide his life.
“But one day it occurred to Johann Eck and to
other Catholic churchmen to taunt Luther on his
observance of Sunday in place of the Bible Sabbath.
Said Eck, ‘Scripture teaches: “Remember to hallow the
Sabbath day; six days shall you labor and do all your
work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath day of the

“The Catholic Church for over one thousand
years before the existence of a Protestant, by virtue of
her Divine mission, changed the day (or worship)
from Saturday to Sunday…. The Christian Sabbath
is therefore to this day the acknowledged offspring of
the Catholic Church, as Spouse of the Holy Ghost,
without a word of remonstrance from the
Protestant world.’ Editorial, The Catholic Mirror
(Baltimore), September 23, 1893.” Burnside, DPUF,
120.
“1—‘You may read the Bible from Genesis to
Revelation, and you will not find a single line authoriz-

225

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Lord your God,” etc. Yet,’ insisted Eck, ‘the church
has changed the Sabbath into Sunday on its own authority, on which you [Luther] have no Scripture.’
“At the Council of Trent (1545-1563), convened
by the pope to stanch the onrush of Protestantism, Gaspare de Posso, the archbishop of Reggio, in an address
of January 18, 1562, brought the issue up again. ‘The
authority of the church,’ said he, ‘is illustrated most
clearly by the Scriptures; for while on the one hand
she [the church] recommends them, declares them to be
divine, [and] offers them to us to be read, …on the
other hand, the legal precepts in the Scriptures taught
by the Lord have ceased by virtue of the same authority
[the church]. The Sabbath, the most glorious day in
the law, has been changed into the Lord’s day….
These and other similar matters have not ceased by
virtue of Christ’s teaching (for He says He has come
to fulfill the law, not to destroy it), but they have
been changed by the authority of the church.’
“This challenge to Protestantism has not been
forgotten. In the 1957 printing of Peter Geiermann’s
The Convert’s Catechism of Catholic Doctrine, converts to the Catholic Church are taught this series of
questions and answers:
“ ‘Q. Which is the Sabbath day?
“ ‘A. Saturday is the Sabbath day.
“ ‘Q. Why do we observe Sunday instead of Saturday?
“ ‘A. We observe Sunday instead of Saturday
because the Catholic Church transferred the solemnity from Saturday to Sunday.’ p.50.
“…The first religious Sunday law in Western Europe did come from the Catholics. …It insisted that on
Sunday …agricultural labor ought to be laid aside, in
order that people may not be prevented from attending
church.’ This significant regulation is known as the
28th canon (or church law) of the Third Council of
Orleans, France. This Third Council of Orleans met
in 538, the same year that the power of the Ostrogoths was broken and the 1260-year prophecy began.” Maxwell, 1GC, 129,130.

urday because the Catholic Church, in the Council of
Laodicea (AD 364), transferred the solemnity from
Saturday to Sunday.’ [The Convert’s Catechism of
Catholic Doctrine, third ed., p. 50.]” Rafferty, PI, 70.
“Listen to John A. O’Brien, professor of theology
at the University of Notre Dame from the 1940‘s to the
1960’s on this point:
“ ‘The Bible does not contain all the teaching of
the Christian religion, nor does it formulate all the duties of its members. Take, for example, the matter of
Sunday observance, the attendance at divine services
and the abstention from unnecessary servile work on
that day, a matter upon which our Protestant neighbors
have for many years laid great emphasis. Let me address myself in a friendly spirit to my dear nonCatholic reader.
“You believe that the Bible alone is a safe guide
in religious matters. You also believe that one of the
fundamental duties enjoined upon you by your Christian faith is that of Sunday observance. But where does
the Bible speak of such an obligation? I have read the
Bible from the first verse of Genesis to the last verse
of Revelations, [sic] and have found no reference to
the duty of sanctifying the Sunday. The day mentioned in the Bible is not the Sunday, the first day of
the week, but the Saturday, the last day of the week..
(O’Brien, 138,139).
“…But since Saturday, not Sunday, is specified
in the Bible, isn’t it curious that non-Catholics who
profess to take their religion directly from the Bible
and not from the Church, observe Sunday instead of
Saturday? Yes, of course, it is inconsistent…. That
observance remains as a reminder of the Mother
Church from which the non-Catholic sects broke
away—like a boy running away from home but still
carrying in his pocket a picture of his mother or a lock
of her hair (O’Brien, 406-408).”
Shea, DARG,
121,122..
“Satan well knew that the Holy Scriptures would
enable men to discern his deceptions and withstand his
power. It was by the word that even the Saviour of the
world had resisted his attacks. At every assault, Christ
presented the shield of eternal truth, saying, ‘It is written.’ To every suggestion of the adversary, He opposed the wisdom and power of the word. In order for
Satan to maintain his sway over men, and establish the
authority of the papal usurper, he must keep them in
ignorance of the Scriptures. The Bible would exalt
God and place finite men in their true position; therefore its sacred truths must be concealed and suppressed. This logic was adopted by the Roman Church.
For hundreds of years the circulation of the Bible
was prohibited. The people were forbidden to read
it or to have it in their houses, and unprincipled
priests and prelates interpreted its teachings to sustain their pretensions. Thus the pope came to be almost universally acknowledged as the vicegerent of

“The following quotations are taken from Catholic catechisms on church doctrine.
“ ‘Question—Have you any other way of proving
that the church (Roman Catholic) has power to institute
festivals of precept?
“ ‘Answer—Had she not such power, she could
not have done that in which all modern religionists
agree with her—she could not have substituted the
observance of Sunday, the first day of the week, for
the observance of Saturday, the seventh-day, a
change for which there is not scriptural authority.’
[A Doctrinal Catechism, by Stephen Deenan, p. 174.]
“Question—Which is the Sabbath day?
“ ‘Answer—Saturday is the Sabbath day.
“ ‘Question—Why do we observe Sunday instead
of Saturday?
“ ‘Answer—We observe Sunday instead of Sat-

226

DANIEL 7
God on earth, endowed with authority over church and
state.
“The detector of error having been removed, Satan worked according to his will. Prophecy had declared that the papacy was to ‘think to change times
and laws.’ Daniel 7:25. This work it was not slow to
attempt. To afford converts from heathenism a
substitute for the worship of idols, and thus to promote their nominal acceptance of Christianity, the
adoration of images and relics was gradually introduced into the Christian worship. The decree of a
general council finally established this system of idolatry. To complete the sacrilegious work, Rome presumed to expunge from the law of God the second
commandment, forbidding image worship, and to divide the tenth commandment, in order to preserve the
number.
“The spirit of concession to paganism opened the
way for a still further disregard of Heaven’s authority.
Satan, working through unconsecrated leaders of the
church, tampered with the fourth commandment also,
and essayed to set aside the ancient Sabbath, the day
which God had blessed and sanctified (Genesis 2:2, 3),
and in its stead to exalt the festival observed by the
heathen as ‘the venerable day of the sun.’ This change
was not at first attempted openly. In the first centuries
the true Sabbath had been kept by all Christians. They
were jealous for the honor of God, and, believing that
His law is immutable, they zealously guarded the sacredness of its precepts. But with great subtlety Satan
worked through his agents to bring about his object.
That the attention of the people might be called to the
Sunday, it was made a festival in honor of the resurrection of Christ. Religious services were held upon it;
yet it was regarded as a day of recreation, the Sabbath
being still sacredly observed.
“To prepare the way for the work which he designed to accomplish, Satan had led the Jews, before
the advent of Christ, to load down the Sabbath with the
most rigorous exactions, making its observance a burden. Now, taking advantage of the false light in which
he had thus caused it to be regarded, he cast contempt
upon it as a Jewish institution. While Christians generally continued to observe the Sunday as a joyous festival, he led them, in order to show their hatred of Judaism, to make the Sabbath a fast, a day of sadness and
gloom.
“In the early part of the fourth century the emperor Constantine issued a decree making Sunday a public
festival throughout the Roman Empire. The day of the
sun was reverenced by his pagan subjects and was
honored by Christians; it was the emperor’s policy to
unite the conflicting interests of heathenism and Christianity. He was urged to do this by the bishops of the
church, who, inspired by ambition and thirst for power,
perceived that if the same day was observed by both
Christians and heathen, it would promote the nominal
acceptance of Christianity by pagans and thus advance
the power and glory of the church. But while many

God-fearing Christians were gradually led to regard
Sunday as possessing a degree of sacredness, they still
held the true Sabbath as the holy of the Lord and observed it in obedience to the fourth commandment.
“The arch-deceiver had not completed his work.
He was resolved to gather the Christian world under his
banner and to exercise his power through his vicegerent, the proud pontiff who claimed to be the representative of Christ. Through half-converted pagans,
ambitious prelates, and world-loving churchmen he
accomplished his purpose. Vast councils were held
from time to time, in which the dignitaries of the
church were convened from all the world. In nearly
every council the Sabbath which God had instituted
was pressed down a little lower, while the Sunday
was correspondingly exalted. Thus the pagan festival came finally to be honored as a divine institution, while the Bible Sabbath was pronounced a
relic of Judaism, and its observers were declared to
be accursed.
“The great apostate had succeeded in exalting
himself ‘above all that is called God, or that is worshiped.’ 2 Thessalonians 2:4. He had dared to change
the only precept of the divine law that unmistakably
points all mankind to the true and living God. In
the fourth commandment, God is revealed as the Creator of the heavens and the earth, and is thereby distinguished from all false gods. It was as a memorial of
the work of creation that the seventh day was sanctified
as a rest day for man. It was designed to keep the living God ever before the minds of men as the source of
being and the object of reverence and worship. Satan
strives to turn men from their allegiance to God, and
from rendering obedience to His law; therefore he directs his efforts especially against that commandment
which points to God as the Creator.
“Protestants now urge that the resurrection of
Christ on Sunday made it the Christian Sabbath. But
Scripture evidence is lacking. No such honor was given to the day by Christ or His apostles. The observance of Sunday as a Christian institution had its
origin in that ‘mystery of lawlessness’ (2 Thessalonians
2:7, R.V.) which, even in Paul’s day, had begun its
work. Where and when did the Lord adopt this child of
the papacy? What valid reason can be given for a
change which the Scriptures do not sanction?” Great
Controversy, 51-55.
“Among the leading causes that had led to the
separation of the true church from Rome was the hatred
of the latter toward the Bible Sabbath. As foretold by
prophecy, the papal power cast down the truth to the
ground. The law of God was trampled in the dust,
while the traditions and customs of men were exalted.
The churches that were under the rule of the papacy were early compelled to honor the Sunday as a
holy day. Amid the prevailing error and superstition,
many, even of the true people of God, became so bewildered that while they observed the Sabbath, they

227

GEMS FROM DANIEL
refrained from labor also on the Sunday. But this did
not satisfy the papal leaders. They demanded not only
that Sunday be hallowed, but that the Sabbath be profaned; and they denounced in the strongest language
those who dared to show it honor. It was only by fleeing from the power of Rome that any could obey God’s
law in peace.” Great Controversy, 65.

can be perfectly obeyed. Satan’s charges were refuted.
God had given man unmistakable evidence of His love.
“Another deception was now to be brought forward. Satan declared that mercy destroyed justice, that
the death of Christ abrogated the Father’s law. Had it
been possible for the law to be changed or abrogated, then Christ need not have died. But to abrogate
the law would be to immortalize transgression, and
place the world under Satan’s control. It was because
the law was changeless, because man could be saved
only through obedience to its precepts, that Jesus
was lifted up on the cross. Yet the very means by
which Christ established the law Satan represented as
destroying it. Here will come the last conflict of the
great controversy between Christ and Satan.
“That the law which was spoken by God’s own
voice is faulty, that some specification has been set
aside, is the claim which Satan now puts forward. It is
the last great deception that he will bring upon the
world. He needs not to assail the whole law; if he can
lead men to disregard one precept, his purpose is
gained. For ‘whosoever shall keep the whole law, and
yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.’ James 2:10.
By consenting to break one precept, men are brought
under Satan’s power. By substituting human law for
God’s law, Satan will seek to control the world.
This work is foretold in prophecy. Of the great apostate power which is the representative of Satan, it is
declared, ‘He shall speak great words against the Most
High, and shall wear out the saints of the Most High,
and think to change times and laws: and they shall be
given into his hand.’ Daniel 7:25.
“Men will surely set up their laws to counterwork
the laws of God. They will seek to compel the consciences of others, and in their zeal to enforce these
laws they will oppress their fellow men.
“The warfare against God’s law, which was begun in heaven, will be continued until the end of time.
Every man will be tested. Obedience or disobedience
is the question to be decided by the whole world. All
will be called to choose between the law of God and
the laws of men. Here the dividing line will be
drawn. There will be but two classes. Every character will be fully developed; and all will show
whether they have chosen the side of loyalty or that
of rebellion.” Desire of Ages, 762,763.

“The special characteristic of the beast, and therefore of his image, is the breaking of God’s commandments. Says Daniel, of the little horn, the papacy:
‘He shall think to change times and the law.’ Daniel
7:25, R.V. And Paul styled the same power the ‘man of
sin,’ who was to exalt himself above God. One prophecy is a complement of the other. Only by changing
God’s law could the papacy exalt itself above God;
whoever should understandingly keep the law as thus
changed would be giving supreme honor to that
power by which the change was made. Such an act
of obedience to papal laws would be a mark of allegiance to the pope in the place of God.
“The papacy has attempted to change the law of
God. The second commandment, forbidding image
worship, has been dropped from the law, and the fourth
commandment has been so changed as to authorize the
observance of the first instead of the seventh day as the
Sabbath. But papists urge, as a reason for omitting the
second commandment, that it is unnecessary, being
included in the first, and that they are giving the law
exactly as God designed it to be understood. This cannot be the change foretold by the prophet. An intentional, deliberate change is presented: ‘He shall think
to change the times and the law.’ The change in the
fourth commandment exactly fulfills the prophecy. For
this the only authority claimed is that of the church.
Here the papal power openly sets itself above God.
“While the worshipers of God will be especially
distinguished by their regard for the fourth commandment—since this is the sign of His creative
power and the witness to His claim upon man’s reverence and homage—the worshipers of the beast
will be distinguished by their efforts to tear down
the Creator’s memorial, to exalt the institution of
Rome. It was in behalf of the Sunday that popery first
asserted its arrogant claims; and its first resort to the
power of the state was to compel the observance of
Sunday as ‘the Lord’s day.’ But the Bible points to the
seventh day, and not to the first, as the Lord’s day.
Said Christ: ‘The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath.’ The fourth commandment declares: ‘The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord.’ And by the
prophet Isaiah the Lord designates it: ‘My holy day.’
Mark 2:28; Isaiah 58:13.”
Great Controversy,
446.447.

“Roman Catholics acknowledge that the
change in the Sabbath was made by their church,
and they cite this very change as evidence of the
supreme authority of this church. They declare that
by observing the first day of the week as the Sabbath,
Protestants are recognizing her power to legislate in
divine things. The Roman Church has not relinquished her claim to infallibility, and when the
world and the Protestant churches accept the spurious sabbath of her creating, they virtually
acknowledge her claim. They may cite the authority of
the apostles and fathers in defense of this change, but

“By His life and His death, Christ proved that
God’s justice did not destroy His mercy, but that sin
could be forgiven, and that the law is righteous, and

228

DANIEL 7
the fallacy of their reasoning is easily discerned. The
papist is sharp enough to see that Protestants are deceiving themselves, willingly closing their eyes to the
facts in the case. As the Sunday institution gains
favor, he rejoices, feeling assured that it will eventually bring the whole Protestant world under the
banner of Rome.” Signs, 11/1/1899.

with the Jewish Sabbath, the observance of the Christian Sunday began with sundown on Saturday and lasted till the same time on Sunday…. The method of
reckoning Sunday from sunset to sunset continued in
some places down to the 17th century, but in general
since the Middle Ages, the reckoning from midnight
to midnight has been followed.” Burnside, DPUF,
123,124.

Melanchthon’s Testimony.—
“Philipp Melanchthon, the close colleague of
Martin Luther, seems to have been the first to directly
connect the change of the Law in Daniel 7:25 with the
work of the Papacy:
“‘He changeth the times and laws that any of the
six work days commanded of God will make them unholy and idle days when he list, or of their own holy
days abolished make work days again, or when they
changed the Saturday into Sunday…. They have
changed God’s laws and turned them into their own
traditions to be... kept above God’s precepts.’
Quoted by George Joye, in Exposition of Daniel the
Prophet, 1545, p. 110.” Bohr, ND7, 65.

“The Papacy would do as it had seen the father, Pagan Rome, do. Julius Caesar made the first
calendar. Pope Gregory would change it and make the
calendar we use today. Julius Caesar and Augustus
Caesar named time after themselves—July and August.
This the Pope has not yet done. Though they have control of the month of December. ” Unknown Source.
“For the little horn to endeavor to change times
would indicate a deliberate attempt to exercise the
prerogative of God in shaping the course of human
history.” 4SDABC, 831.
“The times are in God’s hands—the times of our
lives, the time we are to worship Him, and the time
when future events shall occur. For the little horn to
attempt to change any of these times (7:25) is but another of its deliberate attempts to act as if it were
God.” Ferrell, BD, 37.

Baptist Testimony.—
“Some years ago Dr. Edward T. Hiscox, a Baptist
scholar and theologian who authored The Baptist Manual, addressed a large group of ministers in New York
on this question. Concerning Sunday as a day of worship he said, ‘What a pity that it comes branded with
the mark of paganism, christened with the name of
the sun god when adopted and sanctioned by the papal
apostasy, and bequeathed as a sacred legacy to Protestantism.’” Anderson, UDP, 94.

They Shall Be Given Into His Hand.—
“Daniel 7 describes how the Papacy broke into
God’s spiritual temple and altered the center of the Ten
Commandments-the Sabbath Commandment.” Were,
KONAJ, 46.

God’s People Defend the Original Times & Law.—
“Let not the commandment-keeping people of
God be silent at this time, as though we gracefully accepted the situation. There is the prospect before us
of waging a continuous war, at the risk of imprisonment, of losing property and even life itself, to defend
the law of God, which is being made void by the
laws of men.” R&H, 1/1/1889.

“The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her power
increased, the darkness deepened. Faith was transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope
of Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God for
forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the people
looked to the pope, and to the priests and prelates to
whom he delegated authority. They were taught that
the pope was their earthly mediator and that none
could approach God except through him; and, further, that he stood in the place of God to them and
was therefore to be implicitly obeyed. A deviation
from his requirements was sufficient cause for the severest punishment to be visited upon the bodies and
souls of the offenders. Thus the minds of the people
were turned away from God to fallible, erring, and
cruel men, nay, more, to the prince of darkness
himself, who exercised his power through them. Sin
was disguised in a garb of sanctity. When the Scriptures are suppressed, and man comes to regard himself
as supreme, we need look only for fraud, deception,
and debasing iniquity. With the elevation of human
laws and traditions was manifest the corruption that
ever results from setting aside the law of God.

Papacy Changes the Very Reckoning of Time.—
“The Papacy not only changed the Sabbath from
the seventh to the first day of the week, but it also
changed the very reckoning of time.
“Lev. 12:32: ‘From even unto even, shall ye
celebrate your sabbath.
“Luke 23:54: ‘That day was the preparation, and
the Sabbath drew on.’ As they laid Christ’s body in the
tomb, the sun was setting, thus the Sabbath drew on.
The Bible reckoning of time was from ‘even to even,’
from sunset to sunset.
“Mark 1:32: ‘At even when the sun did set.’ As
some objected to Christ healing on the Sabbath, they
waited until sunset to bring the sick….
“(The Catholic Encyclopedia—published Robert
Appleton & Co., Vol.14, p.336, Article ‘Sunday’): ‘As

229

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Those were days of peril for the church of
Christ. The faithful standard-bearers were few indeed.
Though the truth was not left without witnesses, yet at
times it seemed that error and superstition would wholly prevail, and true religion would be banished from
the earth. The gospel was lost sight of, but the forms
of religion were multiplied, and the people were burdened with rigorous exactions.” Great Controversy,
55,56.

and a half of prophetic time? The principle given
us in the Bible is, that when a day is used in symbolic prophecy, it stands for a year. (Ezekiel 4: 6;
Numbers 14: 34.) Under the Hebrew word for day,
yom, Gesenius has this remark on its plural: ‘Sometimes [yamim] marks a definite space of time; viz., a
year; as also Syr. and Chald. [iddan] denotes both time
and year; and as in English several words signifying
time, weight, measure, are likewise used to denote certain specified times, weights, and measures.’
“Bible students have recognized this principle
through the ages. The following quotation reveal the
agreement of various authorities on this point. Joachim, abbot of Calabria, one of the great ecclesiastical
figures of the twelfth century, applied the year-day
principle to the 1260-year period. ‘The woman,
clothed with the sun, who signifies the church, remained hidden in the wilderness from the face of
the serpent, a day without doubt being accepted for
a year and a thousand two hundred and sixty days
for the same number of years.’ [Joachim of Floris,
Concordantia, book 2, chap. 16, p. 12b.]
“ ‘Three times and an half; that is, for 1260 solar
years, reckoning a time for a calendar year of 360 days,
and a day for a solar year. After which “the judgment
is to sit, and they shall take away his dominion,” not at
once, but by degrees, to consume and to destroy it unto
the end.’ [Sir Isaac Newton, Observations Upon the
Prophecies of Daniel, pp. 127, 128.]
“The Bible year, which must be used as the basis
of reckoning, contained three hundred and sixty days.
(See comments on Revelation 11: 3.) Three years and a
half contained twelve hundred and sixty days. As each
day stands for a year, we have twelve hundred and sixty years for the continuation of the supremacy of this
horn. Did the papacy possess dominion that length of
time? The answer again is, Yes. The edict of the emperor Justinian, dated AD 533, made the bishop of
Rome the head of all the churches. But this edict could
not go into effect until the Arian Ostrogoths, the last of
the three horns that were plucked up to make room for
the papacy, were driven from Rome; and this was not
accomplished, as already shown, until AD 538. The
edict would have been of no effect had this latter event
not been accomplished; hence from this latter year we
are to reckon, as this was the earliest point where the
saints were in reality in the hands of this power. From
this point did the papacy hold supremacy for twelve
hundred and sixty years? Exactly. For 538 + 1260 =
1798; and in the year 1798, Berthier, with a French
army, entered Rome, proclaimed a republic, took
the pope prisoner, and inflicted a deadly wound
upon the papacy. Though it has never since enjoyed
all the privileges and immunities which it possessed
before, we are seeing a gradual restoration of its former
strength.” Smith, DR, 143-145.

A Time.—
“ ‘Time’ means ‘year’—The Aramaic word,
translated as ‘time’ (7:25), is iddan ; it also occurs in
4:16,23, 25, 32, and 12:7. It is extremely significant
that those five verses clearly show that the word,
‘time,’ should be translated in 7:25 as ‘year,’ not as
‘time.’
“‘Times’ means ‘two years’— In some languages, including Aramaic, there is not only a singular
(one) and a plural (many), but there is also a dual
(two). ‘Times’ is from the dual of the Aramaic iddan
rather than from its plural. Thus ‘times’ should be
translated ‘two times’ instead of ‘times’ or ‘many
times.’ ‘Seven times’ in the Hebrew of 4:16 is ‘seven
years’ in the Septuagint.
‘Peleg’ means ‘half’— Not only is it the word
for ‘dividing’ (Gen 10:25), peleg is also the word for
‘half.’ So the last part of 7:25 should be translated ‘a
time, two times, and half a time.’” Ferrell, BD, 47.
“A 360-day prophetic year is not literal, but symbolic; hence its 360 days are prophetic, not literal,
days. But the year-day principle, as illustrated in
Numb. 14:24 and Eze, 4:6, a day in symbolic prophecy stands for a literal year. Thus a prophetic year, or
‘time,’ represents 360 literal, natural years, and similarly a period of 1260 or 2300 or any other number of
prophetic days means as many literal, actual years (that
is, full solar years as marked off by the season, which
are controlled by the sun).” 4SDABC, 833.
A Time and Times and the Dividing of Time.—
“The pronoun ‘they’ in the sentence containing
this phrase embraces the saints, the times, and the laws
just mentioned. How long a time were they to be given
into the hands of this power. A time, as we have seen
from Daniel 4: 23, is one year; two times, the least
that could be denoted by the plural, two years, and
the dividing of time, or half a time, half a year. The
word ‘dividing’ in the phrase ‘dividing of time’ is
translated from the Chaldee word, pelage, which Gesenius defines as ‘a half,’ and refers to Daniel 7: 25 as an
example. The Septuagint translates it ‘half.’ We thus
have three years and a half for the continuance of this
power….
“We must now consider that we are in the midst
of symbolic prophecy; hence in this measurement the
time is not literal, but symbolic. The inquiry then arises, How long a period is denoted by the three years

“The forty and two months are the same as the
‘time and times and the dividing of time,’ three

230

DANIEL 7
powers may determine.’” A.H. Lewis, A Critical History of Sunday Legislation, 64.
“The year was AD 538; all of the then known
world of Christendom was under a Sunday law.”
Heiks, TDSB, 118-121.

years and a half, or 1260 days, of Daniel 7—the time
during which the papal power was to oppress God’s
people. This period, as stated in preceding chapters,
began with the supremacy of the papacy, AD 538, and
terminated in 1798. At that time the pope was made
captive by the French army, the papal power received
its deadly wound, and the prediction was fulfilled, ‘He
that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity.’”
Great Controversy, 439.

“The 1260-year prophecy of Daniel 7:25 began in
AD 538 when the ‘supremacy of the papacy’ was manifested in the ecclesiastical canon mandating a change
from the fourth commandment, and the state, under
Justinian’s Corpus Juris Civilis, compelled mankind
to worship the papacy (the beast) by obeying the
altered law. Then ascended those blasphemous words
to heaven: ‘And he shall speak [by legislation] great
words against the most High.’ Dan. 7:25.” Heiks,
Source, 76.

“The horn was to carry on certain activities for a
special period of three and one-half prophetic times.
On the basis of Daniel 4:16, 25, 29,. 32, 34; 12:7, 1112; and Revelation 12:6,14, these three and one-half
times can be identified as prophetic-symbolic years.
The days of these years should then be interpreted according to the year-day principle. This yields a period
of 1260 historical years. Starting in 538, the period
extends to 1798. It was in the year 1798 that the
French army dealt what appeared to be a deadly wound
to the papacy by deposing the pope and breaking the
temporal powers of the church in Europe.” BRI,
2SOD, 180.

Letter of Pope Vigilius to Justinian, 540 AD.—
“The year was AD 538. The entire then-known
world of Christendom was under a universal Sunday
law just as the scriptures predicted and as Pope Vigilius
is to confirm. With the biggest threat of opposition
removed and believing that the ongoing threat of war
was also removed, the Roman populace was delighted
in the uniting of the old empire as one again under one
religion. Pope Vigilius (537-555), writes to Justinian
on Sept. 17, 540, the following letter of praise for establishing the one and only true faith “in every corner of the world”:
“ ‘We have noted in the letter of Your Clemency...that you do not permit any differences, any discordance in the Christian faith which honors and
worships the Divine Trinity.... Not the least of our
satisfaction in the Lord is to see that He deigned in his
mercy to give you not only an imperial, but a priestly
soul. In offering the sacrifice according to ancient tradition, all pontiffs pray that the Lord may deign to unify the Catholic faith and preserve it throughout the
world. This Your Piety effected with all possible
strength, when you imposed in all your provinces
and in every corner of the world the inviolate
maintenance of that faith which we know was defined and imposed as Christian confession by the
most venerable Synods of Nicaea, Constantinople, the
First of Ephesus, and Chalcedon, and when you refused
to call Christian whoever severs himself from the unity
of those Synods. . . .” [Guenther, Otto, Epistulae Imperatorum Pontificum Aliorum, Avellana Quae Dicitur
Collectio, 2 pts. In Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum, vol. 35. Prague: F. Tempsky, 1895, (ep.
92), 348, Sept. 17, 540.]
“H.F. Thomas, Chancellor of Cardinal Gibbons,
correctly states:
“ ‘Of course the Catholic Church claims that the
change was her act.’ He goes on to say, ‘And the act is
a MARK of her ecclesiastical authority in religious
things.’ The Universal Sunday law throughout Christendom in 538 was simply the catalyst or the Mark of
her ecclesiastical authority which signaled that the

The Year 538 AD.—
“When Justinian subdued the Ostrogoths in
Rome on March 1, 538, Italy then came immediately under his civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, including his Sunday law. On May 1, 538, Justinian
prohibited ‘the practice of unlawful religious rites,’
meaning, of course, that one the ‘one and true Catholic
faith’ was to be recognized. Freedom of choice and
religious liberty were then totally denied and legislated
out of existence. Religious liberty was not to be experienced for another 1260 years.’
“…All that remained of the then-known world of
Christendom that was not under Justinian’s civil and
ecclesiastical jurisdiction was the vast territory of Gaul.
However, on May 7, 538, Gaul came under an ecclesiastical Sunday law, as well [at the] Third Synod of
Orleans, AD 538.
“…The original wording of the 28th canon, as it is
translated from the original Latin document into fluent
English, reads thus:
“ ’28. Whereas the people are persuaded that they
ought not to travel on the Lord’s day with the horses,
or oxen and carriages, or to prepare anything for food,
or to do anything conducive to the cleanliness of houses or men, things which belong to Jewish rather than
Christian observances; we have ordained that on the
Lord’s day what was before lawful to be done may still
be done. From rural work, i.e., plowing, cultivating
vines, reaping, mowing, thrashing, clearing away
thorns or hedging, we judge it better to abstain, that the
people may the more readily come to the churches and
have leisure for prayers. If anyone be found doing the
works forbidden above, let him be punished, not as the
civil authorities may direct, but as the ecclesiastical

231

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Pontifical government of force or, more accurately
stated, the government of Satan, was then fully underway and thereby commenced the 1260 prophetic
period in A.D. 538. Previously divorced from Christ,
no longer widowed, but married to the state, the Catholic Church was ‘given’ a specified time of 1260 long
years-to ‘practice and prosper.’ What a witness to the
universe of the ‘new order’ of Satan’s rule! You cannot have a Sunday law without first denying religious liberty and this is the real issue behind the
Sunday law.
“The man of sin thinks to change times and
laws. He is exalting himself above God, in trying to
compel the conscience.” [Ellen White, Review and
Herald, December 24, 1889.]”
Heiks, AD538,
284,285.

That was fulfilled when in 1798, Napoleon’s general
Berthier made Pope Pius VI a prisoner, and took
him to France where he died the next year. It was
the purpose of Napoleon to deprive the pope of his
temporal powers and that was then accomplished.
“And in Dan, 11:40 is a prophecy stating that ‘at
the time of the end shall the king of the south push at
him.’ The geographical area of Egypt was the region
of the king of the south—south of Jerusalem and the
Holy Land. In 1798 Napoleon invaded Egypt and
made that land a colony of France. Thus in that
year Napoleon became the ‘king of the South’ and
brought about the fulfillment of the prophecy of
Dan. 11:40.” Thiele, OSID, 77.
“Religious liberty was not to be experienced
for another 1260 years, until General Berthier, the
French civil ‘sword,’ entered Rome, erected the tree
of liberty, and on February 15, 1798, in the presence
of a large crowd, signed a document and officially
decreed, ‘Rome is Free.’ Banners at that historic even
read ‘Religion and Liberty.’” Heiks, TDSB, 118.

The 1260 Days Do Not Begin with Pepin.—
“Some claim that the 1260 years of papal supremacy began somewhere in the 8th century when
Pepin ascended the throne. How can this be answered?
“ANS. The point marked in the prophecy as the
beginning of papal supremacy is not when the pope
became a temporal prince, but when he had power to
persecute the church of God. This was not by virtue
of any grant from Pepin, nor from Phocas, but from
Justinian. Croly, on the Apocalypse, says that the
highest authorities among the civilians and analysts of
Rome spurn the idea that Phocas was the founder of the
supremacy of Rome; they ascend to Justinian as the
only legitimate source. Baronius, the great Catholic
historian, formally gives the whole detail of Justinian's
grants of supremacy to the pope. Gavazzi, Lectures,
p.66, says: ‘The celebrated letter of Justinian to the
pope in the year 533, not only recognizing all previous
privileges, but enlarging them, and entitling the pope
and his church to many immunities and rights, afterward gave origin to the pretensions displayed in the
canon law.’ See also De Cormenin, vol.1, p.114. This
decree made in 533 was not carried into effect till
538, and we must date the period from the time
when the saints, times and laws were actually given
into his hands. It was this spiritual control, not temporal, that is marked by the prophecy.” Biblical Institute, 47,48.

“The year 1798 comes at the end of a series of
events converging together, including such events as
the reformation movement, which shook off the yoke
of the Church, the waves of the Jesuits’ rebellion, and
the influence of philosophers such as Descartes and the
encyclopedists Diderot and Voltaire, who propagated
philosophical doubt and challenged the authority of the
Church. And, finally, it included the French Revolution which rejected any ecclesiastical authority, founded a secular society, massacred Catholic priests and
deified reason. Furthermore, in 1798 the Pope himself was arrested, stripped of every power and exiled. The foundation of the papal supremacy was
then shaken. …The book of Revelation refers to the
same event in terms of a ‘deadly wound.’” Doukhan,
DVE, 53,54,131.
“1798 brought a complete separation of Church
and State. The Holy Catholic Church and the Holy
Roman Empire both crashed. The pope a captive,
stripped of his wealth, was carried away, by infidels, to
a foreign country. Even as he was hurried away from
the Sistine Chapel, he was taken through a hall pictured
by the scene of the massacre of St. Bartholomew’s day.
It certainly looked as though the Papacy was dead. In
fact, half of Europe, thought ‘the Papacy was dead.’
“…To make it more remarkable, France had been
the Papacy’s strongest supporter. Now it is used to
bring its end. …By order of the French government
Pope Pius VI was dragged into exile. Rome was declared a republic. The whole papal government was
dissolved. ‘The Papacy was extinct; not a vestige of its
existence remained; and among all the Roman Catholic powers not a finger was stirred in its defense.
The Eternal City had no longer prince or pontiff; its
bishop was a dying captive in foreign lands; and the

The End of Papal Dominion, 1798.—
“When, in 1797, Pope Pius VI fell grievously ill,
Napoleon gave orders that in the event of his death no
successor should be elected to his office, and that the
Papacy should be discontinued. (Joseph Rickaby,
Lectures on the History of Religion, ‘The Modern Papacy,’ volume 3, [lecture 24], p. 1.)” Bohr, ND7, 79.
“Two specific events are called for to take place
in 1798 in fulfillment of prophecies in the book of
Daniel. One is the prophecy of Dan. 7:25, which calls
for some event which would mark the terminus of the
period of 1260 years of papal supremacy in 1798.

232

DANIEL 7
months.”

decree was already announced that no successor
would be allowed in his place.’ Rome and its Papal
Rulers, p. 440, Canon Trevor.
“…Thus came the termination of the 1260 years
of the prophecy, amid world shaking events that
gripped the attention of mankind. This was not the end
of the papacy. In the inspired prophecy ‘the little horn’
was to continue until the time came that the saints
‘possess the kingdom.’ [Daniel sees the ‘little horn’
speaking ‘great words’ during the time of the judgment—after 1844.] That power is still at Rome. But
the period of its special supremacy over the saints
and times and laws of the Most High was ended.”
Burnside, DPUF, 132-134.

“The little horn had all the power of Babylon.
In government it was an absolute monarchy, holding authority over all the thrones of Europe. Kings
rose and fell at the dictates of Rome. From a religious
standpoint, it was the ruling power dictating to the consciences of men, bringing them before her tribunal and
peering into their very thoughts. The rack and the inquisition were her instruments, and no man escaped the
scrutiny of the man’s eye in the little horn. The means
by which this power was maintained was its system of
education, which kept Europe in darkness for over one
thousand years. This was a long-lived kingdom.
‘They [the saints, the times, and the laws] would be
given into his hands for a time and times and the
dividing of times.’ The reader is referred to Daniel
11:13, margin; to the seventh verse of chapter 12, and
to Rev. 12:6; 13:5, and Num. 14:34 for different expressions giving the same time and referring to the
same power. This time, three and one half years, or
forty-two months, or twelve hundred and sixty years,
as it is variously designated, began in 538, when three
horns were plucked up to make way for the establishment of this one power, the little horn. It continued
until 1798, when his dominion was taken away. His
power, however, is not yet destroyed.” Haskell, SDP,
96,97.

Time of Tribulation Would Be Cut Short.—
“The word of God had declared that the days
of tribulation should be cut short, [Matthew 24:22]
and so they were. The Reformation spread so greatly
in some of the countries of Europe that the rulers
would not obey the mandates of the Catholic Church.
Then, too, Jesuitism threatened to swallow up the
church, and become master instead of servant, and so
in the year 1773, Pope Clement XIV, issued a bull
declaring the order of Jesuits dissolved. This tended to peace and quiet; and although there were not a
few instances of persecution after that time, there was
never any such persecution as would warrant the term
‘tribulation.’ We may say, therefore, that the days of
tribulation came to an end about twenty-five years
before the close of the days of papal supremacy.”
Waggoner, PL, 123.

1260 Days are Not Literal Time.—
“The validity of the year-day principle has
been demonstrated by the precise fulfillment of various prophecies calculated by this method, notably
the 1260 days and the 70 weeks. A period of three
and a half literal years falls absurdly short of fulfilling
the requirements of the 1260-day prophecies in regard
to the Papacy. But when, by the year-day principle, the
period is extended to 1260 years, the prophecy meets a
unique fulfillment.” 4SDABC, 833,834.

The Same 1260-Year Prophecy Given Seven Times.—
Daniel 7:25: “He shall speak great words against
the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most
High, and think to change times and laws: and they
shall be given into his hand until a time and times, and
the dividing of time.”
Daniel 12:7: “It shall be for a time, times, and an
half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter
the power of the holy people….”
Revelation 11:2, 3: “The holy city shall they
tread under foot forty and two months. And I will
give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophesy a thousand two hundred and three score
days, clothed in sackcloth.”
Revelation 12:6: “The woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, that
they should feed her there a thousand two hundred
[and] threescore days.”
Revelation 12:14: “To the woman were given
two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the
wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the
serpent.”
Revelation 13:5: “There was given unto him a
mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and
power was given unto him to continue forty and two

“In Daniel 7, we have this terrible little horn
power. By far, more details are given about the horn
than about all the other beasts, which included the
mighty Babylonian, Media-Persian, Grecian, and pagan
Roman empires—nations that lasted hundreds of years
apiece. Yet the emphasis is on the little horn power,
which is so terrible that God Himself in the judgment
brings an end to it. Yet this little horn power, worse
than any of the other beasts lasting for hundreds and
hundreds of years, is going to last only a literal three
and a half years? A literal three and a half years
doesn’t fit the magnitude of the larger events depicted
in the previous parts of the prophecy. Plus, we saw
that the fourth beast was pagan Rome, which ended
over 1500 years ago. The next power, the little horn,
had to come down to the time of the end, when the
judgment is to sit and God is to establish His kingdom.
Somehow, three and half years doesn’t quite extend far
enough from the final days of pagan Rome to the time

233

GEMS FROM DANIEL
of the end. Here, too, literal time does not fit the
events that are depicted in the prophecy though,
again, the day-year principle solves the problem.”
Goldstein, 1844MS, 77,78.

communion, but once light becomes known, it is time
for him or her to act accordingly.” Shea, DARG, 126.
The Little Horn Is Not Antiochus Epiphanes.-“The Bible doesn’t state that the little horn of
Daniel 8 is Antiochus Epiphanes, and there are many
ways in which he does not fit the prophecy at all.
Horns represent kingdoms, and he was only an individual king—a part of one of the four horns. He did not
appear at the ‘latter end’ of the Seleucid kingdom
(Daniel 8:23) but approximately in the middle of the
line of Seleucid kings. (The Seleucid dynasty ran from
312/311 to 65 BC, and Antiochus Epiphanes reigned
from 175 to 164 BC.)
“And he did not really ‘prosper’ (verse 12) or
grow ‘exceedingly great’ (verse 9). His father, Antiochus III, was called ‘the Great,’ and rightly so, for he
restored the original Seleucid dominions. Antiochus
Epiphanes, on the other hand, was referred to sarcastically, by at least some of his contemporaries, as
‘Epimanes’—the mad man. Antiochus Epiphanes,
after a short-lived triumph in the ‘south’ (Egypt), was
totally defeated there when the Roman ambassador, C.
Popilius Laenas, merely informed him that the Roman
Senate wanted him to leave. The grim Roman drew a
circle around Antiochus with his cane and demanded a
decision before he stepped out of it.
“In the ‘east’ (Mesopotamia), Antiochus
Epiphanes died under obscure and sorry circumstances.
Even in the ‘glorious land’ (Palestine), where at first
he seemed successful, all his ambitions came to nothing within his lifetime.
“Furthermore, all attempts to fit his desecration of
the Jewish temple into ‘2300 evening and mornings’
have uniformly failed. The most nearly contemporary
account, in Maccabees 1:54-59; 4:52,54, is overwhelmingly precise in stating that he interrupted the temple
services for three years and ten days (from Chislev
15, 168, to Chislev 25, 165.
“Now 1 Maccabees 1:54 applies the phrase ‘desolating sacrilege’ (bdelugma eremoseos, Daniel 9:27,
Greek) to what Antiochus Epiphanes did to the altar in
the Jewish temple. (He evidently erected an idol on it
and sacrificed a pig, to the horror of all devout Jews,
for whom pigs have always been unfit for human
touch.) But Jesus in the Olivet Discourse said that
Daniel’s ‘desolating sacrilege’ was still future as of
His day. Matthew 24:15. He Added, ‘Let the reader
understand.’ So, if we really want to understand the
meaning of the little horn of Daniel 8, we shall have to
conclude, with Jesus, that it cannot have been Antiochus Epiphanes, who died in 164 BC, almost two hundred years prior to the Olivet Discourse.” Maxwell,
1GC, 153,154.

Little Horn is Identical to Beast of Rev. 13.—

=
“In chapter 13 (verses 1-10) is described another
beast, ‘like unto a leopard,’ to which the dragon gave
‘his power, and his seat, and great authority.’ This
symbol, as most Protestants have believed, represents
the papacy, which succeeded to the power and seat and
authority once held by the ancient Roman empire. Of
the leopard-like beast it is declared: ‘There was given
unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies.... And he opened his mouth in blasphemy
against God, to blaspheme His name, and His tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given
unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome
them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and
tongues, and nations.’ [Rev. 13:5-7]. This prophecy,
which is nearly identical with the description of the
little horn of Daniel 7, unquestionably points to the
papacy.” Great Controversy, 439.
The Little Horn is a System, Not the People In it.—
“There are true Christians in every church who do
not know the origin of the Sunday-sabbath, and believe
that they are keeping the day which God sanctified and
blest. This is true of worshipers even in the Catholic
Church; and while this ignorance and integrity remain, God accepts of their sincerity; but when light
shall fall upon their pathway, God requires them to
come into harmony with his law, and to observe the
Sabbath of his appointing.” Signs, 11/19/1894.
“By way of caution, we must be careful to maintain a distinction between a theological system and
the administrative center of a church, on the one
hand, and the conscience of the individual Christian, on
the other. Only God knows the motives of an individual, and He alone can read the human heart. …The focus in Daniel’s prophecy is not on individual Christians, but on a religious system that has gone awry—a
system that has adopted unbiblical theological principles rooted in Greek philosophy. It is this system that
the prophecy identifies and from which it calls for
separation (see Revelation 18:1-4). An individual
Christian can still act in good conscience within that

“1. ‘Little horn’ rose out of ten divisions of
Rome. Therefore it is Roman. Daniel 7:7,8.

234

DANIEL 7
“…7. Antiochus did not rise after the ‘ten kings’
Dan. 7:6. Antiochus was only one of the Syrian kings
and not a new kingdom.
“…9. It is impossible to find three kings whom
Antiochus plucked up. Dan. 7:8,24.
“10. He was not ‘more stout than his fellow.’
Dan. 7:20. His father, not he, was called Antiochus the
Great.
“11. His persecutions did not last even 3 ½ literal
years.
“12. The kingdom following the Grecian [Antiochus] was Roman, not the everlasting kingdom of the
saints. Dan. 7:27.
“13. Antiochus did not continue until the Judgment before the Ancient of Days. Dan. 7:9-14, 26,27.”
Burnside, DPUF, 181,182.

27). …The dominion of the little horn represents the
Papacy’s supremacy from 538-1798. Obviously, the
little horn cannot be judged before its period of dominion is over, so the judgment must have begun sometime after 1798.
“This judgment not only transpires after 1798 but
it also takes place before the second coming. And
why is this? Because in Daniel 7:13 Christ goes to the
Father in heaven to judge and only after He has finished does He come back to earth to give the kingdom
to His people. The same sequence is found in the book
of Revelation. In Revelation 14:6-12 we find God’s
final warning message to the world. Three angels are
seen descending from heaven to deliver this three-part
message.. The first angel (Revelation 14:7) announces
that the hour of God’s judgment ‘has come’ (past tense
in Greek). It is clear that the judgment begins before
the second and third angel have delivered their messages. If the judgment begins before the second and
third angels’ messages are delivered, then the judgment
must be before the second coming. It would be nonsensical to say that Jesus will come before the second
and third angels’ messages have been delivered. Not
until all three messages have been delivered is Jesus
seen seated on the cloud coming to the earth! (Revelation 14:14)
“Needless to say, this proves that the judgment
did not take place at the cross or in the time of the
apostles because the little horn had not yet ruled. Paul
makes it crystal clear that the judgment was still future
in his day (Acts 17:30-31; I Corinthians 5:10). The
above perspective also proves that we are not judged
the moment we die. After all, why would God proclaim a specific hour for the judgment to begin if people already went to heaven or hell when they died? If
the judgment begins after 1798 and before the second coming, then it did not take place when people
died.” Bohr, ND7, 118.

“From His perspective in the first century AD
(see Matthew 24:15,16), Jesus interpreted the 'abomination of desolation,’ or ‘desolating/appalling sacrilege’—a blasphemous religious object or practice that
Daniel said the little-horn power would set up (Daniel
8:12,13; 9:27; 11:31; 12:11)—as still future. The book
of Revelation also looks to the future when speaking of
the period of domination by an evil power that is symbolized in Daniel by the little horn.
Daniel 7:25

Revelation
12:6

Revelation
12:14

Revelation
13:5

3 and ½
times

1,260 days
(3 and ½
years)

3 and ½
times

42 months
(3 and ½
years)

“In Revelation, which was written after Jerusalem
was destroyed, this period comes after the life of Christ
on earth: 'She gave birth to a son, a male child, who is
to rule all the nations with a rod of iron; and her child
was caught up to God and to His throne. And the
woman fled into the wilderness where she had a
place prepared by God, so that there she might be
nourished for one thousand two hundred and sixty
days' (Revelation 12:5,6).
“It is clear that Christ and the New Testament
did not regard the earlier Antiochus as fulfilling the
work of the little horn....” Gane, WAJ, 82,83.

“The 1260 days end somewhere before the time
of judgment and are distinct from it (7:25,26) since
they are not supposed to direct to it. The 2300 evenings and mornings end precisely at the Day of
Atonement since they are designed to point to it.”
Doukhan, DVE, 35.
“The 1260 years was a great tribulation for God’s
people. As their lives were sacrificed at the altar for
the Word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ,
their blood cried out for judgment:
“ ‘And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw
under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, and for the testimony which they held:
And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O
Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth?’ Revelation 6:9,10.
“Daniel 7:26 partially answers their question.
Soon after 1798, the termination of the 1260 days, the

DANIEL 7:26
But the judgment shall sit, and they
shall take away his dominion, to consume
and to destroy it unto the end.
Time of the Judgment.—
“Three times in Daniel 7 we are told that the
judgment would take place after the nefarious work of
the little horn. In fact. we are told that the judgment
was to be God’s response to the evil dominion of the
little horn (verse 8 followed by verses 9-14; verse 21
followed by verse 22; verse 25 followed by verses 26-

235

GEMS FROM DANIEL
judgment would begin, and God would work to first
judge, and then avenge their blood.” Unknown Source.

“After describing the terrible career of the little
horn, and stating that the saints should be given into his
hand for 1260 years, bringing us down to 1798, verse
26 declares: ‘But the judgment shall sit, and they shall
take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it
unto the end.’ In verse 10 of the same chapter we have
substantially the same expression regarding the judgment: ‘The judgment was set.’ It would seem consistent to suppose that the same judgment is referred to in both instances. But the sublime scene
described in verse 10 is the opening of the investigative
judgment in the sanctuary in heaven… The opening of
this judgment scene is located by the prophecy at the
close of the great prophetic period of 2300 years,
which terminated in 1844. [See comments on Daniel
8:14 and 9: 25-27.]” Smith, DR, 145,146.

The Extent of the Judgment.—
“If human courts exercise some care in investigating the subjects brought to their attention before reaching decisions, surely God would exercise even greater
care in such matters. ...This judgment is investigative
in nature because of the reference to the opening of the
books or scrolls (v 10). Regardless of the precise form
in which those records are kept, these books or scrolls
certainly represent some kind of record keeping in
heaven. An examination of records of one type or another is thus involved in this judgment. Thus it is evident that this heavenly judgment is investigative in
nature.
“The use of the phrase, ‘the judgment sat,’ implies deliberation, and the reference to the opening of
books reinforces its investigative nature.
These
‘books’ surely contain the records that are to be examined during the course of the proceedings. The question then is not whether this judgment is investigative
in nature, but who is to be investigated thereby?”
“That a judgment of the little horn would appear
to involve a judgment of the millions of people who
have attempted to follow God through allegiance to
this alleged earthly representative of His. Any investigation by this judgment of the little horn should therefore involve an investigation into the cases of those
professed Christian individuals who have made up and
followed this corporate group.
“…To identify the little horn as the papacy is not
to say that the judgment upon those who have followed
it will be unfavorable just by the fact that they followed
it. Nor does this mean that those outside that religious
communion who have professed allegiance to God are
automatically classified with the ‘saints of the Most
High,’ and, as a consequence, are entitled to enter the
kingdom of God. We may be sure that all classes
will be weighed fairly in the impartial balances of
this court.
“…The results of the judgment described in Dan.
7 cut both ways. An unfavorable decision is rendered
in the case of the little horn: its dominion is taken
away and it is destroyed (v26). On the other hand, a
favorable decision is rendered in behalf of the saints of
the Most High: they receive the kingdom.
“Although no reference is made to the saints in
the initial description of the judgment scene, it is only
natural to expect that the ones to whom the kingdom is
finally to be given should also be examined. The people of God are accepted for citizenship in the future
eternal kingdom as a result of this judgment in their
favor. The fact that the saints are given the kingdom as
a consequence of this judgment implies that they have
been adjudged worthy—through Christ—to be admitted to the eternal kingdom.” Shea, SSPI, 123-126.

Deadly Wound to Be Healed.—
“The overthrow of the papacy in 1798 marked the
conclusion of the prophetic period of 1260 years, and
constituted the ‘deadly wound,’ prophesied in Revelation 13: 3 to come upon this power….
“In 1800 another pope was elected, his palace
and his temporal dominion over the Papal States
were restored, and, as George Croly, noted British
commentator, says, every prerogative except that of a
systematic persecutor was again his, for the ‘deadly
wound’ was beginning to be healed.
“How could that ‘deadly wound’ be healed, and
the specifications of Daniel 7: 26, ‘They shall take
away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto
the end,’ be realized? How are we to explain this apparent paradox? Whatever the exegetical difficulties
may be, the fact remains that in the history of the papacy these two specifications are being seen.
“In 1844 the judgment began its work in the
heavenly sanctuary. (Verse 10.) In verse 11 we are
told that because of ‘the great words which the horn
spake... the beast was slain.’ December 8, 1854, the
dogma of the Immaculate conception was decreed by
the pope. In 1870 the armies of Victor Emmanuel
took away the temporal power of the pope, the very
year that the Twentieth Ecumenical Council decreed the infallibility of the pope when speaking ex
cathedra, that is, when as shepherd and teacher of all
Christians he defines a doctrine concerning faith or
morals. But despite the increasing honors heaped upon
the office of the bishop of Rome by the clergy, the
pope’s temporal power was wholly taken away.
Thereafter the popes shut themselves up as prisoners in
the Vatican at Rome until the signing of the concordat
with Italy, in 1929, which restored ‘his dominion’ over
the Vatican City, a small section of the city of Rome.”
Smith, DR, 146,147.
They.—
“The plural subject and verb, ‘they [those who sit
in the judgment] shall take away his dominion,’ evidently refers back to the angelic personnel involved in

The Judgment Shall Sit.—

236

DANIEL 7
the heavenly court as we observed earlier (vs 9-10).”
Shea, SSPI, 112.

How could the children of God keep heart in this present evil world, amid the misrule and oppression of the
governments of earth, and the abominations that are
done in the land, if they could not look forward to
the kingdom of God and the return of their Lord,
with full assurance that the promises concerning
them both shall certainly be fulfilled, and that
speedily?” Smith, DR, 147.

“And there came one of the seven angels which
had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto
me, Come hither; I will show unto thee the judgment
of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters.”
Revelation 17:1.

“When the Son of man shall come in his glory,
and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon
the throne of his glory: …Then shall the King say unto
them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” Matthew 25:31, 34.

Take Away His Dominion.—
“And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the
beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire.” Revelation 17:16.
“And the beast was taken, and with him the
false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These
both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone.” Revelation 19:20.

“The Son of man receives dominion and authority over the kingdom, and then gives the saints the
kingdom or territory with attendant authorization for
its use.
“…As a result of the judgment, the Son of man is
given the kingdom (v 14); and all the nations are to
worship Him as a result of that decision. The saints of
the Most high also receive the kingdom as a result of
the same judgment, but one aspect of life in the kingdom which they are given is to worship Him. He
should be the one, therefore, who gives the kingdom
to them, just as the Ancient of Days is the one who
gave the kingdom to Him. The two figures of the Son
of man and the saints are separate and distinct; the
former need not be taken as the corporate image of the
latter…
“Further supplementary evidence for making a
distinction between the Son of man and the saints
comes from the realm in which they operate. The Son
of man receives the kingdom from the Ancient of Days
in heaven in the presence of the angelic host, but the
saints receive the kingdom upon the earth ‘under the
whole heaven.’” Shea, SSPI, 113, 115.

Consume and Destroy It Unto the End.—
“With the judgment in heaven began the judgment-hour message on earth which is a warning
against the dominion of the papacy over the souls of
earth’s inhabitants. See Rev. 14:6-14. An important
part of this message is to reveal to mankind the mediatorial work of Christ in the heavenly sanctuary
in contrast to the false and counterfeit papal system
by which her priests bind human souls ‘with a more
perfect despotism than Oriental emperors ever sought
or dreamed.’” Bunch, BOD, 108.
“And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of His mouth,
and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming.
even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan
with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved.” 2 Thess. 2:8.

“The portrayal of Daniel 7 is clear. Jesus goes to
His father to perform the work of judgment. In the
heavenly court the Father legally takes away the
kingdom from the little horn and gives it to Jesus, to
whom it rightfully belongs. Then Jesus gives it back
to man who lost it in the first place. God does not
take the kingdom back by force. Rather, he takes the
little horn to court! This process is made clear in Daniel 7:14, 18, 22.” Bohr, ND7, 131,132.

DANIEL 7:27
And the kingdom and dominion, and
the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, shall be given to the people
of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions shall serve and obey him.

“The Saviour longs to manifest His grace and
stamp His character on the whole world. It is His purchased possession, and He desires to make men free,
and pure, and holy. Though Satan works to hinder this
purpose, yet through the blood shed for the world there
are triumphs to be achieved that will bring glory to
God and the Lamb. Christ will not be satisfied till the
victory is complete, and ‘He shall see of the travail of
His soul, and shall be satisfied.’ Isaiah 53:11. All the

Kingdom Given to the People of the Saints.—
“After beholding the dark and desolate picture of
papal oppression of the church, the prophet is permitted
once more to turn his eyes upon the glorious period of
the saints’ rest, when they shall have the kingdom, free
from all oppressive powers, in everlasting possession.

237

GEMS FROM DANIEL
nations of the earth shall hear the gospel of His grace.
Not all will receive His grace; but ‘a seed shall serve
Him; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.’ Psalm 22:30. ‘The kingdom and dominion,
and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of
the Most High,’ and ‘the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.’
‘So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west,
and His glory from the rising of the sun.’ Daniel 7:27;
Isaiah 11:9; 59:19.” Desire of Ages, 827,828.

Him shall be gathered all nations.’ Matt. 25:31, 32.
This kingdom is yet future. It is not to be set up
until the second advent of Christ.” Great Controversy, 347.
Everlasting Kingdom.—
“This was the same climax as in Daniel 2:44:
‘In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set
up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed.’”
Thiele, OSID, 79.
“Said the angel, ‘Satan is the root, his children are
the branches. They are now consumed root and
branch. They have died an everlasting death. They are
never to have a resurrection, and God will have a clean
universe.’ I then looked and saw the fire which had
consumed the wicked, burning up the rubbish and purifying the earth. Again I looked and saw the earth purified. There was not a single sign of the curse. The
broken, uneven surface of the earth now looked like a
level, extensive plain. God’s entire universe was clean,
and the great controversy was forever ended. Wherever
we looked, everything upon which the eye rested was
beautiful and holy. And all the redeemed host, old and
young, great and small, cast their glittering crowns at
the feet of their Redeemer, and prostrated themselves
in adoration before Him, and worshiped Him that liveth
forever and ever. The beautiful new earth, with all
its glory, was the eternal inheritance of the saints.
The kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of
the kingdom under the whole heaven, was then given to the saints of the Most High, who were to possess it forever, even forever and ever.” Early Writings, 295.

“Then Jesus ceases His intercession in the sanctuary above. He lifts His hands and with a loud voice
says, ‘It is done;’ and all the angelic host lay off their
crowns as He makes the solemn announcement: ‘He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let
him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be
holy still.’ Rev. 22:11. Every case has been decided
for life or death. Christ has made the atonement for
His people and blotted out their sins. The number of
His subjects is made up; ‘the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven,’ is about to be given to the heirs of
salvation, and Jesus is to reign as King of kings and
Lord of lords.” Great Controversy, 613,614.
Saints Receive the Kingdom of Glory.—
“Those who are accounted worthy in the investigative judgment will come forth in the first resurrection, or will be translated without seeing death,
and will reign with Christ forever and ever. Sin,
with all who have clung to it, will be forever destroyed.
The pride and arrogance of Babylon of old, her iniquity
of every form, which has been repeated by all the nations of earth, together with the instigator of all evil,
will at last be blotted out. The end of the controversy
is reached.” Haskell, SDP, 103.

“God calls for separation from the world. Will
you obey? Will you come out from among them, and
remain separate and distinct from them? ‘For what
fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness?
and what communion hath light with darkness?’ You
cannot mingle with worldlings, and partake of their
spirit, and follow their example, and be at the same
time a child of God. The Creator of the universe addresses you as an affectionate Father. If you separate
from the world in your affections, and remain free from
its contamination, escaping the corruption that is in the
world through lust, God will be your Father, He will
adopt you into His family, and you will be His heir. In
place of the world, He will give you, for a life of
obedience, the kingdom under the whole heavens.
He will give you an eternal weight of glory and a life
that is as enduring as eternity.” 2 Testimonies, 44.

“The kingdom of God’s grace is now being established, as day by day hearts that have been full of sin
and rebellion yield to the sovereignty of His love. But
the full establishment of the kingdom of His glory
will not take place until the second coming of Christ
to this world. ‘The kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven,’
is to be given to ‘the people of the saints of the Most
High.’ Daniel 7:27. They shall inherit the kingdom
prepared for them ‘from the foundation of the
world.’ Matthew 25:34. And Christ will take to Himself His great power and will reign.” Mount of Blessing, 108.

“There are four world empires, and Christ’s kingdom, the fifth, is an everlasting kingdom. That means
that there are no repeats of these prophecies. They
all start at Daniel’s time and go on to everlasting fifth
kingdom of Jesus Christ!” PJ.

“The throne of glory represents the kingdom
of glory; and this kingdom is referred to in the Saviour’s words: ‘When the Son of man shall come in
His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then
shall He sit upon the throne of His glory: and before

238

DANIEL 7
was meditating on these prophecies and seeking God
for an understanding of the times, a series of visions
was given him concerning the rise and fall of kingdoms. With the first vision, as recorded in the seventh
chapter of the book of Daniel, an interpretation was
given; yet not all was made clear to the prophet.
‘My cogitations much troubled me,’ he wrote of his
experience at the time, ‘and my countenance changed
in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.’ Daniel 7:28.”
Prophets & Kings, 553,554.

DANIEL 7:28
Hitherto is the end of the matter. As
for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in
me: but I kept the matter in my heart.
My Cogitations Much Troubled Me.—
“Shortly before the fall of Babylon, when Daniel

239

GEMS FROM DANIEL

PJ

THE LAW OF LIBERTY IS THE STANDARD OF JUDGMENT
240

DANIEL 7

241

GEMS FROM DANIEL

242

DANIEL 8

DANIEL: CHAPTER EIGHT
1 In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared unto me, even unto me Daniel, after that
which appeared unto me at the first.
2 And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw,
that I was at Shushan in the palace, which is in the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river
of Ulai.
3 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold,
there stood before the river a ram which had two horns:
and the two horns were high; but one was higher than the
other, and the higher came up last.
4 I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and
southward; so that no beasts might stand before him,
neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand;
but he did according to his will, and became great.
5 And as I was considering, behold, an he goat came
from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched
not the ground: and the goat had a notable horn between
his eyes.
6 And he came to the ram that had two horns, which I
had seen standing before the river, and ran unto him in
the fury of his power.
7 And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was
moved with choler against him, and smote the ram, and
brake his two horns: and there was no power in the ram
to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground,
and stamped upon him: and there was none that could
deliver the ram out of his hand.
8 Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he
was strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up
four notable ones toward the four winds of heaven.
9 And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which
waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and toward the
east, and toward the pleasant land.
10 And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven; and it
cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground,
and stamped upon them.
11 Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince of the
host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and
the place of the sanctuary was cast down.
12 And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice
by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to
the ground; and it practised, and prospered.
13 Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint
said unto that certain saint which spake, How long shall
be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the trans-

gression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the
host to be trodden under foot?
14 And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three
hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.
15 And it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, had seen
the vision, and sought for the meaning, then, behold,
there stood before me as the appearance of a man.
16 And I heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai,
which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.
17 So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I
was afraid, and fell upon my face: but he said unto me,
Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end shall
be the vision.
18 Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a deep
sleep on my face toward the ground: but he touched me,
and set me upright.
19 And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what
shall be in the last end of the indignation: for at the time
appointed the end shall be.
20 The ram which thou sawest having two horns are the
kings of Media and Persia.
21 And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the
great horn that is between his eyes is the first king.
22 Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it,
four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in
his power.
23 And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the
transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up.
24 And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own
power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the
holy people.
25 And through his policy also he shall cause craft to
prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his
heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also
stand up against the Prince of princes; but he shall be
broken without hand.
26 And the vision of the evening and the morning which
was told is true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for it
shall be for many days.
27 And I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did the king's business; and I was
astonished at the vision, but none understood it.

INTRODUCTION TO CHAPTER EIGHT
“Chapter 8 to the end of Daniel is now written
in Hebrew. These chapters have to do with the people
of God. Chapter 2:4 to the end of chapter 7 was written in Chaldee. The Chaldeans would have more interest in the historic events.” Unknown Source.

explanation of that dream or vision. In Daniel 8, the
first fourteen verses deal with a vision of a ram, a goat,
a little horn, and then the cleansing of the sanctuary.
The second half of the chapter—verses 15 to 27—
explain the meaning of the ram, the goat, and the little
horn. The cleansing of the sanctuary is not explained.” Goldstein, 1844MS, 30.

“Like Daniel 2 and 7, Daniel 8 is divided into two
major sections: a prophetic dream or vision, then an

243

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“The vision in chapter 8 is like a motion picture from the start. Directional movement is prominent. The ram, moving out of the east, charges westward, northward, and southward. The goat speeds
from the west to encounter the ram. Later, four horns
from its head move out toward the four points of the
compass. At the first the ‘little horn’ moves out horizontally toward the south, the east, and ‘the glorious
land.’ Then its directional movement changes. The
horn now moves vertically, heavenward—in an attack upon the starry hosts and ultimately against
the heavenly Prince of the host and His sanctuary
ministration.
“The climax of the vision in chapter 8 focuses on
these two vertical activities of the little horn. First, it
reaches to the stellar heavens and cast some of the stars
to the ground where it subsequently tramples upon
them. In its second vertical motion the horn moves
upward into the heavenly realm against the Prince of
the host, taking away His priestly ministration and casting down the foundation of His sanctuary. The truth
about the Prince’s ministration in His heavenly sanctuary is thrown down to the ground.
“These symbolic delineations, underscoring spatial locations as they do, indicate clearly that the sanctuary in the vision of chapter 8 is the heavenly sanctuary and not a temple in Jerusalem. The directional
motion of the horn (vertical) into the heavenly
realm itself heightens the drama of the vision. The
attention of the reader is centered on the struggle
between the little horn and the Prince over the
heavenly sanctuary and its ministration.
“The Prince of the host is not only the Ruler of
the host (His people), but He is also a royal Priest
ministering in His heavenly sanctuary in their behalf. The heavenly sanctuary deals with the salvation
of mankind. The little horn endeavors to meddle and to
interfere with this most important heavenly activity of
the Prince. Consequently the historical fulfillment of
the cosmic sweep of this prophecy—denoted by its
spatial dimensions—finds its fulfillment more appropriately in the religious phase of Rome than in the brief
desecration of the temple in Jerusalem by Antiochus
Epiphanes.” BRI, 2SOD, 497,498.

prophecies in Chapters 9-12 form a unit as a second
pair, a decade later, also grouped two years apart (9:1;
10:1).” Ferrell, BD, 30.
ORDER OF EVENTS
DANIEL 7
DANIEL 8
Babylon
Medo-Persia
Medo-Persia
Greece
Greece
Pagan Rome
Pagan Rome
Papal Rome/Ten Horns
Papal Rome
[both in little horn]
Judgment
Sanctuary Cleansed
Burning Flames
Broken Without Hand

DANIEL 8:1
In the third year of the reign of king
Belshazzar a vision appeared unto me, even
unto me Daniel, after that which appeared
unto me at the first.
In the Third Year of Belshazzar.—
“It is also possible now to date accurately the first
year of Belshazzar’s kingship to 550/549 BC (7:1) and
this third year to 548/547 BC (8:1).” BRI, 2SOD, 85.
A Vision Appeared Unto Me.—
“The Hebrew word for ‘vision’ is chazon, which
refers to the entire vision of ch. 8:1-14. See vs. 26a
and ch. 9:23 for more information.” PJ
After That Which Appeared Unto Me at the First.—
“The vision he refers to as the one which appeared unto him at the first, is doubtless the vision of
the seventh chapter, which he had in the first year of
Belshazzar’s reign.” Smith, DR, 149.

“At the end of chapter 7, Daniel is distraught over
what he has viewed (7:28). At the beginning of Daniel
8, Daniel mentions a connection of this second vision
to the preceding one. This locks them together.”
Ferrell, BD, 26.

LAST CHAPTERS OF DANIEL EXPLAIN CH. 8
VISION
EXPLANATIONS
Dan. 8:3-14
Dan. 8
Dan. 9
Dan.11,12
Ch. 8:3-12
8:15-25
11:2-12:4
Ch. 8:13,14 8:26
9:24-27
12:5-12

“The Hebrew word for ‘after’ can have the meaning not only of being afterwards in time, but following
after in terms of copying after or walking after some
person or thing. Thus, the vision of chapter 8 would
follow after (or, be parallel to) that of chapter 7. And,
in fact, all four of the visions in the book of Daniel (ch.
2, 7, 8-9, 10-12) follow after (or, are parallel to) each
other.” Unknown Source.

“In Daniel 7, the little horn takes away the Law
of God. In the eighth chapter, it takes away the gospel by substituting its own mediatorial system for that
which is Christ’s. This is the main burden of Daniel 8
and 9.” Were, KONAJ, 44.

DANIEL 8:2
And I saw in a vision; and it came to

“The visions of chapters 7 and 8 come together as
one pair grouped two years apart (7:1; 8:1). The

244

DANIEL 8

pass, when I saw, that I was at Shushan in
the palace, which is in the province of
Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by
the river of Ulai.
I Saw in a Vision.—
“The Hebrew word for ‘vision’ is chazon, which
refers to the entire vision of ch. 8:1-14. See vs. 26a
and ch. 9:23 for more information.” PJ

ram give a more specific description; for while the
Median kingdom was the older of the two, the Persian excelled it in strength, and its position in history
must be attributed to the line of Persian kings which
began with Cyrus the Great. The definiteness with
which this symbol is interpreted is an illustration of the
fact that the Scriptures are their own best commentaries. Said the angel, ‘The ram which thou sawest
having two horns are the kings of Media and Persia.’ [vs.20.]” Haskell, SDP, 105.

Shushan.—
“Shushan or Susa = "lily." Susa was the winter
residence of the Persian kings; located on the river Ulai
or Choaspes.” Bible Dictionary.

“Since Babylon was so soon to fall, it is naturally left out of this symbolic prophecy. The symbols of this vision begin with Medo-Persia.” Bunch,
BOD, 110.

At Shushan in the Palace.—
“Shushan was the capital of Elam, which was
formerly a subject province of the kingdom of Babylon, but as that empire began to weaken, and the
strength of Cyrus, the Persian general, was recognized,
Elam, under Abradates, the viceroy or prince, [would
revolt] from Babylon, and [join] the forces of the Persians. Years before this, the prophet Isaiah had said
that Elam and Media would join forces in the conquest
of Babylon. As Daniel lived in the palace of Shushan,
he saw the way opening for the fulfillment of this
prophecy.” Haskell, SDP, 104,105.

The Higher Came Up Last.—
“Media was an independent kingdom long before Persia was anything but a subject province.
After Cyrus, Persia became the dominant power and
attained the greater eminence.” Bunch, BOD, 111.

DANIEL 8:4
I saw the ram pushing westward, and
northward, and southward; so that no
beasts might stand before him, neither was
there any that could deliver out of his
hand; but he did according to his will, and
became great.

In the Province of Elam.—
“Elam was a province east of Babylonia at the
head of the Persian Gulf. Shushan, also called Susa,
was the capital city of the province, and was destined
to become the royal seat of the Medo-Persian empire.”
Bunch, BOD, 110.

Westward, and Northward, and Southward.—
“These three directions of symbolic movement fit
well geographically and historically with the three major westward conquests of Persia—Babylon to the
west, 539 BC; Lydia to the north, 546 BC; and Egypt
[and Ethiopia] to the south, 525 BC. [Darius Hystaspes went north against the Scythians in 513.] These
three major conquests to the west correspond well
with the three ribs in the mouth of the MedoPersian bear (chap. 7). However, the bear is not described as going off in these three directions to make
its conquests. The ribs are already present in the bear’s
mouth when it is described. In chapter 8 the ram has
to travel off in these directions to make its conquests.” BRI, 2SOD, 503.

I Was By the River Ulai.—
“The light that Daniel received direct from God
was given especially for these last days. The visions
he saw by the banks of the Ulai and the Hiddekel,
the great rivers of Shinar, are now in process of
fulfillment, and all the events foretold will soon have
come to pass (Letter 57, 1896). 4BC 1166.

DANIEL 8:3,4
Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw,
and, behold, there stood before the river a
ram which had two horns: and the two
horns were high; but one was higher than
the other, and the higher came up last.

“Notice the parallels between the MediaPersian bear of Daniel 7 and the Media-Persian ram
of chapter 8. Both beast were asymmetrical: the bear
was raised up on one side (7:5); correspondingly, the
ram’s horns were not equal in size, one being higher
than the other (8:3). Also, the bear had three ribs in its
mouth, believed to be Babylon, Egypt, and Lydia—
three nations crushed by Media-Persia. The ram in
Daniel 8 conquers in three directions: westward (Babylon), southward (Egypt), and northward (Lydia).”
Goldstein, 1844MS. 33.

A Ram With Two Horns—Media and Persia.—
“In his previous vision the second kingdom had
been represented by a bear which raised itself on one
side and had three ribs in its mouth. Both symbols
apply to the double nature of the kingdom of the
Medes and Persians, but the uneven horns of the

245

GEMS FROM DANIEL

river, and ran unto him in the fury of his
power.
And I saw him come close unto the
ram, and he was moved with choler against
him, and smote the ram, and brake his two
horns: and there was no power in the ram
to stand before him, but he cast him down
to the ground, and stamped upon him: and
there was none that could deliver the ram
out of his hand.

No Beasts Could Stand Before Him.—
“As the ram pushed westward, northward, and
southward, and no beast could stand before it, so the
Medo-Persian empire extended its dominion in these
directions. At the fall of Babylon one hundred and
twenty provinces recognized the authority of Cyrus and
Darius. These were held in subjection, and others added, so that in the time of Ahasuerus of Esther, the kingdom controlled one hundred and twenty-seven provinces, and extended from India on the east to the Mediterranean on the west, and from the Caspian Sea to
Ethiopia. It was then called a glorious kingdom, and
the monarch was spoken of as ‘his excellent majesty.’”
Haskell, SDP,105,106.

As I Was Considering.—
“‘As I was considering,’ said the prophet. Here is
an example for every lover of truth and all who have
any regard for spiritual things. When Moses saw the
burning bush, he
said, ‘I will now
turn aside, and see
this great sight.’
How few are willing at the present
time to turn aside
from their pursuit
of
business
or
pleasure to consider the important
themes which God
seeks to bring to
their
attention.”
Smith, DR, 151.

“Cyrus in his conquests swept everything before
him with seemingly irresistible force.” Thiele, OSID,
82.
“Goodspeed’s Ancient World, p.57, states:
‘Croesus (that fabulously rich king in Asia Minor in the
north-west) joined with Egypt, and even the leading
Greek state, Sparta, in the endeavor to put a stop to
the victorious career of Cyrus. It was in vain. Cyrus defeated Croesus, King of Lydia, and captured him
and his capital Sardis (546 BC). Babylon was then
attacked and yielded to him.
“…Xenophon, the Greek writer of the later
Persian times, said of Cyrus: ‘He was able to extend
the fear of himself over so great a part of the world that
he astonished all, and no one attempted anything
against him.’ Cyropaedia. Bk. 1.” Burnside, DPUF,
137.

The Kingdom of Grecia—the Goat People.—
“The symbol here introduced is explained to Daniel by the angel. ‘The rough goat is the king [or
kingdom] of Grecia.’ Verse 21. Concerning the fitness of this symbol to represent the Grecian, or Macedonian, people, Thomas Newton observes that the
Macedonians, ‘About two hundred years before Daniel,
were denominated AEgeadae, or the goat’s people.’
He explains the origin of the name as recounted by
heathen authors: ‘Caranus, their first king, going with a
great multitude of Greeks to seek new habitations in
Macedonia, was commanded by the oracle to take the
goats for his guides to empire: and afterwards seeing a
herd of goats flying from a violent storm, he followed
them to Edessa, and there fixed the seat of his empire,
made the goats his ensigns or standards and called the
city AEgeae, or the goat’s town, and the people AEgeadae, or the goat’s people.... The city of AEgeae, or
AEgeae, was the usual burying place of the Macedonian kings. [The ocean next to Greece is called the Aegean Sea.]
“ ‘It is also very remarkable that Alexander’s son
by Roxana was named Alexander AEgus, or, the son
of the goat; and some of Alexander’s successors are
represented in their coins with goat’s horns.’ [Thomas

None Could Deliver Out of His Hand.—
“So successful were their conquests that in the
days of Ahasuerus (Esther 1:1) the Medo-Persian
kingdom, consisting of one hundred twenty-seven
provinces, extended from India to Ethiopia, the
boundaries of the then-known world.”
Smith,
DR,151.
Became Great.—
“The Medo-Persian Empire covered much more
territory than its predecessor, Babylon.” 4SDABC,
840.

DANIEL 8:5-7
And as I was considering, behold, an
he goat came from the west on the face of
the whole earth, and touched not the
ground: and the goat had a notable horn
between his eyes.
And he came to the ram that had two
horns, which I had seen standing before the
246

DANIEL 8
Newton, Dissertations on the Prophecies, Vol. I, pp.
303,304.]” Smith, DR, 151,152.

Grecians against the Medes was on the banks of the
Granicus, a stream of Asia Minor. This was in the year
334 BC. Already the victory of Greece was recorded in
the books of heaven. The battle at Granicus was
soon followed by the defeat of the Medo-Persian
force at the pass of Issus, and the third and overwhelming defeat was on the plains of Arbela. None
could deliver the sinking cause of the Medo-Persian
empire from the hands of the victorious Alexander.”
Haskell, SDP, 107.

The Goat Came From the West.—
“The ‘goat came from the west on the face of
the whole earth.’ That is, Greece lay west of Persia
and attacked from that direction. The Greek army
swept everything on the face of the earth before it.
“The goat ‘touched not the ground.’ Such was
the marvelous celerity of his movements that he
seemed to fly from point to point with the swiftness of
the wind. The same characteristic of speed is indicated by the four wings of the leopard in the vision
of Daniel 7, representing the same nation.” Smith,
DR,152.

“Persia was subdued, the country ravaged, its armies cut to pieces and scattered, and its cities plundered. The royal city of Persepolis, the capital of the
Persian Empire—even its ruins one of the wonders of
the world to the present day—was sacked and burned.
Thus the ram had no power to stand before the goat,
and there was none that could deliver him out of his
hand.” Smith, DR, 153.

“While the Persian ram came from the east and
charged west, the Greek goat came from the west and
charged east.” BRI, 2SOD, 504.
Ram and He-Goat—Two Sanctuary Animals.—
“And he shall take of the congregation of the
children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.” Lev 16:5.
“Note: The ram and the he-goat were sanctuary animals used in the Day of Atonement. Thus,
In Daniel 8 these two animals are used not only to represent two world empires, but to point the child of
God by association to the Day of Atonement.
“However, another lesson is learned. The ram
and the goat originally symbolized Jesus Christ, but
now in Daniel 8, they symbolize earthly powers. This
change indicates that the activity of the world powers
controlled by Satan would try to usurp the
knowledge of Christ from the minds of God’s people. This attempt, we shall see, was most successful
during the time of the ‘little horn’ when it took away
the ‘daily.’” PJ.

Alexander the Notable Horn.—
“The notable horn between his eyes is explained
in verse 21 to be the first king of the Macedonian
Empire. This king was Alexander the Great.
“A concise account of the overthrow of the Persian Empire by Alexander is given in verses 6 and 7.
The battles between the Greeks and the Persians are
said to have been exceedingly fierce. Some of the
scenes recorded in history vividly bring to mind the
figure used in the prophecy—a ram standing before the
river, and the goat running toward him ‘the fury of his
power.’ Alexander first vanquished the generals of
Darius at the River Granicus in Phrygia. He next attacked and routed Darius at the passes of Issus in Cilicia, and afterward defeated him on the plains of Arbela
in Syria. This latter battle occurred in 331 BC, and
marked the fall of the Persian Empire. By this event
Alexander became master of the whole country. Concerning verse 6—‘He [the goat] came to the ram that
had two horns, which I had seen standing before the
river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power’—
Thomas Newton says: ‘One can hardly read these
words without having some image of Darius’s army
standing and guarding the River Granicus, and of Alexander on the other side with his forces plunging in,
swimming across the stream, and rushing on the enemy
with all the fire and fury that can be imagined.’ [Ibid.,
p. 306.]
“Ptolemy begins the reign of Alexander in 332
BC but it was not until the battle of Arbela the year
following that Alexander became ‘absolute lord of that
empire in the utmost extent in which it was ever possessed by any of the Persian kings.’ [Humphrey
Prideaux, The Old and New Testament Connected in
the History of the Jews, Vol. I, p.378.]
“On the eve of this battle, Darius sent ten of his
chief relatives to sue for peace. When they had presented their conditions to Alexander, he is said to have
replied, ‘Heaven cannot support two suns, nor the earth

Moved With Choler Against Him.—
“Choler is Old English for ‘anger.’ The language of this verse depicts the completeness of the
subjection of Persia to Alexander. The power of the
empire was completely broken. The country was ravished, its armies cut in pieces and scattered, its cities
plundered. The royal city of Persepolis, whose ruins
still stand as a monument to its ancient splendor, was
destroyed by fire.” 4SDABC, 840
Smote the Ram, No Power in the Ram.—
“That kingdom which had been a rod in the
hand of God to overthrow Babylon in its wickedness, repeated her sins, and in turn met the same fate.
Although the Persians restored the Jews to Jerusalem,
that could not save them. It is only as nations or individuals continue in a love of the truth, only as they
partake constantly of the leaves of the tree of life, that
their existence is prolonged. The ram and the goat met
on a river. The first successful battle fought by the

247

GEMS FROM DANIEL
two masters.’ [Walter Fogg, One Thousand Sayings of
History, p. 210.]” Smith, DR, 152,153.

“The conqueror is greater than the conquered.
The ram, Medo-Persia, became ‘great;’ the goat,
Greece, became ‘very great.’ ‘When he was strong,
the great horn was broken.’ Human foresight and
speculation would have said, When he becomes weak,
his kingdom torn by rebellion, or weakened by luxury,
then the horn will be broken, and the kingdom shattered. But Daniel saw it broken in the prime of its
strength, at the height of its power, when every beholder would have exclaimed, Surely, the kingdom is established, and nothing can overthrow it. Thus it is often
with the wicked. The horn of their strength is broken
when they think they stand most firm. The Scripture
says, ‘Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed
lest he fall.’ 1 Corinthians 10:12.” Smith, DR,
153,155.

“We cannot escape the conviction that things
might have turned out very differently if King Darius
had not been such a notable coward. Darius’s Persians
vastly outnumbered the Greeks. At Arbela the Persians
are said to have pitted a million men against Alexander’s 47,000. But at Granicus, Issus, and Arbela,
King Darius lost his nerve at the first sign of a reverse, turned his chariot around, and fled for his
life—a signal in those days for the entire Persian
army to flee also.
“In an unusually intriguing passage the Bible says
that ‘the king’s heart is a stream of water in the
hand of the Lord; he turns it wherever he will.’
Proverbs 21:1. Historical accounts indicate that a
single hour of courage on Darius’s part in any one
of his three great battles might well have saved his
army and enabled it to annihilate Alexander’s forces. Had God seen fit, He could easily have supplied
Darius with this needed courage. He gave Daniel
courage to face lions. He gave Daniel’s friends courage to face a fiery furnace. But the Persian Empire had
chosen to find its way without faith in the God of Israel, and in Persia’s hour of crisis God allowed human
weakness to run its course. Daniel 7:6 says that dominion was ‘given’ to the Greeks.” Maxwell, 1GC,
150,151.

“ ‘He that is slow to anger,’ says the wise man, ‘is
better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit, than
he that taketh a city.’ The man or woman who preserves the balance of the mind when tempted to indulge
passion stands higher in the sight of God and heavenly
angels than the most renowned general that ever led an
army to battle and to victory. Said a celebrated emperor when on his dying bed, ‘Among all my conquests
there is but one which affords me any consolation now,
and that is the conquest I have gained over my own
turbulent temper.’ Alexander and Caesar found it
easier to subdue a world than to subdue themselves.
After conquering nation after nation, they fell—one
of them ‘the victim of intemperance, the other of
mad ambition.’” Child Guidance, 95,96.

“Alexander stands without a rival for the rapidity
of his conquests. He was but a young man of twenty
when, by the death of his father, Philip of Macedon, he
fell heir to a small dominion. He united the Greek
states, placed himself at the head of affairs, and led her
armies in a series of wonderful victories. In the space
of a few short years he was the recognized master of
the world. He who rose to the highest position the
world could offer, fell equally as suddenly. He had
conquered kingdoms, but was not master of his own
passions. His love of praise led him to have himself
proclaimed Son of Jupiter Ammon in Egypt, and his
love of drink caused his death at the age of thirtytwo years, after a universal reign of only two years.
Such was the fate of one who feared neither God nor
man. ‘The Most High ruleth in the kingdoms of men.’”
Haskell, SDP, 108

Four Notable Horns Come Up.—

DANIEL 8:8
Therefore the he goat waxed very
great: and when he was strong, the great
horn was broken; and for it came up four
notable ones toward the four winds of
heaven.

“After Alexander’s death there arose much contention among his followers respecting the succession.
After a seven days’ contest it was agreed that his natural brother, Philip Aridaeus, should be declared king.
By him, and by Alexander’s infant sons, Alexander
AEgus and Hercules, the name and show of the Mace-

Great Horn Broken.—

248

DANIEL 8
donian Empire were for a time sustained. But the boys
were soon murdered, and the family of Alexander became extinct. Then the chief commanders of the army,
who had gone into different parts of the empire as governors of the provinces, assumed the title of king.
They at once began warring against one another to such
a degree that within a few years after Alexander’s
death, the number was reduced to four—the exact
number specified in prophecy.
“Four notable horns were to come up toward the
four winds of heaven in place of the great horn that was
broken. These were Cassander, who had Greece and
the neighboring countries; Lysimachus, who had Asia
Minor; Seleucus, who had Syria and Babylon, and
from whom came the line of kings known as the ‘Seleucidae,’ so famous in history; and Ptolemy, son of
Lagus, who had Egypt, and from whom sprang the
‘Lagidae.’ These held dominion toward the four winds
of heaven. Cassander had the western parts, Lysimachus the northern regions, Seleucus the eastern
countries, and Ptolemy the southern portion of the
empire. These four horns may therefore be named
Macedonia, Thrace (which then included Asia Minor,
and those parts lying on the Hellespont and the Bosphorus), Syria, and Egypt.” Smith, DR, 155.

growth of a horn in chapter 8. The idea of horn growth
is emphasized two times in the chapter. The first reference is in verse 3 where a participle of the verb alah
(‘to come up’) is used. This word states that the higher
horn (of the ram) ‘came up last,’ that is, it grew up last.
In verse 8 the verb alah appears again with reference to
the four horns coming or growing up in place of the
great horn which was broken.
“In contrast with the growth idea of alah is the
yasa motion of the ‘little horn’—going, moving, or
coming forth in the sense of a movement from one
compass direction to another. A horizontal expansion, not a vertical growth, is described. This is consistent with the usage of the verb yasa in the OT and in
Daniel. In the latter term consistently expresses
movement from one direction of the compass, from one
fixed position, to another (see 9:23-23; 10:20; 11:11,
44). To this must be added the fact that yasa in the
OT is used in a number of instances for military
movements of various kinds (Deut. 20:1; 1 Chr. 5:18;
20:1; Prov. 30:27; Amos 5:3) or for a king moving out
with his army (1 Sam 8:20; 2 Chr. 1:10).
“In short, the idea of 8:9a is not that the ‘little
horn’ grows out of one of the winds of heaven, but
that it moves forth from one of the compass directions on a horizontal plane and expands to other
such directions. The idea of military expansion
seems to be present too.” BRI, 2SOD, 392,393.

Four Winds of Heaven.—
“The Hebrew way of saying, from one of the four
cardinal points of the compass without specifying from
which direction.” Mansell, OSOA, 52.

Little—as in Daniel 7 Little Horn.—
“The Hebrew word translated ‘little’ in Daniel 8
is not the usual Hebrew word for ‘little.’ Daniel had a
much more common word readily available to him, but
he chose this relatively rare word in order to match
it with the Aramaic word for ‘little’ used in chapter
7 to describe the horn depicted there. The distinct
linguistic connection between these two prophetic
symbols shows that they are the same entity.” Shea,
DARG, 209.

DANIEL 8:9
And out of one of them came forth a
little horn, which waxed exceeding great,
toward the south, and toward the east, and
toward the pleasant land.
Out of One of Them.—
“In Daniel 8:8,9, the Hebrew noun ‘horn(s)’ is
feminine, but the pronoun ‘them’ is masculine. Consequently, ‘them’ cannot refer back to ‘horns’ as its antecedent. On the other hand, the word ‘wind(s)’ can be
either masculine or feminine and, therefore, ‘them’ can
refer back to ‘winds.’ Accordingly, the little horn
came from one of the four winds, the Hebrew way of
saying, from one of the four cardinal points of the
compass without specifying from which direction.
However, the direction becomes clear from the context. In order to have move toward the south, and
toward the east, and toward the pleasant land’—
Palestine—(Dan. 8:9), it must have come from the
west!” Mansell, OSOA, 52.

A Little Horn Came Forth.—
“By way of introduction to the little horn, it
should be noted that its activities are described in a
series of three separate scenes. The first phase of its
activities is described in verse 9 where it is seen as
extending out in three directions to the south, to the
east, and to the glorious land or Palestine.
“The second phase of its activities is described in verse 10. In this scene it is described as
reaching up to the stars, the host of heaven, and casting
some of them down to the earth and trampling upon
them.
“In the third scene the little horn is seen to reach
up to heaven again. This time, however, it encounters
the Prince of the host. While there is no description of
personal harm or injury being done to the Prince, His
tamid or ‘continual, daily’ ministration is taken away
from Him, and the place of foundation of His sanctuary

Came Forth.—
“The verb in the opening phrase of verse 9 is
yasa, the basic meaning of which is ‘to go out’ or ‘to
come, move forth.’ It is not the typical word for the

249

GEMS FROM DANIEL
is cast down to the earth, evidently by the little horn.”
BRI, 2SOD, 507.

dominion, except by some temporary conquests in
Egypt. These he immediately relinquished when the
Romans took the part of Ptolemy and commanded him
to desist from his designs on that territory. The rage of
his disappointed ambition he vented upon the unoffending Jews.
“The little horn, in comparison with the powers
that preceded it, was exceeding great. Persia is simply
called great, though it consisted of a hundred twentyseven provinces. (Esther 1: 1.) Grecia, being more
extensive still, is called very great. Now the little
horn, which waxed exceeding great, must surpass
them both. How absurd, then, to apply this Antiochus, who was obliged to abandon Egypt at the dictation of the Romans. It cannot take long for anyone
to decide the question which was the greater power—
the one which evacuated Egypt, or the one which
commanded that evacuation.
“The little horn was to stand up against the Prince
of princes, which expression refers, beyond controversy, to Jesus Christ. (Daniel 9:25; Acts 3:15; Revelation
1:5.) But Antiochus died one hundred sixty-four years
before our Lord was born. The prophecy cannot therefore apply to him, for he does not fulfill the specifications in a single particular. The question may then be
asked, Why has anyone ever tried to apply it to him?
We answer, Roman Catholics take that view to avoid
the application of the prophecy to themselves; and
many Protestants follow them, apparently in order to
oppose the doctrine that the second advent of Christ is
now at hand.” Smith, DR, 156-158.

“A third power is here introduced into the prophecy. In the explanation given to Daniel by the angel
this symbol is not described as definitely as are MedoPersia and Greece.
“There are two common interpretations of the
symbol which need be noticed in these brief comments. The first is that the ‘little horn’ denotes the
Syrian king, Antiochus Epiphanes. The second is that
it denotes the Roman power. It is an easy matter to test
these two positions.” Smith, DR, 156.
Does the Little Horn Denote Antiochus?—
“If Antiochus Epiphanes does not fulfill the specifications of the prophecy, the application cannot be
made to him. The little horn came out of one of the
four horns of the goat. It was therefore a power existing distinct from any of the other horns of the
goat. Was Antiochus such a power?
“Who was Antiochus? From the time that Seleucus made himself king over the Syrian portion of Alexander’s empire, thus constituting the Syrian horn of
the goat, until that country was conquered by the Romans, twenty-six kings ruled in succession over that
territory.
The eighth of these was Antiochus
Epiphanes. Antiochus, then, was simply one of the
twenty-six kings who constituted the Syrian horn of
the goat. He was, therefore, for the time being, that
horn. Hence he could not at the same time be a separate and independent power, or another and remarkable
horn, as was the little horn.
“If it were proper to apply the little horn to any
one of these twenty-six Syrian kings, it should certainly
be applied to the most powerful and illustrious of them
all; but Antiochus Epiphanes was not by any means the
most powerful king of the Syrian line. Although he
took the name Epiphanes, that is, ‘The Illustrious,’ he
was illustrious only in name. Nothing, says Prideaux,
on the authority of Polybius, Livy, and Diodorus Siculus, could be more alien to his true character; because
of his vile and extravagant folly, some thought him a
fool and changed his name from Epiphanes, ‘The Illustrious,’ to Epimanes, ‘The Madman.’ [See Humphrey
Prideaux, The Old and New Testament Connected in
the History of the Jews, Vol.II, pp.106,107.]
“Antiochus the Great, the father of Epiphanes,
being defeated in a war with the Romans, was able
to procure peace only by the payment of a prodigious sum of money and the surrender of a part of
his territory. As a pledge that he would faithfully
adhere to the terms of the treaty, he was obliged to
give hostages, among whom was Epiphanes, his son,
who was carried to Rome. The Romans ever afterward maintained this ascendancy.
“The little horn of the goat was to wax exceeding
great; but Antiochus Epiphanes did not become exceeding great. On the contrary, he did not enlarge his

“14. …Antiochus was merely one of a line of
kings and not a separate kingdom. Hence he was
merely a part of one of the horns. Antiochus reigned
over one of the four horns and ‘the little horn’ was a
fifth power. Therefore, Antiochus was not the ‘little
horn.’ Rome was ‘the little horn.’
“15. Antiochus certainly did not ‘wax’ exceeding great.’ He was not even the strongest of the Seleucid section of Alexander’s kingdom. Antiochus was
weak and was tributary to the Romans.
“16. Antiochus certainly did not wax ‘exceeding great towards the south.’ Dan. 8:9. His march to
‘the south’ to Egypt was stopped by the mere word of
an unarmed Roman officer. When Antiochus said he
would think about the Roman’s demand the Roman
drew a circle in the sand around Antiochus and told
him he would do his thinking within that circle.
Antiochus turned and retreated. He was frightened out
of Egypt by an unarmed representative of Rome. He
was later routed by the Jews. To apply this prophecy
of a world power, a super-power, which waxed ‘exceeding great towards the south’ to this cruel but weak
creature appears to be the height of folly; and is advanced merely to avoid or explain away this divine
prophecy.

250

DANIEL 8
“17. His push to the east resulted in his death. He
certainly did not wax ‘exceeding great’ in that direction.
“18. He shall stand up against the Prince of princes,’ Christ. Daniel 8:25. This Rome did, but Antiochus died 164 years before Christ. Antiochus just
does not meet the specifications of prophecy.” Burnside, DPUF, 183,184.

has two phases in its historical fulfillment. Even
though it symbolizes these two phases, they really belong to one power—Rome (pagan/papal).” BRI,
2SOD, 189,190.
“Is the ‘little horn’ represented by heaven as denoting both pagan and papal Rome? Indeed, pagan
and papal Rome are counted as one entity in Daniel
and Revelation, as others have so recognized. In Daniel 7:8, 20, 24, the little horn (the papacy) is represented as coming out of the fourth beast (pagan Rome). It
is a continuation or part of pagan Rome. In Daniel 8
the little horn power finds its fulfillment only in pagan
and papal Rome combined. Heaven counts them as
one. In Daniel 11, the king of the north represents
both pagan and papal Rome. Both are termed “the
king of the north.” In Revelation 12:3–4 the dragon
power that endeavors to destroy the Christ child
was pagan Rome. However, verses 13–16 reveal that
during the 1260 years, the dragon cast a flood of
water out of its mouth to sweep away the woman.
This was during the reign of papal Rome. Thus, the
dragon power of Revelation 12 is also both pagan
and papal Rome…. All generally recognize that the
‘little horn’ in Daniel 8:9 has two phases, yet is counted as one in the eyes of heaven. ” Heiks, AD508,

The Little Horn Denotes Rome.—
“It has been an easy matter to show that the little
horn does not denote Antiochus Epiphanes. It will be
as easy to show that it does denote Rome.
“The field of vision here is substantially the same
as that covered by Nebuchadnezzar’s image of Daniel
2, and the vision of Daniel 7. In both these prophetic
delineations we have found that the power which succeeded Grecia as the fourth great power was Rome.
The only natural inference would be that the little
horn, the power which in this vision succeeds Grecia
as an ‘exceeding great’ kingdom, is also Rome.”
Smith, DR, 158.
“Jesus Himself (Matt 24:15) demonstrates that
the book of Daniel and its predictions go beyond the
time of Greece. Therefore, the fourth empire must be
Roman.” BRI, 2SOD, 157.

“Through paganism, and then through the Papacy, Satan exerted his power for many centuries in
an effort to blot from the earth God’s faithful witnesses. Pagans and papists were actuated by the
same dragon spirit. They differed only in that the
Papacy, making a pretense of serving God, was the
more dangerous and cruel foe. Through the agency
of Romanism, Satan took the world captive. The
professed church of God was swept into the ranks of
this delusion, and for more than a thousand years the
people of God suffered under the dragon’s ire. And
when the Papacy, robbed of its strength, was forced to
desist from persecution,” Signs, 11/1/1899.

Little Horn of Daniel 8—Both Pagan & Papal.—
“In chapter 8 the little horn was to appear on the
scene of action after the four horns had arisen from the
head of the Greek goat. These represented the divisions Alexander’s generals carved from the empire
after his death. Put in specific chronological terms, this
means that the little horn was to appear on the scene of
action sometime after 323 BC. In Chapter 7 the little
horn was to appear on the scene of action sometime
after the divisions of the Roman empire had arisen
(represented by the ten horns). In chronological terms
this would date its appearance to some point after AD
476.
“This chronological contrast in the two horns represents the difference in time between (1) the intrusion
of Imperial Rome into the Near East and (2) the appearance of the papacy among the powers that arose
from the fragmented Roman empire. In chapter 7 the
symbol of the little horn includes only the religious
phase of Rome inasmuch as the imperial phase was
represented by the body of the fourth beast. On the
other hand, in chapter 8 both phases of Rome’s
work are represented under this one little horn
symbol. The Imperial phase is referred to in its political and military extension into the Near East—the east,
south, and glorious land (vs. 9). Its religious phase is
evidenced by the specifically religious nature of the
works that follow thereafter (vss.10-12).
“...It can be seen that what was represented by
both beast and horn in chapter 7 is represented in chapter 8 by the horn alone. Thus the little horn of chapter 8

The “Little Horn” of Daniel 7 & 8 Compared..—
“In Daniel 7, different beasts are used to represent
the kingdoms, including the fourth beast—symbol of
pagan Rome. Yet the little horn power—symbol of
papal Rome—was still part of the fourth beast. It was
not a separate power. So the fourth beast, like the
iron in Daniel 2, arises after Greece and extends
until the time of the end, though in another phase.
“The same principle exists with the little horn
power of Daniel 8. It comes up after Greece (see verse
23), yet it extends down until the end, when it shall be
‘broken without hand,’ just as the stone representing
God’s kingdom was cut out ‘without hands’—a symbol
of divine intervention. Like the powers in the previous prophecies, this little horn comes up after
Greece and extends until the end of time.

251

GEMS FROM DANIEL
south, and the beautiful land in Daniel 8:9 represent
territorial conquests by Imperial Rome. With verse 10,
however, a transition takes place. The small horn of
Rome has a new target, but it is not on earth. It is in
heaven. The next three verses identify the targets of
the small horn as the ‘starry host’ of heaven (vs. 10),
the ‘Prince’ who leads that host (vs. 11), and the sanctuary in heaven along with the service carried on there
(vss. 11,12). This transition from horizontal earthly
conquests to a vertical assault on heaven is referred
to as the vertical dimension of apocalyptic.” Shea,
DARG, 177-179.

“The little horn, then, symbolizes both pagan
and papal Rome because the pagan phase began after
Greece, while the papal phase will extend to the end.
“…The important point here is that the little horn
power, which comes after the ram and the he-goat,
symbolizes Rome in its pagan and papal phases,
though the emphasis here, as in Daniel 7, is on the
papal phase.
“Indeed, notice some parallels between the little
horn of Daniel 7 and the little horn of Daniel 8, parallels that prove we are dealing with the same power.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

COMPARISON OF THE LITTLE HORN OF
DANIEL 7 AND DANIEL 8
Both horns are little at the beginning.
Both become great later on.
Both are persecuting powers.
Both are self-exalting and blasphemous.
Both target God’s people.
Both “take away” the law and the gospel.
Both have aspects of their activity delineated by
prophetic times.
Both extend until the time of the end.
Both face supernatural destruction.
“Clearly, the little horn of Daniel 8 is Rome.”
Goldstein, 1844MS, 35,36; (Pfandl, DTSOB, 77).

Toward the South, the East, and the Pleasant Land.—
“Rome reached the height of its greatness under
Octavian, known as Augustus Caesar. The date from
which it may most probably be considered a universal
empire, was the time when it had made itself master of
all the divisions of the preceding or goat kingdom. And
when it made Egypt a province, it had then absorbed
into itself all the kingdom of Alexander. This was BC
30. But it was introduced into prophecy earlier than
this, that is, when the league was made between it and
the Jews in BC 161. After that the prophet saw it
extending itself toward the east, the south, and the
pleasant land. This was fulfilled when it made Syria
and Palestine Roman provinces in BC 65 and 63,
and Egypt, as already stated, BC 30.” Biblical Institute, 46.

“We have seen that in the seventh chapter of Daniel the little horn, though as such representing only the
latter phase of Rome, yet does really represent Rome
in both its phases—Rome from beginning to end;
because when the time comes that the ‘little horn’ ;is to
be broken and destroyed, it is indeed ‘the beast’ that is
‘slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning
flame.’” Jones, CWCP, 95.

“The horn’s horizontal-geographical movement noted in the first part of the verse 9 is elaborated
on in the second part of the verse. Here the directions
of the expansion are indicated by the phrase, ‘toward
the south, and toward the east, and toward the glory.’”
BRI, 2SOD, 392,393.

Which Waxed Exceeding Great.—
“The idea conveyed is of this horn growing extremely, abundantly, preeminently, or stupendously
great.” Thiele, OSID, 86.
Symbol
Ram
He-Goat
Little-horn

Strength (KJV)
‘great’
‘very great’
‘exceeding great’

“The little horn comes out of one of the four
winds. It came out of the west wind, having arisen in
the Italian peninsula, and expanded toward the south
(Carthage and Egypt), and the east (the Grecian Empire).” Ferrell, BD, 96.

Earthly Power
Persia
Grecia
Rome

DANIEL 8:10
And it waxed great, even to the host of
heaven; and it cast down some of the host
and of the stars to the ground, and stamped
upon them.

“The vision presents a progression in terms of the
power utilized by the kingdoms involved. The Persian
ram ‘magnified himself’ (vs. 4, RSV). The Greek
goat ‘magnified himself exceedingly’ (vs. 8, RSV).
The little horn then ‘magnified itself, even to the host
of heaven…, even up to the prince of the host’ (vss.
10,11, RSV). This progression from the comparative
to the superlative would be true in terms of the Roman
Empire, but it would not be true in terms of an individual ruler such as Antiochus Epiphanes.
“The small horn in the vision of Daniel 8 represents Rome. The territorial conquests to the east,

Fulfilled by Both Pagan and Papal Rome.—
“Verses 9-10 find their fulfillment in Pagan
Rome, while vss.10-12 are primarily fulfilled by Papal
Rome.
“The Papacy [Papal Rome] is the child [son] of
Pagan Rome. Thus, spiritually, Pagan Rome is Satan’s
counterfeit of the heavenly Father, while Papal Rome
is Satan’s counterfeit of the Son, Jesus Christ. Like the

252

DANIEL 8
Son, Papal Rome receives its seat, power, and authority
from its father, the Dragon, or Satan, so that when you
worship the beast, you worship Satan. Like the Son,
the Papacy comes out of the water and begins a 1260
day ministry. Like the Son, Papal Rome learns what
to do from what its father, Pagan Rome, did. Like
the Son, it suffers a deadly wound, but comes back to
life.
“Therefore in vs. 10 in particular we find that
both Pagan and Papal Rome, ‘cast down some of the
host [God’s people] and of the stars to the ground and
stamped on them’—the Papacy following the example of Pagan Rome, but doing it in a greater scale
and for a longer period of time, 1260 years.
“The Papacy relates to Pagan Rome in the same
way that Jesus related to the Father: “Then answered
Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth
the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise.” John 5:19.” PJ

host of the battle.’ If we use the Bible as its own interpreter we must believe that the ‘host’ of Dan. 8
represents God’s people.” Bunch, BOD, 117.
“But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the
city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of angels, To the general
assembly and church of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect.” Heb. 12:22.
“In the OT ‘host’ refers, among other things, to
‘my [Lord’s] hosts, my people the sons of Israel (Ex.
7:4 RSV). In this case it may also be understood to
have an explicative force, referring to God’s people
on earth over whom the ‘little horn’ extends its
power.
“The casting down to the ground and the trampling of ‘some of the host and some of the stars’ is interpreted literally in verse 24 as the destruction of
‘mighty ones and people of the saints.’ In 7:27 ‘the
people of the saints of the most High’ are the faithful
followers of the Lord; the same seems to apply to
8:10,24. The attack upon the ‘mighty ones and people of the saints’ points to the persecution of God’s
people.” BRI, 2SOD, 398.

Even To.—
“In verse 9, the preposition used with all three of
the directions described is ‘el (a preposition denoting
motion to or direction toward). In this case the preposition ‘el was used to describe motion on the horizontal
plane while the preposition ‘ad was used to describe
motion in the vertical dimension. This use of ‘ad becomes more clear in the succeeding verses.” BRI,
2SOD, 508.

And of the stars.—
“And ‘the stars’ represent the leaders of the
host: Revelation 1:20: ‘The mystery of the seven stars
which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven
golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of
the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks which
thou sawest are the seven churches.’” Heiks, AD508,
26.

Host of Heaven.—
“The ‘host [#6635] of heaven’ is the people of
God: Exodus 12:41: ‘And it came to pass at the end
of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame
day it came to pass, that all the hosts [#6635] of the
LORD went out from the land of Egypt.’
“…Those being persecuted are God’s people, described by Philippians 3:20 as having their citizenship in heaven.” Heiks, AD508, 26.

“That the ‘stars’ who were cast down and destroyed by the Papacy represent the officers and leaders of the saints or host there can be no question.
‘Stars’ are often used in the Scriptures to represent
leaders. In Isa. 14:12,13, Lucifer is called the ‘day
star,’ and in Rev. 22:16 Christ is called ‘the bright and
morning star.’ Of Him prophecy said: ‘There shall
come a Star out of Jacob.’ Numb. 24:17. The crown of
twelve stars on the woman of Rev. 12:1, who was
symbolic of Christ’s bride or church, represents the
leadership or rulership of the twelve apostles. The
elders or ministers of the seven churches of Rev. 2
and 3, are represented as ‘seven stars’ in the right
hand of Christ. …Those who are prominent or outstanding in any calling are called ‘stars.’” Bunch,
BOD, 117.

“Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened
us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) And
hath raised us up together, and made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” Eph. 2:5.
“The ‘host’ and the ‘stars’ that were cast down to
the earth and destroyed by the Papacy are clearly identified as the saints of God and their leaders. …The
‘host of heaven’ are all who assist Christ in the work of
redemption including the saints who belong to the family of heaven and whose names are enrolled in the New
Jerusalem. See Heb. 12:22,23. Angels are called ‘the
Lord’s host,’ and Christ ‘the Captain of the Lord’s
host.’ Gen. 32:1,2; Josh. 5:14. The rulers of Israel
were said to be ‘over the host of the Lord,’ and were
called ‘the officers of the host.’ 1 Chron. 9:19; Num.
31:14,48. In scores of places God’s people are called
the ‘host’ and that ‘the Lord of hosts mustereth the

It Cast Down to the Ground. Where is the Papacy?—
“The action is set in the stellar heavens. …The
little horn exalts itself against the starry host of
heaven. In this third scene it is seen as coming in conflict with the Prince or leader of that same host. This
Prince, therefore, has a relationship to the heavenly

253

GEMS FROM DANIEL
sphere. The horn’s action of casting the truth down
to the earth is described in this section too. Thus the
location from which it is cast down should be, by
way of contrast, heaven. These factors contribute to
the conclusion that the action of this final scene is set
in heaven, just as the action is in the preceding scene.”
BRI, 2SOD, 513.

“In Daniel 8:25 we have the interpretation of
verse 11 of the vision by the angel and it will clearly
settle which phase of Rome that does the ‘magnifying:’
“Daniel 8:25: ‘And through his policy also he
shall cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall
magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the Prince
of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.”
“Who is this power that magnifies himself and
thinks to stand up against the Prince of princes? The
angel declares it will be the power that shall be broken
without hand. ‘Broken without hand’ is a clear reference from Daniel to the Second Coming of
Christ….
“II Thessalonians 2:8 makes the inescapable connection between Jesus’ return and the end of papal
Rome: ‘And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.’
“Ellen White agrees with Paul but is at odds with
William Miller. By quoting 2 Thessalonians 2:7–8, she
proclaims that which is to be taken out of the way is
the papacy at our Lord’s second coming, not paganism:
“ ‘The mystery of iniquity doth already work; only he who now letteth [hindereth] will let [hinder], until
he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked
be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.’ The prophet Daniel, describing the
same power, says, ‘He shall speak great words against
the Most High, and shall wear out the saints of the
Most High, and think to change times and laws.’ How
strikingly have these prophecies been fulfilled by
the Romish Church!... The mystery of iniquity,
which had already begun to work in Paul’s day, will
continue its work until it be taken out of the way at
our Lord’s second coming.’ [Ellen White, Signs of the
Times, June 12, 1893.]
“Therefore, the presumptuous power brought to
view in verse 11 that is to be ‘broken without hand’ in
the interpreting of verse 25 cannot be pagan Rome, for
it had ceased to exist many centuries before. The only
logical answer to our question of who that power is,
is none other than papal Rome.” Heiks, AD508,
27,28.

Casts Down to Ground and Stamps Upon Them.—
“The little horn reaches up to heaven, which is the
vertical dimension, and then he throws down the stars
to the earth in the other direction. But he is not content with merely throwing the stars down to the
earth; he goes on to trample upon them, crushing
them.” Shea, DARG, 179.

DANIEL 8:11
Yea, he magnified himself even to the
prince of the host, and by him the daily
sacrifice was taken away, and the place of
the sanctuary was cast down.
Yea, he.—
“Note the change in gender. From ‘it’ to ‘he’,
‘himself,’ ‘him.’ Why? Because there was a vast
change in Rome. It changed from pagan to papal.”
Burnside, DPUF, 140.
“The focus of verses 11-12 continues to be on
the upward, vertical movements of the ‘little horn’
as it intrudes into the affairs of the heavenly realities. The horn magnifies itself against the Prince of the
host (Christ). This is done by arrogating to itself
divine prerogatives and by attempting to nullify
Christ’s heavenly, priestly ministry of forgiveness
and salvation. It casts God’s revealed truth to the
ground and for a time is seen to practice and to prosper
in its endeavors.
“Some historicist interpreters attempt to find a
parallel fulfillment for each specification in 8:9-12 for
the two phases of political-pagan and ecclesiasticalpapal Rome. We suggest that there is no simultaneous
or dual fulfillment here, but rather sequential. Sequential fulfillment means that verses 9-10 are fulfilled by
the pagan (pre-medieval) phase of Rome, whereas
verses 11-12 are fulfilled by papal (ecclesiastical)
Rome. Accordingly, 8:9-12 finds its fulfillment sequentially in Rome with verses 9-10 in its politicalpagan phase and verses 11-12 in its ecclesiasticalpapal phase.” BRI, 2SOD, 399, 401.

How the Papacy Magnified Himself.—
“Around the time of the barbarian conquest of
Rome, the Bishop of Rome cast himself in the role of
‘Vicar of Christ’—i.e., ‘vice-Christ’— authorized to
act on earth in His physical absence. Historian A.J.
Wylie exposes the motive: ‘With Rome would have
fallen her bishop, had he not, as if by anticipation of
the crisis, reserved till this hour the master-stroke of his
policy. He now boldly cast himself upon an element of
much greater strength than that of which the political
convulsions of the time had deprived him: namely, that
the bishop of Rome is the successor of Peter, the

He Magnified Himself.—
“Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he
as God sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God.” 2 Thessalonians 2:4.

254

DANIEL 8
off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so.’ Joshua 5:13-15.
“This was none other than Michael, the Captain or Prince of the host, also known later as Jesus
Christ. This was the same One who talked with Moses
at the burning bush, asking him also to take off his
shoes. ‘Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Before Abraham was, I am.’ John 8:58.” PJ.

prince of the apostles, and, in virtue of being so, is
Christ’s vicar on earth. In making this claim, the
Roman pontiffs vaulted at once over the throne of
kings to the seat of gods: Rome became once more
the mistress of the world, and her popes the rulers of
the earth.’ A.J. Wylie, The Papacy, 34. [Found in Bible
Readings for the Home Circle, 1915 ed., 229.] Kings
and commoners would come under the sway of the
arrogant claim.
“Additional groundwork had been laid more than
a decade earlier. In AD 494, Pope Gelasius I had presented to the Roman emperor the papal view of world
governance. That view involved two ‘swords,’ or two
powers, ruling the lives of men: the civil and the ecclesiastical, the ‘royal’ and the ‘sacred.’ One will note
the ambitious symbolism for the church: not a shepherd’s staff, but a conqueror’s sword. Apostolic servanthood was set aside for equivalency with a king—no,
more than equivalency:
“Of the two ‘swords,’ the pope wrote, the ‘responsibility of the bishops is more weighty [than the
king’s] insofar as they will answer also for the kings of
men themselves at divine judgment.’ In other words,
as author J. Michael Miller wrote, ‘the two swords
theory maintained that secular leaders were subject
to the pope’s spiritual authority.’
“The ‘two swords’ view and the presumptuous
title ‘Vicar of Christ’ were a proclamation of the
papal intention to be ‘king of kings’—ruler over all
other earthly crowned heads. Indeed, the triple
crown worn by the popes exemplified the papal claim
to superior status. It would be only a matter of time
and patient insinuation in matters of state until the way
would be opened for the church to exercise her assumed responsibility in the affairs of state.” Handwerk, Jean, The Significance of Clovis: Christ’s Mediation Replaced, Cornerstone Newsletter,

“The inquiry of many a proud heart is, ‘Why need
I go in penitence and humiliation before I can have the
assurance of my acceptance with God?’ I point you to
Christ. He was sinless, and, more than this, He was
the Prince of heaven; but in man’s behalf He became
sin for the race.” Steps to Christ, 45,46.
“It has been said on occasion that the book of
Revelation could well be called the book of the Lamb,
because of the frequency with which that designation
occurs in it. As a parallel to this book, the book of
Daniel could be titled the book of the Prince. First
we meet Him in divine-like being in the earthly context
of 3:25. Then, by way of contrast, we meet Him as a
human-like being in the heavenly context of 7:13-14.
“Next He is the Prince of the host engaged in a
struggle over the heavenly sanctuary and its ministration in chapter 8. In chapter 9 He appears upon
the heights of the literary structure of the second half of
the book as the Prince of the covenant, the Prince of
sufferers. In chapter 10 He is Michael who wrestles
with the ancient Persian kings over the fate of His people. Once again and for a final time He will engage in
such a struggle, when He stands up to take the dominion and rulership over the eternal kingdom of God according to chapters 12 and 7.” BRI, 2SOD, 251.
“It is generally held that ‘the Prince of princes,’
against whom the horn rises or stands up (compare the
interpretation of the vision-audition in 8:25), is identical with ‘the Prince of the host.’ According to 12:1-3
the name of the ‘Prince’ is Michael, ‘the great
Prince’(vs. 1). Michael is a judgment figure in 12:1-3
who has close associations with the judgment figure of
the Son of man in chapter 7. The judgment motif appears also in 8:25 where the uprising of the ‘little horn’
against ‘the Prince of princes’ ultimately leads to the
horn’s destruction ‘by no human hand’ (vs.25d). In
this connection one cannot fail to be reminded that
in the NT the Michael figure is identified with
Christ. (Jude 9; cf. 1 Thess. 4:16).” BRI, 2SOD, 403.

“This is movement vertically into the religious
world—into the place of God.” PJ.
“The papal authorities’ claim that the Roman pontiff ‘is of so great dignity and power that he forms one
and the same tribunal with Christ’ exalts the pope to
a position as high as the ‘Prince of the host,’ Jesus
Christ.” Mansell, OSOA, 58.
Prince of the Host.—
“ ‘And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold,
there stood a man over against him with his sword
drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said
unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? 14
And he said, Nay; but as captain [same Hebrew word
as “Prince”] of the host of the LORD am I now
come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did
worship, and said unto him, What saith my Lord unto
his servant? 15 And the captain [Prince] of the
LORD’s host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from

The Prince of the Host = Jesus, our High Priest.—
“The ordinary word sequence is reversed at the
beginning of verse 11 in order to place emphasis on the
important position that the Prince of the host occupies. His connection with the starry host (vs. 10) emphasizes His political role as Leader of the host of the
saints. But in this third scene (introduced by verse
11) it is His priestly role which is being emphasized

255

GEMS FROM DANIEL
designate the ‘tower’ (migdal) of Babel. The description of the little horn’s behavior reminds us, through
the etymological play on words, of the ‘escalation’ of
Babel.
“Moreover, the power with the same characteristics as the little horn in Daniel 11 (see vs. 36) happens
to come from the North (see v. 29), which is another
way of referring to Babylon by the prophets (cf. Jer.
1:14; 46:13,20; 50:1,3; Eze. 26:7; etc.).
“The two figures are identical even in their motivation. In Daniel 8, the ambition of the little horn is to
exalt himself to the position of the Prince of the heavenly host, who is the High Priest officiating on the Day
of Atonement. In Revelation 14, the ambition of Babel
is to take the place of the God-Judge. Since the
Judgment and the Day of Atonement are the same
event, it follows that the places coveted by the little
horn and Babel are the same. Note in this connection
the phrase ‘Who is like the beast’ (Rev. 13:4) which is
an echo of ‘Who is like God’ (Mikael). It thereby indicates the nature of the usurpation of the beast, namely,
the pretense of taking the place of the High Priest Michael.
“The ambition of Babel is identical to that of the
little horn. It is of a religious nature and is aimed at
the position of the High Priest in connection with
Kippur and the Judgment. Thus it is the power to
forgive sins and ultimately to decide about salvation
(see Lev. 16:39,32) that both are striving for.
“…The taking away of the continual by the little
horn betrays his intention to represent God on earth;
this is his crime.” Doukhan, DVE, 65,66,67.

by virtue of His connection with the heavenly sanctuary and its ministry.” BRI, 2SOD, 513.
“The prophecy of the 2300 evenings and mornings implies the involvement of the High Priest as it
relates to the Day of Atonement. Indeed, the reference
to the High Priest is repetitively connoted in the word
Prince (sar). The word (sar) points to the High Priest
in many texts of the Old Testament (1 Chron. 15:22;
24:5; Ezra 8:24). Within the book of Daniel, sar refers to Michael (10:5,13, 21; 12:1), whose garments
of linen are reminiscent of the Day of Atonement,
the only day the priest was thus dressed (Lev.
16:4).” Doukhan, DVE, 37,38.
Yea, He magnified Himself Even Unto the Prince of
the Host.—
“Let us read verses 11 and 12 of Daniel 8, and it
will be plainly seen that here is exactly the place
where Paul found the scripture from which he
taught the Thessalonians concerning the ‘man of
sin’ and the ‘mystery of iniquity.’ ‘Yea, he magnified himself even to the Prince of the host, and by him
the daily sacrifice was taken away; And the place of
his sanctuary was cast down. And an host was given
him against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it
practiced and prospered.’
“This plainly points out that which took away
the priesthood, the ministry, and the sanctuary of
God, and of Christianity.
“Let us read it again. ‘Yea, he [the little horn—
the man of sin] magnified himself even to the Prince of
the host [‘against the Prince of princes’—Christ], and
by him [the man of sin] the daily sacrifice [the continual service, the ministry and the priesthood of Christ]
was taken away, and the place of His sanctuary [the
sanctuary of the prince of the host, of the Prince of
princes—Christ] was cast down. And an host was given him [the man of sin] against the daily sacrifice
[against the continual service, of the ministry of Christ,
the Prince of the host] by reason of transgression, and it
cast down the truth to the ground; and it practiced and
prospered.” Jones, CWCP, 98.

“This compromise between paganism and
Christianity resulted in the development of ‘the man
of sin’ foretold in prophecy as opposing and exalting
himself above God. That gigantic system of false religion is a masterpiece of Satan’s power—a monument
of his efforts to seat himself upon the throne to rule the
earth according to his will.
“…It is one of the leading doctrines of Romanism
that the pope is the visible head of the universal
church of Christ, invested with supreme authority
over bishops and pastors in all parts of the world.
More than this, the pope has been given the very titles
of Deity. He has been styled ‘Lord God the Pope’ and
has been declared infallible. He demands the homage
of all men.
“…The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her power
increased, the darkness deepened. Faith was transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope
of Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God for
forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the
people looked to the pope, and to the priests and
prelates to whom he delegated authority. They were
taught that the pope was their earthly mediator and
that none could approach God except through him;
and, further, that he stood in the place of God to

“The arrogance of men knows no limits and even
aspires to equal the ‘Prince of the host’ (8:11)…. Daniel 11:36 states that this same tyrant would ‘exalt himself and magnify himself above every god, and shall
speak astonishing things against the God of gods.’
…While these passages describe religious and political
struggles, the little horn of chapter 8 and the king of
chapter 11 rise up against heaven itself. In these
verses the ‘place of His sanctuary’ can hardly be restricted to the earthly temple, but must extend beyond
to the heavenly sanctuary.” BRI, 2SOD, 59, 68.
“It is noteworthy that the root of the word ‘exalted’ (gdl) is the same as the one used in Gen. 11:4 to

256

DANIEL 8
them and was therefore to be implicitly obeyed.”
Great Controversy, 50, 55.

tamiyd (#8548 in Strong’s or Old Testament lexicons).
The context of its usage gives certain light as to its
meaning. The theme and context in which the ‘daily’ finds its home in the book of Daniel is none other
than that of the sanctuary. As we look at the following texts, it will become abundantly clear to the reader
that the prophets had one thought in mind and one only: the ‘daily’ was always used in connection with the
ministerial work of the priest in the first apartment.
Never was the ‘daily’ attributed to the work of the
priest in the second apartment, or to anything else, as
will be shown in the following biblical verses. In every
case, the underlined word, each one written in the context of the sanctuary, has the very same reference number ‘8548’ as does the ‘daily’ in Daniel 8:11 in the Old
Testament. Without question, then, the meaning of the
‘daily’ is synonymous with the meaning of these
words.
“Ex. 25:30: ‘And thou shalt set upon the table
shewbread before me alway.’
“Ex. 27:20-21: ‘And thou shalt command the
children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive
beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always. In the tabernacle of the congregation without
the vail, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his
sons shall order it from evening to morning before the
LORD: it shall be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.’
“Ex. 29:38: ‘Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day
by day continually.’
“Ex. 29:42: ‘This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD:
where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.’
“Ex. 30:8: ‘And when Aaron lighteth the lamps
at even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the Lord throughout your generations.
“Turning now to the book of Hebrews, we find
total consistency from the Old Testament prophets to
the New:
“Heb. 7:3: ‘Without father, without mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor
end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth
a priest continually.’
“[Heb. 7:24,25: ‘But this man, because he continueth

And By Him
“Literally, the second clause in verse 11 reads,
‘And from him was taken away the continuance.’
Every part of this clause poses difficulties. The Hebrew expression mimmennu is not to be translated ‘by
him’ but ‘from him.’ Who is the antecedent of ‘him’?
Grammatically, the nearest and most natural antecedent
is ‘the Prince of the host.’ This is supported in the ancient versions.
“…We have noted that 8:11a refers to the selfexaltation of the ‘little horn’ power even to the heavenly ‘Prince of the host.’ In verses 11b the statement is
made that ‘from him’ (mimmennu), that is, from the
heavenly ‘Prince of the host,’ the tamid was taken
away. This indicates that the tamid (the continuance; that goes on without interruption) is something which belongs to the heavenly Prince.” BRI,
2SOD, 404,408
“The Hebrew literally reads that ‘from him,’ that
is, from the prince of the host, the ‘daily’ or the ‘continual’ was taken away.” Goldstein, 1844MS, 61.
The Daily.—
“The following are the ways in which ‘tamiyd’ is
translated in the King James Bible:
“Tamyd” translated as: Number of times
4 times
Alway
6 times
Always
25 times
Continual
53 times
Continually
7 out of 101 times.
Daily
3 times
Ever
1 time
Evermore
3 times
Perpetual
From: Thiele, OSID, 89.
“Examples of the way ‘tamiyd’ is used are as follows:
“perpetually burning incense, Ex. 30:8.
“perpetually burning lamps, Ex. 27:20.
“ever present shewbread, Lev. 24:8, [Ex.25:30].
“daily morning and evening offerings, Ex.29:38.
“perpetual fire on the altar, Lev. 6:13.
“daily morning and evening meal offerings, Leviticus 6:20.
“memorial of Aaron’s breastplate, Ex. 28:29.
“the mitre continually worn, Ex. 28:38.
“continual ministry of the priests, 1 Chr. 16:37.
“constant presence of God in the pillar of cloud
and fire, Numbers 9:16.
“constant care of God of His people, Dt. 11:12.
“God’s continual guidance, Isa. 58:11.” Thiele,
OSID, 89.

ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood. Wherefore he is
able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.]

“Heb. 7:27: ‘Who needeth not daily, as those
high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins,
and then for the people’s: for this he did once, when he
offered up himself.’
“Heb. 9:6: ‘Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God.’
“Heb. 10:1: ‘For the law having a shadow of
good things to come, and not the very image of the
things, can never with those sacrifices which they of-

“In the Hebrew of the Old Testament, ‘daily’ is

257

GEMS FROM DANIEL
fered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.’
“Heb. 10:11: ‘And every priest standeth daily
ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices,
which can never take away sins.’
“Here we see perfect harmony between Old and
New Testaments. Let us now inquire if Ellen White is
in harmony with the rule of faith:
“After His ascension, our Saviour was to begin
His work as our High Priest. Says Paul, ‘Christ is not
entered into the holy places made with hands, which
are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to
appear in the presence of God for us.’ Hebrews 9:24.
As Christ’s ministration was to consist of two great
divisions, each occupying a period of time and having
a distinctive place in the heavenly sanctuary, so the
typical ministration consisted of two divisions, the
daily and the yearly service, and to each a department
of the tabernacle was devoted.
“As Christ at His ascension appeared in the presence of God to plead His blood in behalf of penitent
believers, so the priest in the daily ministration sprinkled the blood of the sacrifice in the holy place in the
sinner’s behalf.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 357.
“The ministration of the earthly sanctuary consisted of two divisions; the priests ministered daily in
the holy place, while once a year the high priest performed a special work of atonement in the most holy,
for the cleansing of the sanctuary. Day by day the
repentant sinner brought his offering to the door of
the tabernacle and, placing his hand upon the victim's head, confessed his sins, thus in figure transferring them from himself to the innocent sacrifice…. Such was the work that went on, day by day,
throughout the year. The sins of Israel were thus
transferred to the sanctuary, and a special work became
necessary for their removal.” Great Controversy, 418.
“Once again we see perfect harmony.” Heiks,
TDSB,9-12.

“In the OT tamid is commonly used (30 times) in
connection with several different types of activity of
the priests of the sanctuary (cf. Ex. 25:30; 27:20;
29:38; 30:8, etc.). The connection of tamid with the
sanctuary is especially emphasized by its recurrence in
verse 12. In this manner the word tamid, used in both
verses 11 and 12, flanks the word for sanctuary at the
end of verse 11. Thus the order of these relationships
is: tamid-sanctuary-tamid. The close and intimate relationship between these concepts underscores the fact
that this tamid ministry of the Prince is connected
with this heavenly sanctuary.” BRI, 2SOD, 514.
“The tamid of Daniel 8:13,14 is symbolic. It
would be difficult to overemphasize the importance of
understanding the term ‘tamid’ and its far-reaching
implications. …Tamid means ‘continual’ and is used
in this passage to signify a continual something—
without expressing what the something is. Translators
have sometime added the term ‘burnt offering’ in an
attempt to make the passage fit Antiochus Epiphanes.
[We need to] look instead at the symbolic tamid of
Daniel 8 as representing the continual—that is, the allof-the-time—high-priestly ministry of Jesus Christ on
our behalf, in the heavenly sanctuary.
“…That Jesus ministers on our behalf continually
is emphasized in Hebrews 7:21-25, where His ministry
is contrasted with the noncontinuous ministry of the
Old Testament ‘Levitical’ priests:
“Those who formerly became [Levitical] priests
took their office without an oath, but his one [Jesus
Christ] was addressed with an oath, ‘The Lord has
sworn and will not change his mind, “Thou are a
priest for ever.”’ This makes Jesus the surety of a
better covenant.
“The former priests were many in number, because they were prevented by death from continuing in
office; but he [Jesus] holds his priesthood permanently,
because he continues for ever. Consequently he is able
for all time to save those who draw near to God
through him, since he always lives to make intercession for them. Hebrews 7:21-25.
“…Quite often …tamid is used in a technical
sense to describe various basic aspects of the ritual
associated with the Old Testament sanctuary. A dozen
times (as in Numbers 28:3 and 1 Chronicles 16:40) it
refers to the offering of a lamb regularly, morning and
evening, as a ‘continual burnt offering.’ It also refers
(as in Leviticus 24:2) to the lamps that were kept
continually burning and (as in 2 Chronicles 2:4) to the
‘continual offering of the showbread’ which was kept
on display perpetually and was changed weekly. In
Exodus 28:29,30 tamid refers to the symbolically
adorned breastpiece that the high priest wore continually, whenever his duties required him to enter the
sanctuary. In 2 Chronicles 24:14 it refers to all the
burnt offering offered to God during a particular king’s
lifetime. And in 1 Chronicles 23:31 it refers to the

“The various daily and continual services of the
earthly sanctuary were types of the constant service of
Christ in the heavenly sanctuary. Of Christ’s priestly
ministry we read: ‘The Lord sware and will not repent.
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.’ ‘This man, because he continueth ever, hath an
unchangeable priesthood. Wherefore he is able also to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.’
Heb. 7:21,24,25.
“The perpetually burning incense, the everpresent shewbread, the continual ministrations of
the priests were all types of the continual ministry of
Christ in the heavenly sanctuary in behalf of man.
Thus in Daniel 8:11, the ‘daily’ no doubt was employed to denote the constant, unceasing ministry of
Christ in the heavenly sanctuary, and not merely the
daily offering of sacrifice in the earthly sanctuary.”
Thiele, OSID, 90.

258

DANIEL 8
special sacrifices offered regularly on Sabbaths, new
moons, and feast days.
“With this survey in mind, it becomes apparent
that tamid took into account the entire continuing
ministry of the Old Testament sanctuary and was by
no means limited to the daily burnt offerings.
“…The sanctuary rituals which God required
were impressive and varied. …The basic ritual was the
offering of a lamb each morning and evening. According to Leviticus 9:24 God Himself miraculously kindled the altar fire when the tabernacle was originally
dedicated, and the priests were under strict instructions
never to let it go out. ‘This is the law of the burnt offering. The burnt offering shall be on the hearth upon
the altar all night until the morning, and the fire of the
altar shall be kept burning on it…. It shall not go out.”
Leviticus 6:8-13.
“Tradition later claimed that the original fire
continued to burn from the time of Moses until
Nebuchadnezzar destroyed the temple in 586 BC, a
total of over eight hundred years according to biblical chronology.
“This continually burning sacrifice said a lot to
the Israelites camped in the wilderness. At any moment when anyone felt remorse for his sinfulness, a
glance at the tabernacle or at night a sniff of the air
could bring reassurance that the sacrifice was in progress on his behalf. And the continuance of the sacrifice would remind him that the other basic functions of
the priesthood were being maintained on his behalf
also. The lamps were burning day and night, their
steady glow reflecting from the gold-plated walls of the
tabernacle. The bread was in its place on the golden
table. And the high priest, as often at least as he was
on duty, was carrying on his breastpiece the name of
every tribe in the nation, thus symbolically carrying
near his heart and in the presence of God the name of
every individual in the encampment.
“…Like the metals, beasts, and horns of Daniel’s
prophecies, which are symbols of empires and kingdoms, so the tamid of Daniel 8:13,14 is a symbol. It is
a symbol of the continual ministry of Jesus Christ in
the heavenly sanctuary, forgiving our sins and
providing power for us to live changed lives in fulfillment of the new covenant promises.” Maxwell,
1GC, 160,161,166.

“What ‘was taken away’ from the divine figure in
heaven? The text states directly that it was the tamid.
The expression tamid appears in 8:11 with the definite
article, hattamid (the tamid), and is thus to be understood as a substantive. More precisely, it is used in this
text (as also in 11:31; 12:11) as an adjectival noun.
“…Its biblical use as an adjectival substantive
demonstrates rich associations with all phases of the
Hebrew cultus. Thus, although tamid is used in association with the ‘burnt offering,’ it is not restricted to this
context. It is also used with the ‘grain offering,’
‘showbread,’ ‘incense,’ ‘light,’ ‘allowance,’ etc.
“…A study of the usages of tamid in the book of
Leviticus discloses that the term was intimately
linked with the ministry of the priests in the first
apartment of the sanctuary. It is never used in connection with the second apartment ministry. The expression hattamid (‘the tamid’) in Daniel, therefore,
would be more correctly translated ‘the continual intercession’ rather than ‘the daily sacrifice’ as in our common version.” BRI, 2SOD, 404,406,528.
Daniel Uses Another Adjective as a Noun.—
“The word tamid is an adjective or adverb, but
Daniel uses it as a noun. Daniel does the same thing in
chapter 9:24 where he uses another adjective as a
noun. Both times referring to the sanctuary service.
“Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people
and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and
to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and
to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the
most Holy. Daniel 9:24.
“Here ‘the most Holy’ is an adjective, but is used
like a noun, and refers to the entire Heavenly Sanctuary
that Jesus anointed upon his ascension into Heaven.
Thus, Daniel uses two adjectives like nouns to
describe aspects of Christ’s work in the heavenly
sanctuary.” PJ.
The Importance of the Priest in the Daily Ministration.—
“It is of utmost importance to emphasize that forgiveness or ‘atonement’ was not effected without both
the shedding and the application of the blood.
…Many Christians overlook this fact. They speak
gratefully about the act of salvation on the cross and
about the blood which Jesus shed there, but they stop
short and do not mention that in some sense Jesus
had to ‘take blood’ with Him into the heavenly
sanctuary (Hebrews 9:12) in order to care adequately for our sins.
“Many Christians think that Jesus only died in order to provide justification by faith. Romans 4:25,
however, says that He was ‘put to death for our trespasses and raised for our justification.’ Romans 5:10
says that ‘if while we were enemies we were reconciled
to God by the death of his son, much more, now that
we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life.’

“It has been noted—and is worth emphasizing—that the tamid (‘continual ministry’) is that
which takes place in the holy place of the sanctuary.
The ‘little horn’ power is only able to confuse human
beings with regard to the ministration in that place. (In
the earthly sanctuary the term tamid is used only in
connection with items and rituals connected with
the first apartment.) But the ‘little horn’ is never
capable of interfering with the activity in the most holy
place at the end of time.” BRI, 2SOD, 418.
Tamyd—an Adjective/AdverbUsed as a Noun.—

259

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Hebrews 9:12 says that ‘he entered once for all
into the Holy Place, taking …his own blood, thus securing an eternal redemption.’
“So the high-priestly ministry of Jesus Christ
in the heavenly sanctuary is as vital to our salvation
as was His death on the cross. …Fully as essential
as the cross is Christ’s continual ministry, His tamid, in heaven.
“The superiority of Christ’s tamid. …Because
Christ does not die again, either sacrificially or from
old age, His priesthood is marked by an immeasurable superiority in its continual-ness. As we read,
‘The former priests were many in number, because
they were prevented by death from continuing in office; but he holds his priesthood permanently, because
he continues for ever.’ Hebrews 7:24. Thus Jesus ‘is
also able to save absolutely those who approach God
through him; he is always living to plead on their behalf.’ Hebrews 7:24, N.E.B.” Maxwell, 1GC, 163,164.

the use proposed for it in 8:11 (‘take away’) appears
to be exceptional.
“But this use in Daniel does not appear exceptional once it is compared with the use of the same root
in the description of the sacrificial services in Leviticus. There the root rum is used (including the same
hophal conjugation in which it occurs in 8:11) for the
action of removing or taking away the parts of the
animal victim that would be used in the sacrificial
ritual. Since the first seven chapters of Leviticus present the major descriptions of these rites, the use of this
verb in this manner is limited to that section of the
book.
“These references to rum should be considered
along with those of the directly related and overlapping
uses of the root sur. The occurrences of these two
roots used in this way in these chapters of Leviticus
can be tabulated. It is evident that these two words
convey the same meaning when used to describe the
manipulation of the parts of the sacrificial offerings.
While rum and sur are not synonyms, there is this area
of overlap between them. These actions center around
the altar upon which the parts of those sacrificial animals were burned.
“Sur can be used in this way; it can be used to describe the simple physical act of taking away ordinary
objects. It can also be used (in 17 OT occurrences at
least) to describe the specialized act of taking away
illegitimate cultic objects such as idolatrous altars and
high places. It occurs most commonly in this latter
connection to describe the reforms carried out by the
good kings of Judah.
“These include reforms carried out by Asa (2 Chr.
14:3, 5), Jehoshaphat (2 Chr. 17:6), Hezekiah (2 Chr.
30:14, 22; 32:12, Is. 36:7), Manasseh (2 Chr. 33:15),
and Josiah (2 Ki. 23:19; 2 Chr. 34:33). Sometimes it
refers to the fact that these cultic installations were not
removed when they should have been (1 Ki. 22:43; 2
Ki. 14:4; 2 Chr. 15:17; 20:33). Only one instance is
attested when it refers to such an action in the northern
kingdom (Hos. 2:17). The contrast here may have been
especially with the true temple in Jerusalem.
“In these instances the verb sur appears to have
had an extended meaning which was not used for rum.
The latter is never used to convey the idea of taking
away or removing cultic objects of apostasy. When
used to describe functions approved by God in the Levitical sacrificial system, however, their meanings appear to be virtually identical.
“It is also of interest to note the locations of these
verbs in the sacrificial descriptions. They commonly
come in the last section of the descriptions. For example, in the description of the sin offerings, immediately
following the final instruction to “take away” (rum) the
fat, it is said that the priest shall make atonement and
the sinner shall be forgiven. Thus the use of these
verbs signaled the conclusion to the final act in the
sacrifice that brought forgiveness to the sinner.
“There was a close relationship between the use

“Christ’s daily or continual mediation before God
makes possible a daily or continual Christian experience.” Bunch, BOD, 118.
“Was Taken Away.”—
“A number of the characteristics of the prophecy
in chapter 8 emphasize the centrality of the sanctuary
in that prophecy. Since Leviticus deals with the same
subject, the sanctuary and its services, there is a natural
and logical conceptual link between these two literary
sources. Beyond those natural links already mentioned, there is further connection.
“This is found in the terminology describing what
the little horn was to do to the tamid ministration. In
the first reference it is said that after exalting itself up
to the Prince of the host, the tamid was ‘taken away’
from him (8:11b). While this action is stated in the
passive, it is evident from the context that the little
horn is the agent responsible for this removal of the
tamid from the Prince.
“At first glance the Hebrew verb used here for
‘taking away’ (the tamid) seems somewhat unusual. It
comes from the root rum meaning to ‘lift up, exalt.’
Elsewhere in Daniel this verb is used with this customary meaning. For example, in the Aramaic portions of
Daniel it is used of Nebuchadnezzar’s lifting up those
whom he had conquered (5:19), of his lifting up his
own spirit of pride (5:20), and of Belshazzar’s lifting
himself up against the God of heaven (5:23).
“In the Hebrew section of Daniel it is used in a
similar manner. It is used to prophesy about one of the
Seleucid kings who would lift up his heart in pride
(11:12; cf. the Aramaic usage, 5:20). It refers to the
king of the north lifting himself up above every god
(11:36; cf. the Aramaic usage, 5:23), and it refers to the
angel lifting his right hand up to swear an oath (12:7).
Thus the use of this root follows a similar pattern in
both the Hebrew and Aramaic sections of Daniel.
Compared with these other occurrences in Daniel,

260

DANIEL 8
of these verbs and the forgiveness that came to the sinner through the plan of salvation offered ancient Israel
in the sacrificial system. This relationship should be
borne in mind when one examines the use of rum in the
description of the struggle between the Prince of the
host and the little horn. The passage depicts a conflict over the plan of salvation ministered to mankind through the heavenly sanctuary and its services (chap. 8).
“It should also be noted that these two verbs relate to a broad spectrum of sacrificial offerings in Leviticus. Some translators have rendered the tamid in
chapter 8 strictly in terms of the burnt offering (cf. the
RSV, for example). The use of these two verbs in Leviticus, however, points to a relationship that is much
broader than that, as the following summary indicates:
“1. The burnt offering—1:16 (sur), 6:10 (rum)
“2. The cereal offering—2:9; 6:15 (rum)
“3. The peace offering—4:10 (rum), 3:4, 9, 10, 15
(sur)
“4. The priestly sin offering—4:8 (rum), 4:9 (sur)
“5. The congregational sin offering—4:19 (rum)
“6. The commoner's sin offering—4:31, 35 (sur)
“7. The guilt offering—7:4 (sur)
“Thus the whole sacrificial system is involved in
the actions these verbs describe. They are not just limited to the burnt offering. All the major types of sacrifices listed in Leviticus 1-7 a part of the ‘daily’ system
and thus are included within their scope. All of this
(the reality or antitype of the symbols) the little horn
attempts to take away from the heavenly Prince in
chapter 8.
“We may now compare the use of the verbs rum
and sur in Leviticus with their occurrences in cultic
contexts in Daniel. There are three such references: one
in chapter 8, one in chapter 11, and one in chapter 12.
The verb rum is used with the first of these three cases
and the verb sur occurs in the other two instances. The
latter two occurrences appear in passages which are
parallel to and explanatory of the first. The use of these directly related verbs ties those connections together all the more tightly. These occurrences can be
listed with their comparisons in Leviticus as follows:
DANIEL:
Passage

Object

8:11

Tamid

11:31

Tamid

12:11
6
passages

9
passages

Subject
Little horn

Verb

Action

Rum

King of
north
Tamid
Two
above
LEVITICUS:
Portions of 5
Priest

sur

‘taken
away’
‘taken
away’
‘taken
away’

types of
sacrifices
Portions of
types of
sacrifices

Priest

sur
Rum

‘take
away’

sur

‘taken
away’

Daniel. From these cultic comparisons it appears evident where this kind of terminology has been derived
for its use in Daniel. These comparisons also indicate
the kind of connections with the sanctuary services that
the use of these verbs connote.
“The comparisons also explain why the meaning
of rum in 8:11 is not so unusual as it seems at first
(when compared with its root meaning). This is a specialized use of an extended meaning of that verb. It
served in this way as a technical term for the cultic
functions brought into view in this prophecy. It is altogether appropriate, therefore, to use this verb (in
the sense of ‘take away’) in chapter 8 where the
sanctuary and its functions are at issue. These connections emphasize again how central the sanctuary
is to the prophecy of Daniel 8.” BRI, 2SOD, 203-208.
The Daily Was Taken Away.—
“Since this passage as a whole is concerned with
the actions of the little horn, it is evident that it is the
power responsible for taking away the Prince’s tamid ministry.” BRI, 2SOD, 514.
“We understand that when the prophecy speaks of
the “daily” being taken away, …it refers to the fact that
the time would come when efforts would be made to
separate people from God and to divert their minds
from the one sacrifice of His Son, Jesus Christ.
There would be an attempt to take away from men the
constant and daily intercession of Jesus, who ever intercedes for us in the heavenly sanctuary, not made
with hands; and for it substitute another intercession,
not divine. There would be an effort to take away the
bread of life from men, and offer in its place another
bread, which could not nourish the soul. There would
be an attempt to draw the eyes of men away from
‘the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the
world,’ (John 1:29) and fasten them upon a human
means of atonement.’ Dalrymple, The Mystery of
Iniquity, Signs of the Times, Oct. 11, 1932.
“The medieval church assumed many of Christ’s
prerogatives as Prince of the host and obscured His
high-priestly ministry in the heavenly sanctuary. It did
so:
“1. By insisting on the pope’s absolute kingship
as the visible head of the church, and persecuting people who said that the only head of the church is Jesus
Christ. Ephesians 4:15; 5:23.
“2. By presenting the Lord’s Supper in a manner
that encouraged superstition, and persecuting people
(like the followers of John Wycliffe) who refused to
teach that the bread turns into the actual body of Jesus.
“3. By withholding the wine at communion, and
persecuting people (like the Hussites) who requested
the wine as a symbol of the new covenant in Christ’s
blood. Matthew 26:27,28.
“4. By failing to preach the Word of God, and
burning at the stake people (like William Tyndale) who

“For practical purposes I have put the passive
verb into the active in 8:11 in the list given above for

261

GEMS FROM DANIEL
labored to make the Bible accessible to common people.
“5. By authorizing the purchase of pardons, and
excommunicating people (like Martin Luther) who said
that justification is by grace alone through faith in Jesus Christ. Romans 3:24; Ephesians 2:5.
“6, By requiring confession to a priest and the
performance of penance, and persecuting people (like
the Lutherans) who said that every Christian is a priest
who can go directly to God through one Mediator, Jesus Christ. 1 Peter 2:9; 1 Timothy 2:5.
“7. By requiring that the first day of the week be
observed in place of the seventh day, even though God
in the new covenant promised to write His law on people’s hearts. Exodus 20:8-11; Hebrews 8:10-12.
“…To put the matter bluntly, ‘Rome’ has misrepresented Christ’s ministry with a false sacrifice
(the mass), a false priesthood, a false head of the
church, and a false method of salvation.” Maxwell,
1GC, 172, 180.

ten after Vouille [Vougle], Clovis announced to his
bishops that en route for the battle he had promulgated an edict protecting widows, clerics and those whom
the church wished to defend.’ I. N. Wood, Revue
Belge de Pholologie Et D’Histoire, 63:264.
“ ‘It is evident, from the language of Gregory of
Tours, that this conflict between the Franks and Visigoths was regarded by the orthodox party of his own
preceding ages as a religious war, on which, humanly
speaking, the prevalence of the Catholic or the Arian
creed in Western Europe depended.’ W.C. Perry, The
Franks, 85.
“Some have erroneously concluded that the Visigoths were pagans and that, therefore, the conflict in
the West was one over paganism. In fact, though, the
Visigoths were Arian Christians. Similarly, a few
decades later, the issue in the East between the Vandals
and Ostrogoths (also Arian Christians) and Justinian
was not about paganism, nor was it solely a political
conflict. It was a religious war, as well, that would
ultimately decide the dominance of the Catholic or
Arian faith in Eastern Europe.
“…AD 508: “In 508 Clovis was recognized
and honored both by civil and ecclesiastical authorities as the sole ruler in the West.
“…Thus there is indisputable historical confirmation and legislative documentation that only the one
and true Catholic faith was indeed being set up, as
prophesied. Clovis had become the first Catholic king
of the ten divisions of the Western Roman Empire dating from AD 476. His ascension to the throne in 508
brought in its train the first instituted ‘National’ religion. All other faiths were outlawed. Then began
the long chain reaction in prophetic history until every
European nation accepted the one and true Catholic
faith and was led to follow the example of the
Franks in using the civil power to enforce the
church’s dogmas.” Heiks, Source, 3-5,18.

“AD 492: Gelasius I became the new pope on
March 3, 492, and died on November 21, 496, thus
ending his pontificate of only four years, eight months
and eighteen days. During this short time, however, he
established the two swords theory, which set forth the
church’s foundational understanding of church and
state relationship.
“AD 494: Pope Gelasius I wrote to Emperor Anastasius, declaring the theory of the two swords, or
two powers, governing the world. ‘There are two…
by which the world is chiefly ruled: the sacred authority (auctoritas) of bishops and the royal power
(potestas). Of those the responsibility of bishops is
more weighty insofar as they will answer also for the
kings of men themselves at divine judgment.’ The
popes did not claim to wield the temporal sword but to
direct its proper use…. Gelasius conceived church
governance as analogous to that exercised by temporal
rulers. This juridical understanding of the papacy
guided papal theory and practice in subsequent centuries. The two swords theory maintained that secular
leaders were subject to the pope’s spiritual authority.’ J.M. Miller, The Shepherd & the Rock, 94-95.”
“AD 495: Pope Gelasius I was the first pope at a
Roman synod to be saluted as ‘Vicar of Christ.’
“AD 501: (Pope Symmachus, AD 498-514) The
church council in Rome pronounced sentence on October 23, 501, that no human court could judge the
pope; God alone could do that. Thus the pope was
officially exalted above every other man.
“ ‘Thus it was that men acknowledged that they
had no power to judge the Pope. St. Avitus, Bishop of
Vienne, had declared before the opening of the council:
To question the authority of the Pope of Rome is to
overthrow not one bishop alone, but the whole Episcopate.’ F. Hayward, A History of the Popes, 76.
“…AD 507: Clovis defeated Alaric at Vougle,
the event that historians describe thus: ‘In a letter writ-

“In Daniel 7, the little horn attacks the law of
God. In Daniel 8, the little horn attacks the gospel, the
work of the high priestly ministry of Jesus Christ. The
work of the priest in the process by which fallen
humanity is reconciled to their Creator. That is
none other than the gospel work, the gospel of
Christ. When church and state amalgamated in 508,
the gospel message of Christ’s high priestly ministry in
the first apartment, i.e., the ‘daily,’ was immediately
usurped or taken away, to be replaced by a hellish, presumptuous counterfeit that could not offer salvation.”
Heiks, Source, 25.
Papal Mass Takes Away the Daily.—
“The effect of the papal system of ceremonies is
to take away from men a true conception of the intercessory work of Christ in behalf of fallen humanity,
and to substitute in its place a system of its own priestly ritual. By taking away the true means of salvation
through Christ alone and depriving sinners of the

262

DANIEL 8
benefits of His continual intercessory work in their
behalf in the heavenly sanctuary, causing them to
look to priests for the forgiveness of sin, it can well
be said that by this means ‘the daily was taken
away.’” Thiele, OSID, 92

ing of mass, one of the falsehoods of Romanism.
“The so-called intercession of the saints is the
greatest falsehood that can be invented. Priests and
rulers have no right to interpose between Christ
and the souls for whom He has died, as though invested with the Saviour's attributes, and able to
pardon transgression and sin. They themselves are
sinners. They are only human. One day they will see
that their deceptive doctrines have led to crimes of every stripe and type, to adultery, robbery, falsehood.
They are responsible for many terrible wrongs which
men have perpetrated upon their fellow men.
“For all this the Judge of the whole earth will call
them to account at His bar. …Men have only one Advocate, one Intercessor, who is able to pardon transgression. …No middle man comes between the sinner and Christ. No dead prophet, no buried saint is
seen. Christ Himself is our Advocate.” (MS 128,
1897). 7BC, 913,914.

“The Catholic church teaches that the Mass is
a ‘daily,’ ‘continual,’ and ‘perpetual’ sacrifice.…
‘Long before Christ was born the sacrifices of the Old
Law shadowed forth the Sacrifice of the Cross. After
His ascension into Heaven, that identical Sacrifice is
continued in the Mass…. Our Divine Redeemer willed
that the Sacrifice once consummated on the Cross
should be prolonged forever. This is done, through the
Mass.’—Pope Leo XIII, Encyclical Caritatis Studium,
July 26, 1898.
“ ‘Was all Sacrifice to cease with the death of
Christ? No; there was to be in the New Law of Grace a
perpetual Sacrifice, in order to represent continually
that which was once accomplished on the Cross, and to
apply the fruit of it to our souls….
“ ‘What then, is the Mass?
“ ‘The Mass is the perpetual Sacrifice of the
New Law, in which Christ our Lord offers Himself, by
the hands of the Priest, in an unbloody manner, under
the appearances of bread and wine, to His Heavenly
Father, as He once offered Himself on the Cross in a
bloody manner….
“ ‘What effects has the Mass as a Sacrifice of
Propitiation?
“ ‘By it we obtain from the Divine Mercy, 1.
Graces of contrition and repentance for the forgiveness
of sins; and 2. Remission of temporal punishment deserved for sins.’ Joseph Heharbe, A Full Catechism of
the Catholic Religion, pp.262,263,265.” Thiele, OSID,
93.

Spirit of Prophecy Evidence.—
“The Spirit of Prophecy well portrays the daily, ever-continuing ministrations of the earthly
sanctuary as typifying the never ceasing ministry of
Christ in the sanctuary above. Not for one moment
is there any interruption of the Saviour’s work in behalf
of sinners. But that work is the supreme object of the
attacks of Satan. If he can turn men away from their
Saviour in heaven and have them look to erring human
beings as their means of grace, his object will have
been attained. That is the purpose behind the ceremonial system of Roman Catholicism. And any
organization giving itself over toward that end is
taking away the ‘daily.’ This was understood in the
very early days of the advent movement.” Thiele,
OSID, 91.

“Our great High Priest completed the sacrificial
offering of Himself when He suffered without the gate.
Then a perfect atonement was made for the sins of the
people. Jesus is our Advocate, our High Priest, our
Intercessor. …The great High Priest has made the only
sacrifice that will be of any value.
“The incense that is offered now by men, the
masses that are said for the deliverance of souls
from purgatory, are not of the least avail with God.
All the altars and sacrifices, the traditions and inventions whereby men hope to earn salvation are fallacies.
No sacrifices are to be offered without; for the great
High Priest is performing His work in the holy place.
“In His intercession as our Advocate Christ needs
no man’s virtue, no man’s intercession. Christ is the
only sin bearer, the only sin-offering. Prayer and confession are to be offered only to Him who has entered
once for all into the holy place. Christ has declared, ‘If
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.’ He will save to the uttermost
all who come to Him in faith. He ever liveth to make
intercession for us. This makes of no avail the offer-

“The Lord’s direction was, ‘Aaron shall bear the
names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of
judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the
holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually.’ Exodus 28:29. So Christ, the great High Priest,
pleading His blood before the Father in the sinner’s
behalf, bears upon His heart the name of every repentant, believing soul.
“…Not only the sanctuary itself, but the ministration of the priests, was to ‘serve unto the example and
shadow of heavenly things.’ Hebrews 8:5. Thus it was
of great importance; and the Lord, through Moses,
gave the most definite and explicit instruction concerning every point of this typical service. The ministration
of the sanctuary consisted of two divisions, a daily and
a yearly service. The daily service was performed at
the altar of burnt offering in the court of the tabernacle and in the holy place; while the yearly service
was in the most holy.
“…The daily service consisted of the morning
and evening burnt offering, the offering of sweet incense on the golden altar, and the special offerings for

263

GEMS FROM DANIEL
individual sins. ...Every morning and evening a lamb
of a year old was burned upon the altar, with its appropriate meat offering, thus symbolizing the daily consecration of the nation to Jehovah, and their constant
dependence upon the atoning blood of Christ.
“…The incense, ascending with the prayers of Israel, represents the merits and intercession of Christ,
His perfect righteousness, which through faith is imputed to His people, and which can alone make the
worship of sinful beings acceptable to God. Before the
veil of the most holy place was an altar of perpetual
intercession, before the holy, an altar of continual
atonement. By blood and by incense God was to be
approached—symbols pointing to the great Mediator,
through whom sinners may approach Jehovah, and
through whom alone mercy and salvation can be granted to the repentant, believing soul. As the priests
morning and evening entered the holy place at the
time of incense, the daily sacrifice was ready to be
offered upon the altar in the court without.
“…The showbread was kept ever before the
Lord as a perpetual offering. Thus it was a part of
the daily sacrifice. It was called showbread, or ‘bread
of the presence,’ because it was ever before the face of
the Lord. It was an acknowledgment of man’s dependence upon God for both temporal and spiritual food,
and that it is received only through the mediation of
Christ. …The showbread pointed to Christ, the living
Bread, who is ever in the presence of God for us.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 351-354.

darkness of error and superstition threatened to
blot out a knowledge of true religion.” Prophets &
Kings, 714.
Spirit of Prophecy: Crosier Has the True Light.—
“I believe the Sanctuary, to be cleansed at the end
of the 2300 days, is the New Jerusalem Temple, of
which Christ is a minister. The Lord shew[ed] me in
vision, more than one year ago, that Brother Crosier had the true light, on the cleansing of the Sanctuary, &c; and that it was his will, that Brother C.
should write out the view which he gave us in the DayStar, Extra, February 7, 1846. I feel fully authorized
by the Lord, to recommend that Extra, to every
saint.” Word To the Little Flock , 12.
“The Sanctuary of the new covenant is connected with the New Jerusalem like the Sanctuary of
the first covenant was with Old Jerusalem. As that was
the place where the priests of that covenant ministered,
so this is in heaven, the place where the Priest of the
new covenant ministers. To these places, and these
only, the N.T. applies the name ‘Sanctuary,’ and it does
appear that this should forever set the question at
rest…. The priesthood of the worldly Sanctuary of the
first covenant belonged to the sons of Levi; but that of
the heavenly, of the better covenant, to the Son of
God…. Being himself perfect, and his priesthood unending, he is able to ‘perfect forever’ and ‘save them to
the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever liveth to make intercession for them.’ …’Now
when these things (the worldly Sanctuary with its two
apartments and the furniture in each) were thus ordained, the priests went always (daily Heb. 7:27;
10:11) into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the
service of God.’ …The daily service described was
a sort of continual intercession…. Christ had entered
his Father’s house, the Sanctuary, as High Priest, and
began his intercession for his people by ‘praying the
Father’ for ‘another Comforter.’ …’Jesus the Mediator
of the New Covenant in the heavens’ is our interceding
High Priest, making atonement with his own blood.’
O.R.L. Crosier, Day Star Extra, 1846, reprinted in the
Advent Review, Sept. 1850.

“The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her power
increased, the darkness deepened. Faith was transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope
of Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God for
forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the
people looked to the pope, and to the priests and
prelates to whom he delegated authority. They
were taught that the pope was their earthly mediator and that none could approach God except
through him; and, further, that he stood in the place
of God to them and was therefore to be implicitly
obeyed. A deviation from his requirements was sufficient cause for the severest punishment to be visited
upon the bodies and souls of the offenders. Thus the
minds of the people were turned away from God to
fallible, erring, and cruel men, nay, more, to the
prince of darkness himself, who exercised his power
through them. Sin was disguised in a garb of sanctity.” Great Controversy, 55.

“This article was reprinted in the Advent Review
of September, 1850. His comments on Dan. 8:11,12,
are as follows: ‘And the place of his Sanctuary was
cast down; Dan. 8:11. This casting down was in the
days and by the means of the Roman power; therefore, the Sanctuary of this text was not the Earth, nor
Palestine, because the former was cast down at the fall,
more than 4,000 years, and the latter at the captivity,
more than 700 years previous to the event of this passage, and neither by Roman agency. The Sanctuary
cast down is His against whom Rome magnified
himself, which was the prince of the host, Jesus
Christ; and Paul teaches that His Sanctuary is in
heaven. Again, Dan. 11:30,31 (Quoted). What was

“For many centuries God’s people suffered a restriction of their liberties. The preaching of the gospel
in its purity was prohibited, and the severest of penalties were visited upon those who dared disobey the
mandates of men. As a consequence, the Lord’s great
moral vineyard was almost wholly unoccupied. The
people were deprived of the light of God's word. The

264

DANIEL 8
this that Rome and the apostles of Christianity should
jointly pollute?
This combination was formed
against the ‘holy covenant,’ and it was the Sanctuary of that covenant they polluted; which they could
do as well as to pollute the name of God; Jer. 34:16;
Eze. 20; Mal. 1:7. This was the same as profaning or
blaspheming His name. In this sense this ‘politicoreligious’ beast polluted the Sanctuary, (Rev. 13:6) and
cast it down from Rome the holy city, (Ps. 102:19; Jer.
17:12; Heb. 8:1,2) when they called Rome the holy
city, (Rev. 21:2) and installed the Pope there with
the titles ‘Lord god the Pope,’ ‘Holy Father,’ ‘Head
of the Church,’ etc.; and there, in the counterfeit
‘temple of God,’ he professed to do what Jesus actually
does in His Sanctuary; 2 Thess. 2:1-8. The Sanctuary
has been trodden under foot (Dan. 8:13), the same
as the Son of God has. Heb. 10:39.—O.R.L. Crosier.” Bunch, BOD, 120.

of the papal abomination not only claims to be ‘God on
earth,’ but through a human priesthood, a false sacrifice, and a counterfeit mediatorial system, the papacy took possession of the church-temple for more
than a millennium and thus set aside the true Priest,
His atonement, and His mediatorial ministration in
behalf of sinners. The daily or continual service of
Christ was interfered with and virtually displaced by a
false system for 1260 years during which time the laws
of God and the saints of God were ‘given into’ the
hands of the papal power. (Dan. 7:25).” Bunch, BOD,
124.
God is With Us When the Tamyd is Present.—
“But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we
have not forsaken him; and the priests, which minister
unto the LORD, are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites
wait upon their business: 11 And they burn unto the
LORD every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense: the shewbread also set
they in order upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every
evening: for we keep the charge of the LORD our
God; but ye have forsaken him. 12 And, behold,
God himself is with us for our captain, and his priests
with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O
children of Israel, fight ye not against the LORD God
of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper.” 2 Chronicles
13:10-12.
“What is described above is the sacred charge to
OT Israel—the faithful performance of the duties of the
courtyard and holy place—also known as the ‘daily’
(tamyd) priestly ministry. In NT times, God’s true
people are also those who keep the sacred charge of
God—the knowledge of Christ’s continual high
priestly ministry in the heavenly sanctuary. Today
we can know that God is with us if we participate with
Christ in His continual ministry by being daily converted to Him.” PJ

“The very heart of the gospel was removed
when the little horn took away the daily—or continual mediation of Jesus Christ, and cast down the
place of his gospel sanctuary and made it a den of
thieves—he cast down the sacraments and gospel
truth to the ground and ‘practiced’ the mystery of
iniquity and prospered in his sacrilegious perversions. The little horn and his part of the host had indignation against the covenant, by trampling virtually
upon the Son of God, and counting the blood of the
covenant an unholy thing. They cast down the true
doctrine of the cross of Christ, the crucified One.’
Author unknown, Midnight Cry, Oct. 4, 1843, O.R.L.
Crosier.
Rev. 3:8 Suggests Attack on Holy Place Before
1844.—
“I know thy works: behold, I have set before
thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou
hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast
not denied my name. Revelation 3:8.
“This door that is opened is the door to the Most
Holy Place. Men would try to shut it. This implies
that there may have been a successful attempt earlier, as indeed there was, to shut the door to the Holy
Place when the Papacy took away the tamyd—the
knowledge of Christ’s high priestly ministry in the Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary.” PJ.

Daily and the 1290 Days of Daniel 12:11.—
“We are informed in Daniel 12:11 that ‘from the
time that the daily [mediatorial service of Jesus in the
heavenly sanctuary] shall be taken away [as it was by
the Papacy in AD 508] to set up the abomination that
makes desolate, there shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety days,’ margin. Commencing with AD
508, 1290 years brings us to (1798) the termination of
Papal power to persecute God’s people. Now, in Revelation 11:1-3 the persecution of God’s people during
the Dark Ages is explicitly declared to be an attack
upon God’s ‘temple’ and ‘the holy city.’ That is, the
Lord in Revelation 11:1-3 applies spiritually in connection with the church that which literal Rome did in
connection with the literal city of Jerusalem.” Were,
KONAJ, 45.

2 Thess. 2:3-8 Proves Papal Attack on Holy Place.—
“There can be no question but this is a description
of the papacy and was doubtless based on the prophecies of Daniel regarding the little horn. This shows
that ‘the holy place’ where the papal abomination
‘ought not’ to stand was the [Holy Place in
the]‘temple of God.’ Daniel used the word ‘sanctuary’ and Paul ‘temple,’ but they mean the same and are
used interchangeably. Daniel calls ‘the transgression
of desolation,’ Paul terms ‘the man of lawlessness’ and
‘the mystery of lawlessness.’ (RV). The chief pontiff

Why Was Just the Daily Taken Away.—
“Now we come to a crucial point. Why was just

265

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the ‘daily’—the tamid—taken away? See verse 11.
Tamid refers to the first-apartment ministry of the
sanctuary only. Why was the first-apartment aspect
alone taken away be the papacy? Why just the ‘daily?’
Why not the second-apartment work?
“Because the second-apartment ministry, the
yearly, which occurred when the sanctuary was
cleansed, wasn’t in operation then! Not until the end
of the 2300 days, in 1844, did the second apartment
ministry even begin! It could not be taken away during
the little horn’s reign because it was not operating during that time. ‘Unto two thousand and three hundred
days: then shall the sanctuary be cleansed!’ Or, unto
2300 days; then shall the yearly begin!
“In Daniel 8, we have both phases of Christ’s
high priestly ministry in heaven: the daily, which
comes under attack by the papacy; and the yearly,
the second-apartment ministry, which commences
at the end of the 2300 ‘evenings and mornings,’
when the sanctuary is cleansed!”
Goldstein,
1844MS, 62.

tion. Let such matters be considered by those regularly
appointed to have the oversight of our publications.
Let not these brethren, nor our canvassers, nor our ministers magnify these matters in such a way as to lessen
the influence of these good soul-saving books. Should
we take up the work of discrediting our literature, we
would place weapons in the hands of those who have
departed from the faith and confuse the minds of those
who have newly embraced the message. The less that
is done unnecessarily to change our publications, the
better it will be.
“In the night seasons I seem to be repeating to my
brethren in responsible positions, words from the First
Epistle of John. [Chapter 1 is quoted.]
“Our brethren should understand that self needs to
be humbled and brought under the control of the Holy
Spirit. The Lord calls upon those of us who have
had great light to be converted daily. This is the
message I have to bear to our editors and to the presidents of all our conferences. We must walk in the light
while we have the light, lest darkness come upon us.”
1 Selected Messages, 164,165.

Don’t Argue About The Daily.—
“I have words to speak to my brethren east and
west, north and south. I request that my writings
shall not be used as the leading argument to settle
questions over which there is now so much controversy. I entreat of Elders H, I, J, and others of our
leading brethren, that they make no reference to my
writings to sustain their views of ‘the daily.’
“It has been presented to me that this is not a subject of vital importance. I am instructed that our brethren are making a mistake in magnifying the importance
of the difference in the views that are held. I cannot
consent that any of my writings shall be taken as
settling this matter. The true meaning of ‘the daily’
is not to be made a test question.
“I now ask that my ministering brethren shall
not make use of my writings in their arguments regarding this question [‘the daily’]; for I have had no
instruction on the point under discussion, and I see
no need for the controversy. Regarding this matter
under present conditions, silence is eloquence.
“The enemy of our work is pleased when a subject of minor importance can be used to divert the
minds of our brethren from the great questions that
should be the burden of our message. As this is not a
test question, I entreat of my brethren that they shall
not allow the enemy to triumph by having it treated as
such.
“The work that the Lord has given us at this time
is to present to the people the true light in regard to the
testing questions of obedience and salvation—the
commandments of God and the testimony of Jesus
Christ.
“In some of our important books that have been in
print for years, and which have brought many to a
knowledge of the truth, there may be found matters of
minor importance that call for careful study and correc-

The “Daily” Not Paganism.—
“When Constantine became sole emperor by
AD 323-324, he would begin the process of destroying paganism by enacting a series of measures that
would highly favor the growing Christian Church.
These measures included the exemption of all clergy
from state taxation and the subsidizing of church buildings that would later become prominent worship centers of the empire. He also lodged the bishop of Rome
in the Lateran Palace, empowering this office with political jurisdiction, so that both church and state could
operate together in the overall governance of the empire.
“Thus, Constantine’s political favoritism of Catholic Christianity specifically became a crucial step in
both destroying paganism and elevating Catholicism to
the state religion of the Roman Empire. He envisioned
a theocratic state with one emperor and one empire,
with its citizenry welded together by one common,
universal (‘Catholic’) state religion, thus achieving
both political and spiritual unity. As it turned out,
Constantine’s elevation of Christianity would create
such spiritual momentum for the rising Christian
Church that paganism would barely survive for even
a century after his death in AD 337.” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 149.
“As Christianity spread ‘to all the world’ from
apostolic times, it gradually replaced the widespread
practice of paganism. On November 8, AD 392, came
Emperor Theodosius’ edict banning pagan practices
under penalty of death. This law was paganism’s
death knell; paganism was legislated out of existence with Theodosius’ decree.” Heiks, Source, 1.
“Paganism was all but eliminated under the reign

266

DANIEL 8
of Theodosius I (reign, AD 378-395), who would galvanize the emperor’s office into the imperial defender
of the Christian faith. Having ordered the complete
destruction of all pagan centers and sacrificial ceremonies, he would later crush a pagan usurper named Arbogast and his puppet emperor Eugenius (a professed
Christian) in the Battle of the River Frigidus near the
Alps in AD 394, thus assuring the eventual annihilation
of paganism.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 150.

and laws.’
“How strikingly have these prophecies been
fulfilled by the Romish Church! Not only has this
power attempted to change the times and laws of God,
but she openly avows that she has made such changes,
and she declares that by the observance of Sunday,
which rests solely upon her authority, the Protestant
world is acknowledging the supremacy of Rome. It is
the breach which has thus been made in the law of God
that the people described by Isaiah are seeking to build
up.
“….The mystery of iniquity, which had already
begun to work in Paul's day, will continue its work
until it be taken out of the way at our Lord's second
coming. The climax of the working of iniquity will
soon be reached.” Signs, 6/12/1893.

William Millers Mistaken Conclusion on the Daily.—
[William Miller tells how, through studying 2
Thess. 2:7, that he saw it was paganism that was taken
away. He thought that pagan Rome would be taken out
of the way, and thus, that the “daily” was paganism.
Here are his words:
“ ‘"I read on, and could find no other case in
which it [the daily] was found, but in Daniel. I then
[by the aid of a concordance] took those words which
stood in connection with it, 'take way;' ‘he shall take
away, 'the daily; 'from the time the daily shall be taken
away', etc. I read on, and thought I should find no light
on the text; finally, I came to 2 Thess. 2:7, 8. 'For the
mystery of iniquity doth already work; only he who
now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way,
and then shall that wicked be revealed,' etc. And when
I had come to that text, oh! how clear and glorious the
truth appeared! There it is! That is 'the daily!' Well
now, what does Paul mean by 'he who now letteth,' or
hindereth? By 'the man of sin,' and the 'wicked,' popery is meant. Well, what is it which hinders popery
from being revealed? Why, it is paganism; well, then,
'the daily' must mean paganism." - Second Advent
Manual, page 66.
“Was this a correct conclusion? The Spirit of
Prophecy says that this scripture is not talking about
paganism taken out of the way, but rather, it is the man
of sin—the papacy—that is taken out of the way.]
“Paul, in his second epistle to the Thessalonians,
points out the power that has attempted to break down
the law of God. He warns the believers concerning the
great apostasy and the blasphemous antichristian power
that would be developed and perform its work before
Christ should come the second time. He says: ‘That
day shall not come, except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that
is called God, or that is worshiped; so that he as God
sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is
God.’
“ ‘...The mystery of iniquity doth already work;
only he who now letteth [hindereth] will let [hinder],
until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that
Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming." The prophet Daniel, describing the same power, says, ‘He shall speak great
words against the Most High, and shall wear out the
saints of the Most High, and think to change times

The Place of His Sanctuary.—
“So what is the ‘place’ in Daniel 8:11 that was
‘cast down’? For purest light and understanding on the
true meaning of the ‘place (makon) of his sanctuary,’
we turn to the scriptures to see what the Bible says.
“2 Chron. 6:30: ‘Then hear thou from heaven
thy dwelling place, and forgive, and render unto every man according unto all his ways, whose heart thou
knowest; (for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of men.)’
“2 Chron. 6:33: ‘Then hear thou from the
heavens, even from thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for.’
“2 Chron. 6:39: ‘Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, their prayer and
their supplication, and maintain their cause, and forgive
thy people which have sinned against thee.’
“We know that ‘by him the daily sacrifice was
taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast
down.’ We see from these verses that the ‘place’
referred to is where prayers are heard and sins are
forgiven, i.e., the heavenly sanctuary. That heavenly
‘place’ has been cast down—removed from men’s
remembrance by the same entity that ‘took away’
the ‘daily’ from Christ by interposing an earthly
counterfeit of His ‘daily’ ministration in the sanctuary. Without question, these scriptures reveal that the
little horn has taken on a priestly attire and presumes to
perform priestly functions. The horn’s plain intention
continues to be to deflect men’s interest in heaven and
God’s interaction with humanity by inserting himself
between man and his interceding Saviour and in the
place of Christ. It was not pagan Rome but papal
Rome who dared and dares to attempt to usurp the prerogatives of God, who alone can answer prayers and
forgive sins.
“…Never, though, is the makon said to represent a pagan sanctuary or ever even allude to anything of a pagan or of a sinful nature.” Heiks, TDSB,
80,81,82.
“Although miqdas (‘sanctuary’ in 8:11) is a dif-

267

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ferent Hebrew word than qodes (‘sanctuary’ in 8:14),
65 out of 67 times it is used in the Old Testament either
in reference to God’s Sanctuary or God as our sanctuary. The two exceptions refer to corrupt sanctuaries by
His former people. Not once does miqdas refer to a
non-Israelite pagan sanctuary.” Ferrell, BD, 62

assures us that the Lord will ‘send thee help from the
sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion,’ because
‘strength and beauty are in thy sanctuary.’ Ps.
77:13; 20:2; 96:6. Therefore, the sanctuary in heaven
where Christ ministers is ‘the sanctuary of strength.’
[Dan. 11:31]. This is the sanctuary that was ‘polluted,’
‘defiled,’ ‘cast down’ and ‘trodden under foot’ by the
papal power. It cannot possibly apply to Pagan
Rome or any other profane or corrupt place or
power. ” Bunch, BOD, 116.

“It is in God’s heavenly dwelling place—His
sanctuary in heaven—that He hears the prayers of His
faithful, both Israelites and non-Israelites, and from
which comes His forgiveness and from which He renders ‘judgment’ or ‘justice.’ Again it is from His heavenly dwelling place—His sanctuary in heaven—that
the Lord looks upon the inhabitants of the earth (Ps
33:13-14). This is where His throne is located, the
‘foundation’ (makon) of which is established on principles of ‘righteousness and justice’ (Ps 89:14; 97:2).
“…It is indeed correct to hold that an attack on
the ‘foundation of the sanctuary’ is tantamount to
an attack on God himself.” BRI, 2SOD, 413,414,416.

“The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her power
increased, the darkness deepened. Faith was transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope
of Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God for
forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the people
looked to the pope, and to the priests and prelates to
whom he delegated authority. They were taught that
the pope was their earthly mediator and that none could
approach God except through him; and, further, that he
stood in the place of God to them and was therefore to
be implicitly obeyed.” Great Controversy, 55.

“What is God’s dwelling place [4349] (makon)?”
The answer comes:
“Psalm 89:14: ‘Justice and judgment are the
habitation [4349] (makon) of thy throne: mercy and
truth shall go before thy face.’
“Psalm 97:2: ‘Clouds and darkness are round
about him: righteousness and judgment are the habitation [4349] (makon) of his throne.’
“Righteousness, judgment and justice are said to
be the makon, the ‘place of his sanctuary.’ They constitute the ‘basis’ or ‘foundation’ of His throne.”
Heiks, AD508, 36.

“In Rev. 11:1-3 the persecution of God’s people
during the Dark Ages is explicitly declared to be an
attack upon God’s ‘temple’ and ‘the holy city.’ That is,
the Lord in Revelation 11:1-3 applies spiritually in
connection with the church that which literal Rome did
in connection with the literal city of Jerusalem.
“…Paul applies Daniel 11: 36, 37 to the Papacy
as if it had succeeded in invading the land of Israel,
broken down the walls of ‘the holy city’ and ‘sits in
the temple of God, showing himself that he is God’
(2 Thessalonians 2: 3, 4).” Were, KONAJ, 45,46.

“Holiness is the foundation of God’s throne;
sin is the opposite of holiness; sin crucified the Son of
God.” Testimonies to Ministers, 145.

Satan’s Previous on Place of Earthly Sanctuary.—
“Satan was seeking to shut out from men a
knowledge of God, to turn their attention from the
temple of God, and to establish his own kingdom.
His strife for supremacy had seemed to be almost
wholly successful. It is true that in every generation
God had His agencies. Even among the heathen there
were men through whom Christ was working to uplift
the people from their sin and degradation. But these
men were despised and hated. Many of them suffered
a violent death. The dark shadow that Satan had
cast over the world grew deeper and deeper.
“Through heathenism, Satan had for ages turned
men away from God; but he won his great triumph
in perverting the faith of Israel. By contemplating
and worshiping their own conceptions, the heathen had
lost a knowledge of God, and had become more and
more corrupt. So it was with Israel. The principle
that man can save himself by his own works lay at
the foundation of every heathen religion; it had now
become the principle of the Jewish religion. Satan
had implanted this principle. Wherever it is held, men
have no barrier against sin.” Desire of Ages, 35,36.

“They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have
defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy name
to the ground.” Psalms 74:7.
“My face will I turn also from them, and they
shall pollute my secret place: for the robbers shall
enter into it, and defile it.” Ezekiel 7:22.
The Place of His Sanctuary Was Cast Down.—
“In the vision now under consideration the Papacy also directs its attacks against the sanctuary of God
and its services. That this is the sanctuary of God is
evident from Gabriel’s further explanation to Daniel as recorded in Daniel 11:31, and his vision to
John in Rev. 13:6. The Papacy was to ‘pollute the
sanctuary of strength’ and ‘blaspheme God’s name,
and His tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.’
The word sanctuary is from the Latin ‘sanctus,’ meaning ‘sacred,’ or sanctuarium, ‘a sacred place.’ In this
sense it is used all through the Scriptures where it is
never applied to a common or secular place. ‘Thy way,
O God, is in the sanctuary,’ said the Psalmist, and he

268

DANIEL 8
[Note: The quotation above, speaking of the time
of Christ’s first Advent in the courtyard, is certainly
applicable to the time of the rise of the Papacy and its
attack on Christ’s ministry in the Holy Place of the
heavenly sanctuary.]

are not necessary for such access. ‘For there is one
God and one mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus.’ (1 Timothy 2:5). This leaves no room
for the mediation of priests, saints, angels, or Mary—as
in the Roman system.” Shea, DARG, 181.

The Sanctuary was the Heavenly Sanctuary.—
“The Scriptures speak of but two sanctuaries,
one on earth and the other in heaven, the first being
a type of the latter. ‘After the settlement of the Hebrews in Canaan, the tabernacle was replaced by the
temple of Solomon, which though a permanent structure and upon a larger scale, observed the same proportions, and was similarly furnished. In this form the
sanctuary existed—except while it lay in ruins in Daniel’s time—until its destruction by the Romans, in AD
70. This is the only sanctuary that ever existed on
the earth, of which the Bible gives any information.’
The Great Controversy, p. 412. Since this is true and
the earthly sanctuary did not exist during the career of
the Papacy, the references in Daniel must be to the
heavenly sanctuary. There was no other sanctuary at
that time except the one in heaven where Christ ministered.” Bunch, BOD, 116.

“The little horn power, in verse 9, starts out as
pagan Rome, ‘which waxed exceeding great, toward
the south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant
land.’ Here we see a horizontal expansion across the
earth, which pagan Rome did, thus fitting perfectly the
prophecy.
“In verses 10 to 12, the little horn’s actions move
upward and take on a religious thrust. It magnifies
itself to the ‘prince of the host,’ takes away the ‘daily,’
casts down ‘truth,’ even casts down ‘the place of his
sanctuary.’ Here is the papal phase of the little horn
and its attack on the gospel.
“But how, for instance, could the papacy ‘cast
down’ the place, or foundation, of the heavenly
sanctuary? The papacy didn’t get into heaven and
physically attack the sanctuary. Instead, through its
system of the mass, the priesthood, confession, mediation, etc.—which is a counterfeit of the life, death, and
high priestly ministry of Jesus (‘the prince of the
host’)—the foundation of Christ’s work in heaven was
lost or, in a sense, ‘cast down.’
“Imagine Radio Free Europe beaming ‘It is Written’ into the Eastern European bloc. The radio waves
pulse through the air, but before they reach the receivers, the governments send up jamming signals that
block out the beams. The people on the ground receive nothing, hear nothing, and know nothing of
the truths that the program had for them. In a
sense, the foundation—the essence—of the message
is lost, taken away, or ‘cast down.’ This same principle hold regarding papal interference with Christ’s high
priestly ministry.
“We are obviously dealing with symbolic actions
because ‘truth’ itself cannot literally be cast down. The
papacy could no more physically ‘cast down’ God’s
sanctuary, than it could physically ‘cast down the truth
to the ground.’ Verse 12. But through its counterfeit
intercession and mediation, the papacy was able to
destroy the truth of Christ’s work in the sanctuary,
thus it ‘cast down the truth.’” Goldstein, 1844MS,
59,60.

“There can be little doubt but that the little horn is
the agent responsible for this effect upon the sanctuary.
The foundation place of this sanctuary would be ‘cast
down,’ meaning from heaven to earth.”
“…God’s activities described there are specifically that of answering prayer and the administering of
justice and righteousness through the giving of judgment. In some places, such as Psalms 89:14 and 97:2,
this foundation place for God’s throne is not thought of
so much as a physical position, but as a spiritual reality
expressed from that throne. It is in this sense that the
foundation of His throne can be said to be ‘righteousness and justice.’
“…Whatever the special aspect of the work of
God that is stressed by the use of makon here, the casting down of it to the ground can surely be taken as
the usurpation of it, or attempted usurpation, by the
little horn power.” BRI, 2SOD, 514,515.
How The Place of His Sanctuary Was Cast Down.—
“What does it mean to bring a heavenly sanctuary
down to earth? It means that what was correctly represented as being located in heaven has now, in the eyes
of human beings, been brought down here where we
are by the activities of the little horn. The small horn
now represents the heavenly ministry of Jesus Christ as
requiring human or priestly activities on earth to mediate its grace to humanity. Human intermediaries have
been interjected between God and the people. One of
the central issues of the Reformation was a rejection of
this very point. Martin Luther claimed that every
Christian has immediate access to Christ’s ministry in
heaven. Each individual may have personal access to
Jesus Christ and God; human, priestly intermediaries

“ ‘This casting down was in the days and by
the means of the Roman power. …The Sanctuary
cast down is His against whom Rome magnified himself, which was the Prince of the host, Jesus Christ; and
Paul teaches that his Sanctuary is in heaven…. This
‘politico-religious’ beast polluted the Sanctuary, (Rev.
13:6) and cast it down from its place in heaven, (Ps.
102:19; Jer. 17:12; Heb. 7:1,2), when they called
Rome the holy city, (Rev. 21:2) and installed the
Pope there with the titles, ‘Lord God the Pope,’
‘Holy Father,’ ‘Head of the Church,’ etc., and there

269

GEMS FROM DANIEL
moval of Christ’s mediation from the people, to be
replaced by a remarkable collection of shallow foolishness—including worshiping idols, praying to beads,
confessing sins to a man, and falling down in worship
before the sacrifice of the mass. Everything was designed to keep people from the heavenly priestly
ministry of Christ.” Ferrell, BD, 80,81.

in the counterfeit ‘temple of God,’ he professes to
do what Jesus actually does in his Sanctuary, 2
Thess. 2:1-8.’ O.R.L. Crosier, Day Star Extra, 1846;
reprinted in the Advent Review, Sept. 1850.” Thiele,
OSID, 87.
“In the claims they make concerning such rites as
the mass, penance, confession and others, Roman
Catholic writers reveal how by such rituals the place
of Christ’s sanctuary is cast down. Following are
some of their claims:
“ ‘Q. 920. Is the Mass the same sacrifice as
that of the Cross?
“ ‘A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the
Cross.
“ ‘Q. 921. How is the Mass the same sacrifice as
that of the Cross?
“ ‘A. The Mass is the same sacrifice as that of the
Cross because the offering and the priest are the
same—Christ our Blessed Lord; and the ends for which
the sacrifice of the Mass is offered are the same as
those of the sacrifice of the Cross.’ Thomas L.
Kinkead, A Catechism of Christian Doctrine, 196,197.
“ …‘2. What is the Sacrament of Penance?
“ ‘It is a Sacrament in which the Priest, in the
place of God, forgives sins….
“ ‘3. Does the Priest truly remit the sins, or does
he only declare that they are remitted?
“ ‘The Priest does really and truly remit the sins
in virtue of the power given to him by Christ.
“ ‘5. Who has the power to forgive sins in the
Sacrament of Penance?
“‘The Bishops of the Catholic Church and the
Priests commissioned by them.’ Joseph Deharbe, A
Full Catechism of the Catholic Religion, pp. 275,150.”
Thiele, OSID, 87.

The Place of God’s Sanctuary Restored in 1844.—
“…When this passage is compared with chapter
7, a further suggestion can be made about the possible
meaning intended in chapter 8. If it was the specific
foundation for God’s throne that was cast down in
8:12, the casting down of God’s throne in the heavenly court scene in 7:9-10 requires something of a
restoration there. The throne of an earthly monarch
usually is placed upon a raised platform of dais in the
throne room of the palace.
“Daniel 7:9-10 conveys a similar picture. The
throne of God which was ‘cast down’ or set up in this
judgment scene would naturally be set up on some such
dais. The heavenly host assembled for the judgment
gathers before that throne upon its dais. The platform
of dais implied here (in 7:9-10) would naturally have
been identified as the makon for that throne.
“The parallel, then, is that in chapter 8 the prophet
saw the makon symbolically ‘cast down’ to the earth.
On the other hand in chapter 7 the prophet saw the
literal makon ‘restored,’ as it were, to its natural
position in the heavenly sanctuary. Then God’s
throne was ‘cast down’ upon that makon. In one case it
was the makon of the sanctuary or God’s throne that
was ‘cast down’ while in the other instance it was
God’s throne ‘cast down’ upon its makon in order to
begin the judgment described in this scene.” BRI,
2SOD, 214-215.

“During the Dark Ages, the papacy substituted
earthly churches and human priests as the focus of
worship and confession. And it blotted from men’s
minds the great truth that Christ is our Mediator!
The pope substituted Christ’s mediation through the
substitution of the ‘idolatrous sacrifice of the mass’
(GC 59) and the confessional (GC 567-568) which, for
over a thousand years, the papacy removed from the
minds of millions of human beings the grace of Christ
and His intercession in the Sanctuary above. Frankly,
it was the crowning evil of the papacy. The people
were not even permitted to pray outside of a Catholic
church! ‘To pray to God in secret, to refrain from
bowing to an image... was also punishable with death’
(GC 240).
“It has been said that the papacy only cast down
the Sanctuary once, at the beginning of the 1260 years.
Yet even a casual reading of Great Controversy reveals
that the papacy was blotting out Christ’s heavenly
mediation from men’s minds for centuries.
“…The primary activity of the papacy, which in
AD 508 it immediately began in earnest, was the re-

Does ‘Sanctuary’ in 8:11 Apply to Pagan Temple?—
“This theory, if true, removes the heavenly
Sanctuary from Daniel 8:11. ‘And the place of His
Sanctuary was cast down.’ It is claimed by some that
this does not refer to replacing Christ’s Sanctuary in
heaven by the pope’s churches and human mediation
on earth—but instead means that the papacy removed
‘pagan temples.’ It is said that the evidence for this is
the fact that the Hebrew word for ‘sanctuary’ in 8:11
(miqdas ) frequently means ‘pagan temple’ in the Old
Testament. That would be powerful evidence, if it
were true.
“But it is not. First, the papacy destroyed no
pagan temples; it consecrated them to saints! (One
of the only exceptions was the pantheon, which kept its
original name.) Second, in the Bible, miqdas never
means a pagan temple.
“Miqdas (“sanctuary” in 8:11) is a different Hebrew word than qodes (“sanctuary” in 8:14). That is
true. Here are the facts about both words:
“Miqdas is translated “sanctuary” 67 times in the
KJV. In every case but two, it refers to God’s sanctuary

270

DANIEL 8
or that He will be a sanctuary to His people. What are
the two exceptions? The first is Ezekiel 28:18, in
which Satan in heaven at the time of his Fall, tried to
defile the ‘sanctuaries.’ That would be the holiest places in heaven. The second is Amos 7:9, in which the
Israelites, by their sins, defiled their earthly ‘sanctuaries.’ These structures were in the northern kingdom of
Israel, in the time of Jeroboam, and would be the pagan
sanctuaries he established in Bethel and Dan (1 Ki.
12:28-31).
“So in every instance except one, miqdas refers
to God’s sanctuary. The one exception is to corrupt
sanctuaries by His former people. Not once does miqdas refer to a non-Israelite pagan sanctuary, much less
most of the time as claimed.
“The Hebrew word, sometimes used for ‘pagan
temple,’ is bayith (“house,” “temple”), as in Judges
9:46 and 2 Ki. 10:21. Hekal is another word for a heathen temple in the Old Testament. For example, Ezra
5:15 uses it both for God’s temple and a pagan temple.
“Qodes is used 64 times for “sanctuary” in the
KJV. In every instance, it refers to God’s sanctuary.
This is the “Sanctuary” in Daniel 8:14 (more on qodes
later).
“Therefore, both miqdas in 8:11 and qodes in
8:14 refer to God’s Sanctuary in heaven.
“In view of the fact that, as we will see in the
next two sections, nearly every Hebrew word in
Daniel 8:10-14 is, elsewhere in the Old Testament,
generally applied to God’s earthly sanctuary—it is a
tragedy that any of our people would want to apply
the word “sanctuary,” itself, to pagan temples!”
Ferrell, BD, 78-80.

measure of control ‘over” (al) the tamid. Thus, as the
Prince of the host had his host which the horn persecuted, so the little horn itself has its own host here.
While this word is commonly used in the OT to refer to
a corporate group of military personnel, the conflict
here is spiritual rather than literal; hence a literal
army need not be expected.
“It is through its host that the little horn comes
to exercise control over the tamid. Since the tamid
deals with the priestly ministry of the Prince, the host
would most naturally be a spiritual army, a priesthood, through which the little horn would operate.
In contrast to the righteous activity of the Prince and
his host, this activity on the part of the little horn and
its host is unrighteous or rebellious toward God (be
pesa).
“So the priestly activity of the Prince, previously
referred to as being removed from him, has now been
substituted by the little horn and the activities of its
host. No particular direction is mention in connection
with this activity. It does not say explicitly that the
tamid was cast down to the earth like the place of the
sanctuary. However, it can probably be thought of as
accompanying it inasmuch as the tamid ministration
functions in the sanctuary and involves the very essence of Heaven’s saving activities.” BRI, 2SOD,
516,517.
“Who is the ‘host’ of verse 12? We have already
shown in verse 11 how the little horn (papal Rome) has
taken on priestly attire. …It should not be a hard matter for one to recognize that the ‘host’ in verse 12 that
is to be set over or given over the ‘daily’ is the one
and same ‘host’ in verse 11 that has taken away the
‘daily’ and cast down the ‘place’ of ‘his’ (Christ’s)
sanctuary. Therefore, the causing of or the conception
of transgression has its origin in verse 11, by the heinous illegal acts perpetuated by papal Rome.
“At this point all we need to do is verify if heaven
uses the term ‘host’ to identify a priesthood of believers or a group of people in religious garb, thus representing themselves to be priestly intercessors.
“Num. 4:2-3: ‘Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their families,
by the house of their fathers, From thirty years old and
upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the
host, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.’
“Clearly, these sanctuary priests were the ‘host,’
so we find heaven indeed uses ‘host’ in a context of
religious ministry. Thus the host of verse 12 finds its
fulfillment only in papal Rome.” Heiks, TDSB,
114,115.

Counterfeit Temple Substituted for Heavenly.—
“In the false [little horn] system every Catholic
church is a sanctuary. ‘The real presence of our divine Lord in the blessed Eucharist makes every
Catholic church a tabernacle of the most High.’
The True Voice (R.C.).
“The reason why so little is known regarding the
work of Jesus today is because the man of sin cast
down the place of Christ’s sanctuary. By him the ‘daily’ ministration of our Lord Jesus was taken away by
the substitution of the counterfeit system.” Burnside,
DPUF, 147,148.

DANIEL 8:12
And an host was given him against the
daily sacrifice by reason of transgression,
and it cast down the truth to the ground;
and it practised, and prospered.

“Who is this ‘host’ given to the little horn—a host
that works ‘against the daily sacrifice by reason of
transgression’? Dr. Hasel writes that it ‘could possible
refer to the clergy.’ Indeed, the work of the papal
priesthood—through its transgression of God’s

And An Host Was Given Him Against the Daily.—
“The construction of the sentence indicates that
the horn was given a host. But there was a purpose in
this. The horn through its host was also given some

271

GEMS FROM DANIEL
itself was nothing else than to put this false system of
the apostasy in the place of the true, completely to shut
out the true, and finally, to cast it down to the ground
and stamp upon it.
“And this is how it is that this great Christian
truth of the true priesthood, ministry, and sanctuary of
Christ is not known to the Christian world today. The
‘man of sin’ has taken it away, and cast it down to the
ground, and stamped upon it. The ‘mystery of iniquity’
has hid this great truth from the church and the world
during all these ages, in which the man of sin has held
place in the world, and has passed itself off as God, and
its iniquitous host as the church of God.” Jones,
CWCP, 100,101.

truth—usurped the ongoing ‘mediatorial ministry
of the heavenly prince of the host. Intercession, mediation, and other benefits associated with the tamid are
fully in control of the little horn’s ‘host.’”—Daniel
and Revelation Committee, vol. 2, pp. 416,417.
“The sacrifice of the mass, confession to priests,
mediation of the priests, praying to saints, indeed the
whole papal system usurped the truth of the sanctuary
until it was lost, cast down, and ‘taken away.’” Goldstein, 1844MS, 61,62.
“It is of interest to mention that Pope Symmachus
(Ad 498-514), the bishop of Rome who reigned
through the time period of 508, has been recognized by
Catholic historians for one of his great feats. During
his pontificate, through ordination, he created ‘one
hundred and seventeen bishops, ninety-two priests, and
sixteen deacons.’ Live and Times of the Popes, 1:150.
“It was a number that no previous pope had
matched up to the reign of Pope Symmachus. Indeed,
a host was given him.” Heiks, Source, 35.

“Here comes a power under the control of Satan
that puts up the first day to be observed. God calls him
the man of sin because he has perpetuated transgression [Daniel 8:12].” 5MR, 45.
“And many shall follow their pernicious ways;
by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.” 2 Peter 2:2.

By reason of transgression.—
Gen. 31:36: ‘And Jacob was wroth, and chode
with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban,
What is my trespass? What is my sin, that thou hast
so hotly pursued after me?’
“Gen. 50:17: ‘So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren,
and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we
pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the
God of thy father.’”
“Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people
and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression,
and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to
anoint the most Holy.” Daniel 9:24.

It Cast Down the Truth To the Ground.—
“What is the “truth” that the papacy cast
down? Certainly it was the truth in the preceding
verse concerning the “daily” ministry of Christ and the
“place” of his sanctuary where Christ hears prayers and
forgives sin that papal Rome cast down or obscured.
But the Bible has a much wider and all-encompassing
application in mind, for it says:
“Psalm 119:142: “Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the truth.
“The first clue is that the Bible says the “law is
the truth.” So why and by whose authority is the law of
God introduced in Daniel 8:12? Before we confirm
this, we must disclose the second clue that will then
define the chronology of verse 12.
“After the papacy “cast down the truth to the
ground,”—cast down the law of God—(Daniel 8:12,
thus proceeding in transgression in the fullest sense)
the Bible says it ‘practised, and prospered.’ That is, for
a time and times and the dividing of time or 1260
years. Daniel 7:25 confirms this when the little horn
thinks to have changed the law of God:
“And he shall speak great words against the most
High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High,
and think to change times and laws: and they shall
be given into his hand until a time and times and the
dividing of time.”
“Let us remember that ‘speaking’ in prophecy is
an action in progress that represents:
“ ‘...The “speaking” of the nation is the action of
its legislative and judicial authorities.’ [Ellen White,
The Great Controversy, (Nampa, ID: Pacific Press,
1911), 442.]
“It was after the man of sin had thought to change
times and laws (the law of God) that the Bible says he

By reason of transgression, and it cast down truth.—
“It was ‘by reason of transgression,’ that is, by
reason of sin, that this power gained ‘the host’ that
was used to cast down the truth to the ground, to shut
away from the church and the world Christ’s priesthood, His ministry, and His sanctuary; and to cast it all
down to the ground and tread it underfoot. It was by
reason of transgression that this is the consideration
and the revelation upon which the apostle in 2 Thessalonians defines this power as the ‘man of sin’ and the
‘mystery of iniquity.’” Jones, CWCP, 98,99.
“In the order of God, it was Christ and His ministry and sanctuary in heaven, and this alone that in truth
was the object of the Levitical system, and that is truly
the Christian succession to that system. Therefore
when in and by the apostasy the system of bishops as
high priests, presbyters as priests, deacons as Levites,
and the Supper as a sacrifice, was insinuated as the
Christian succession to the Levitical system, this of

272

DANIEL 8
was to begin his reign and practice and prosper for ‘a
time and times and the dividing of time.’ As we have
seen, this was for 1260 long years. Now the government of Satan was to be displayed before the entire
universe. Satan was represented by his earthly ambassador, the Bishop of Rome, who was led on to “destroy
the mighty and the holy people” of God (Daniel 8:24).
“Turning to an exposition on Daniel 8:12 by Ellen
White, we will see how she perfectly mirrors the scriptural account. The underlining is a direct quote from
Daniel 8:12. Her exposition of the text under discussion shows that the law of God was to be cast down
and trampled in the dust unimpeded throughout all of
Christendom at a specific time in earth’s history.
“ ‘Among the leading causes that had led to the
separation of the true church from Rome was the hatred
of the latter toward the Bible Sabbath. As foretold by
prophecy, the papal power cast down the truth to the
ground. The law of God was trampled in the dust,
while the traditions and customs of men were exalted.
The churches that were under the rule of the papacy
were early compelled to honor the Sunday as a holy
day. Amid the prevailing error and superstition, many,
even of the true people of God, became so bewildered
that while they observed the Sabbath, they refrained
from labor also on the Sunday. But this did not satisfy
the papal leaders. They demanded not only that Sunday
be hallowed, but that the Sabbath be profaned; and they
denounced in the strongest language those who dared
to show it honor. It was only by fleeing from the
power of Rome that any could obey God's law in
peace.” [Ellen White, The Great Controversy, (Nampa,
ID: Pacific Press, 1911), 65.]
“Here is the unparalleled statement by Ellen
White that fully mirrors our Biblical application and
interpretation of Daniel 8:12 as the last prophetic specification to be fulfilled that heaven declared would mark
the beginning of the 1260-day/year prophetic period.”
Heiks, AD538, 264-266.

worship, salvation, and related matters, also including
God’s plan to set up His kingdoms of grace and glory.”
BRI, 2SOD, 419.

“In four of the six occurrences in the book of
Daniel, the Hebrew word refers to the revelation that
has come from God which is truth (8:26; 10:1,21;
11:2). These examples refer to the reliability of the
revealed truth in terms of the certainty of its fulfillment
in the future. The fifth usage reveals that the calamity
which befell Israel was a fulfillment of what ‘[had
been] written in the law of Moses’ (9:13a, KJV), yet no
repentance had come and no attention was being given
to God’s ‘truth’ (vs. 13b).
“On the basis of these usages, ‘truth’ in verse
12 may be understood to refer to God’s revelation
in its comprehensive sense, including both ‘the law
of Moses’ and the prophetic-apocalyptic revelation
contained in the book of Daniel itself. This Danielic
context supports the suggestion that ‘truth’ here in
verse 12 is a term referring to the divine truth of revelation which the horn will throw down to the earth. This
revelatory truth contains the instructions about

“Since the Bible alone is the true standard of faith
and morals, it is very evident that when any power
sets itself above the Bible, corruption must follow.
The history of the Roman Catholic Church shows that
this is absolutely true. The power that sets itself above
God necessarily sets itself against God.” Waggoner,
PL, 94.

“The next phrase in verse 12 states that the ‘truth’
was to be cast down to the earth. The third scene dealing with the little horn began with a view of its reaching up to heaven to do battle with the Prince. So it
ends now with the truth fallen upon the earth as a
result of the horn’s activity. The action on the vertical
dimension travels in both directions in this scene, just
as it did in the previous one in verse 10. The verb (‘to
cast down’) is the same as that used for the casting
down of the place of the sanctuary in verse 11 (salak).
“This linguistic correlation, the position of this
statement as a summary to the final scene in the vision,
and the position of this statement in the literary structure of its description, combine to indicate that the
‘truth’ affected here is not just truth in general, but
the truth about the Prince’s tamid ministration in
his sanctuary. It is a specific truth that is attacked
here, not just truth in general.” BRI, 2SOD, 517.
“In the sixth century the papacy had become firmly established. Its seat of power was fixed in the imperial city, and the bishop of Rome was declared to be the
head over the entire church. …Though the truth was
not left without witnesses, yet at times it seemed
that error and superstition would wholly prevail,
and true religion would be banished from the
earth.” Great Controversy, 54,55.
“It was the papacy which cast down the truth to
the ground, by changing the law of God, declaring that
men burn forever in hellfire, and commanding the worship of men and women.
“Only the antitypical day of atonement, the investigative judgment, could prepare the way for Christ to
rid the world of this ongoing horror.” Ferrell, BD, 97.

“The Second Vatican Council (1962-1965) declared that ‘she [the church] has always regarded and
continues to regard the Scriptures, taken together with
sacred Tradition, as the supreme rule of her faith,’
and ‘sacred theology relies on the written Word of
God, taken together with sacred Tradition, as on a
permanent foundation.’ [Flannery, Documents of Vatican II, pp. 762,763.] Thus while the leadership encourages Bible reading, Roman Catholics accept tradition as being on an equal level with Scripture.”
Pfandl, DTSOB, 82.

273

GEMS FROM DANIEL
tics who were admitted to be patterns of virtue were
ruthlessly exterminated in the name of Christ, while
in the same holy name the orthodox could purchase
absolution for the vilest of crimes for a few coins.
When the only unpardonable offense was persistence in
some trifling error of belief, such as the poverty of
Christ: when men had before them the example of
their spiritual guides as leaders in vice and debauchery
and contempt of sacred things, all the sanctions of morality were destroyed, and the confusion between right
and wrong became hopeless. The world has probably
never seen a society more vile than that of Europe
in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.’ Wylie,
History of Protestantism, Vol. 3, pp.641,642.
“…The principles of the papacy are the same today that they were five hundred years ago. Give it the
same power that it once had, for an equal length of
time, and the same state of things would exist. For the
low state of morals in the Middles Ages was not due to
the ignorance of those times, but the ignorance that
existed was due to the depravity, and both were the
direct result of the papal policy. The papal system is as
corrupt today as it ever was, and it cannot be reformed.” Waggoner, PL, 97,98.

It Practiced and Prospered.—
“Of this ecclesiastical power it is declared that it
has ‘practiced’—practiced its deceptions on the people, practiced in schemes of cunning to carry out its
own ends and aggrandize its own power.
“Likewise it has ‘prospered.’ It has made war
upon the saints, and prevailed against them. It has
well-nigh run its allotted career, and is soon to be broken without hand, to be given to the burning flame, and
to perish in the consuming glories of the second appearing of our Lord.” Smith, DR, 160-162.
“It would practice and prosper for 1260 days.” PJ
“Popery had become the world’s despot. Kings
and emperors bowed to the decrees of the Roman pontiff. The destinies of men, both for time and for eternity, seemed under his control. For hundreds of years
the doctrines of Rome had been extensively and implicitly received, its rites reverently performed, its
festivals generally observed. Its clergy were honored
and liberally sustained. Never since has the Roman
Church attained to greater dignity, magnificence, or
power.” Great Controversy, 60.

Papal Rome’s Attack on the Heavenly Sanctuary.—
“It is of interest to note just what the little horn
did to this sanctuary. A number of works can be cited:
“1. It acted toward the sanctuary somewhat in the
manner of a foreign invader. The main symbols of the
beasts and horns in chapter 8 represent political
powers. Thus, when the little horn intrudes into the
realm of the sanctuary, it does so somewhat in the same
vein as those powers would have done.
“2. It stood up or exalted itself against the
Prince to whom the sanctuary and its ministry
belong. Though he carries a political title here, the
Prince exercises a priestly function as well. In
diverting that function the little horn takes on a
priestly character too.
“3. It disrupts, or attempts to disrupt, the
services of the sanctuary.
According to the
description of the vision the little horn was to take
away the tamid (the continual ministration in the
sanctuary) from the Prince who governs the sanctuary.
In so doing it also endeavored to place these functions
under the control of its host. In one way or another,
therefore, the true services of the sanctuary were to be
deflected out of their course.
“4. It was to cast the ‘foundation place’ of the
sanctuary down to the earth. Since we are dealing with
a symbolic rather than literal movement from heaven to
earth, one might think of the transfer of some of the
functions of that sanctuary from the sacred realm of
heaven to the secular realm of earth, from the holy
to the unholy.
“5. It was to introduce transgression into the
services or function of the sanctuary. In the
statement which refers to the little horn being given a

“The ongoing nature of these two overhanging
verbs (‘acted’/’prospered’) indicates that the little horn
was to be allotted a period of time to exercise its powers. Its deserved judgment (described later) was not to
come immediately.” BRI, 2SOD, 518.
“The attack of the ‘little horn’ is always against
(1) the ‘host of heaven’ and ‘the stars’ (vs. 10), (2) the
‘Prince of the host’ (vs. 11a), (3) His tamid ministry
(vss. 11b-12a), (4) the foundation of the heavenly sanctuary (vs. 11c), and (5) the ‘truth’ (vs. 12b). One may
summarize this attack of the ‘little horn’ by saying that
it is engaged in a struggle with the ‘Prince of the
host,’ usurping His functions and thus interfering
with the benefits He provides for His people of the
Saviour-Prince. This consistent picture in 8:9-12 is
fully supported by the angelic interpretation in 8:23-25.
“…The real issue is a struggle of the ‘little
horn’ power and the agency standing behind it to
wrest from the prince of the host the control over
the divine plan of salvation. This struggle has cosmic
dimensions involving heaven and earth and the ultimate triumph of God’s love in saving fallen humanity.”
BRI, 2SOD, 456,457.
“Correctness of belief was thus the sole essential;
virtue was a wholly subordinate consideration. How
completely under such a system religion and morals
came to be dissociated is seen in the remarks of Pius II,
that the Franciscans were excellent theologians, but
cared nothing about virtue.
“This, in fact, was the direct result of the system of persecution embodied in the Inquisition. Here-

274

DANIEL 8
host over the tamid (8:12), the idea is added that it
would do so “by, in, through, with” transgression
(bepasa). (The precise sense of the preposition used
here is difficult to capture.) In one way or another,
therefore, transgression has been introduced into
services or functions that were intended to treat
transgression. Their purpose has been subverted.
“6. The little horn was also to cast the ‘truth’ to
the ground and trample upon it. In context this does
not refer to truth in general, as found in the Torah for
example. It refers more specifically to the truth about
the sanctuary and about the Prince and His
ministry in it.
“Thus the climax of this prophecy depicts, in essence, a struggle over the sanctuary between the little
horn and the Prince of the host. Given the extent of
this attack upon the Prince’s sanctuary, the question
naturally arises as to why the sanctuary assumes such
importance in this prophecy. Clearly this is not a dispute over real estate or a building, whatever its actual
physical makeup may be. What is of utmost importance here is what goes on in that sanctuary.
Whether the tabernacle in the wilderness, Solomon’s
temple, the second temple, or the heavenly sanctuary,
these sanctuaries have been the center for activities
connected with God’s plan for the salvation of
mankind.
“To obtain salvation in OT times the believer
went to the temple and participated in its services. The
same procedure applies in the Christian era. The exception is that the temple to which the NT believer
applies is in heaven, and he/she must ‘go’ there by
faith, not by physical act. In that sanctuary we have a
heavenly High Priest ministering for us. The book of
Hebrews identifies Him as Jesus.
“Chapter 8 refers to that same heavenly High
Priest as the Prince of the host. This Prince is not only
ruler over His host or people, He is also a heavenly
Priest ministering in His sanctuary for them. It is this
particular aspect of His work that is attacked by the
little horn. The focus of the prophecy underscores the
seriousness of the attack. The evident reason for this
is that the Prince’s ministration in His sanctuary
deals with the salvation of mankind. Thus a struggle over the plan of salvation is depicted as going on
here. The spatial dimension employed with the symbolism—the earth-to-heaven axis—heightens the description of this conflict.” BRI, 2SOD, 198,199.

fulfills the control of the tamid and the symbolic casting down of the foundation of the heavenly sanctuary.
“From chapter 9 to chapter 8 the emphasis has
shifted from an attack upon the earthly temple to an
attack upon the heavenly temple. The ministry conducted in that heavenly temple is that which was inaugurated there according to chapter 9—‘to anoint a most
holy place’ (9:24, RSV). The particular ministry
which began there as a result of that service now
meets its counterfeit in the work of the little horn in
chapter 8. ...Chapter 9 is the short-range prophecy. It
takes salvation history only to the point where the
heavenly ministry begins. Chapter 8 carries the reader
forward into the history of the fate of that heavenly
ministry. For this reason there is a shift in these two
prophecies from the earthly temple to a concentration
on the heavenly temple.” BRI, 2SOD, 236.
“The vision in chapter 8 places more stress upon
His work as a priest that it does upon His role as a ruler. It is the Prince’s tamid ministration that the little
horn attempts to take away and counterfeit. It is the
foundation of His sanctuary that the little horn
symbolically casts down to the earth. It is the truth
about Him and His ministration and His sanctuary
that the little horn casts down to the earth and
tramples upon.
“While part of the struggle between the little horn
and the Prince in chapter 8 involves the host of His
stars—the saints—more of it focuses upon the work of
the Prince in the sanctuary for His people. Why is the
sanctuary so important? The evident reason for its
importance has to do with what goes on in it. It is in
the sanctuary (through its ministration) that the
Prince is working out the salvation of the people.
This is what the little horn attempts to take away and
control, in this way diverting the attention of the people
from the true plan of salvation. But the true plan of
salvation, as executed by the Prince, will eventually
prevail. The salvation of the people will be accomplished.” BRI, 2SOD, 219.

DANIEL 8:13
Then I heard one saint speaking, and
another saint said unto that certain saint
which spake, How long shall be the vision
concerning the daily sacrifice, and the
transgression of desolation, to give both the
sanctuary and the host to be trodden under
foot?

“In connection with its destruction of the temple
in Jerusalem Imperial Rome did not substitute a new
ministry. The attack by the horn on the Prince and His
sanctuary looks beyond the function of an earthly temple (8:11-12). The symbolism began to meet its fulfillment when the sacerdotal system of salvation
developed by the medieval church obscured from
the view of mankind the true heavenly ministry of
Jesus our great High Priest. This is the type of action, not the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem, that

Then I heard.—
“He that is of God heareth God’s words: ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.”
John 8:47:

275

GEMS FROM DANIEL
third of the total time that mankind has been in this
world of sin!” Ferrell, BD, 90-92.

One Saint Speaking.—
“This ‘saint’ was the same as ‘that certain saint
which spake’, who was asked a question by ‘another
saint,’ and who gives the answer direct to Daniel.” PJ.

An Extremely Important Question.—
“ ‘How long is this to last, this that we see, the
daily sacrifice stopped, the appalling sacrilege, the
trampling down of the sanctuary and the starry
host?’—Moffatt.” Bunch, BOD, 121.

Another Saint Said Unto That Certain Saint.—
“‘From the text of Daniel 8:13, it appears that
there were three persons connected with that vision.
As to who these three persons were, the margin of the
verse makes it a little more clear. We can receive still
further clearness from a more literal translation of the
text. Here is a literal translation of the first part of the
thirteenth verse: “And I heard a holy one speaking,
and a holy one said to Palmoni, who was the speaker,
How long shall be the vision,” etc.
“‘In the margin of the text where the words, “that
certain saint which spake” are found, these words are
written: “The numberer of secrets, or the wonderful
numberer” (Hebrew: Palmoni ).
“ ‘We find then in verse 13: the speaker, called
the Wonderful Numberer; the holy one, and Daniel.
These were the three persons in the vision. Now the
more literal translation of the text makes plain that the
speaker was the one called Palmoni; for the Hebrew
reads as follows: La-pal-moni, Ham-da-bar unto
Palmoni, the speaker.
“ ‘The Hebrew word, Palmoni , is a contracted
word. It contains the elements of two Hebrew words.
One is, Pele , and the other is Ma-na. The Hebrew
word, Pele, means wonderful. See Isaiah 9:6. The
word, Mana , means numbered. See Daniel 5:25-26.
So this contracted Hebrew word, Palmoni , literally
means wonderful numberer. This Wonderful Numberer is none other than the Lord Jesus Christ.
“‘So one person in the vision, recorded in Daniel 8:13, was the Lord Jesus; the second person, represented by the holy one, was the angel Gabriel. See
Daniel 8:16, and compare with Luke 1:19. The
third person was Daniel, the prophet. There was
something about this vision which Daniel could not
understand. So the angel Gabriel asked the Lord Jesus
a question for the benefit of Daniel, that the desire of
Daniel might be made clear. Instead of the Lord Jesus
turning to the angel Gabriel and giving him the answer,
the prophet Daniel says that the speaker turned to him,
to Daniel, and gave the answer direct to him. Here is
what the prophet says: “And He [that is, Palmoni , the
Wonderful Numberer, Christ] said to me,” etc. Daniel
8:14. So Christ turned His attention directly to the
prophet, and gave the answer to him personally.’—
F.C. Gilbert, Practical Lessons for the Church of Today, pp.606-608.
“…Christ is here called by the unique name, ‘The
Wonderful Numberer.’ Why this strange name? Obviously, to call attention to the fact that the 2300-day
prophecy was of the highest importance. Only Christ
Himself could present it. He alone, the Master of all
numbers, able to count the stars, was able to provide Daniel with a time span that was greater than a

“These two verses of Daniel 8 [verses 13,14]
close the vision proper. They introduce the one remaining point which of all others would naturally be of
most absorbing interest to the prophet and to the
church…. If time had been given, Daniel might have
asked this question himself, but God ever anticipates
our desires, and sometimes answers them before we
ask.
“Two celestial beings converse upon this subject.
This is an important matter which the church should
understand well. Daniel heard one saint speaking.
What this saint said, we are not informed. But another
saint asked an important question: ‘How long shall be
the vision?’ Both the question and the answer are
placed upon the record, which is prima facie evidence
that this is a matter the church should understand. This
view is further confirmed by the fact that the answer
was addressed to Daniel, as the one whom it chiefly
concerned, and for whose information it was given.”
Smith, DR,162.
How Long?—
“The question of 8:13 opens with the Hebrew
words, ‘ad-matay. They are usually translated ‘how
long?’ But closer examination reveals that the meaning is rather different. The thrust of the question is
expressed in the two words, ‘ad-matay; so what do
they really mean?
“The first word, ‘ad, is a temporal preposition
which should be rendered ‘until.’ It is connected to the
temporal interrogative adverb, matay , which means
‘when.’ Therefore the question in 8:13 opens with an
inquiry about time (‘until when . .?’), which is answered in 8:14 (‘until [‘ad ] 2300 evenings-mornings,
then [we; at that time] shall the Sanctuary be nisdaq ”).
“To paraphrase the question more accurately, in
accordance with the Hebrew: “Until what point in time
shall be the vision about the daily, and the desolating
transgression, to give both the Sanctuary and God’s
people to be trodden underfoot?”
“The question asks for the termination point—
A number of Hebrew scholars explain that this compound expression (‘ad-matay ) actually means “until
when?” The main point of the question is thus changed
from ‘how long will the time span be?’ to ‘when will
the time span end?’ The emphasis is not on its beginning nor on its duration, but on its termination. The
stress of the question is about the end point: and what
happens from then on.
“The answers speak about the termination

276

DANIEL 8
point. The above explanation is supported by the fact
that, in the answer of 8:14, the ‘until’ (‘ad ) is then
followed by ‘then’ (a wow after temporal information)
in the last part of 8:14. The focus is on the end time.
“This point about the termination of the time span
is repeated to Daniel three more times in chapter 8:
‘For at the time of the end shall be the vision’ (8:17)
and again, ‘the vision of the evenings and the mornings... is true’; for ‘it shall be for many days’ (8:26).
‘At the time appointed the end shall be’ (8:19). It is the
end time which is emphasized by Gabriel, in his question and several replies.
“…The question is not asking for the length of
time that the papacy will have supremacy (‘how
long?’); that was given in 7:25 (1260 years). We
have earlier learned that the question is asking when an
end will begin to be worked out to forever stop this
ongoing deception and destruction of the people. The
question asks what will happen at the termination of
the terrible time of desolating transgression. The
answer tells what begins to happen at that terminal
point.
“To paraphrase the question more accurately, in
accordance with the Hebrew: ‘Until what point in time
shall be the vision about the continual first apartment
ministry, and the desolating transgression, to give both
the Sanctuary and God’s people to be trodden under
foot?” Ferrell, BD, 93-95, 102.

long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge
and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth?” Revelation 6:9,10.
Question
Answer
Date

HOW LONG?
How Long Host
How Long SancTrodden Under
tuary Trodden
Foot?
Under Foot?
Daniel 12:6
Daniel 8:14
1260 days
2300 days
1798
1844

How Long? Such an Important Question.—
“We see not our signs: there is no more any
prophet: neither is there among us any that
knoweth how long. O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name
for ever?” Psalm 74:9,10.
Shall Be the Vision.—
“It is important to note that the question is about
the length of the vision, not about the length of the activities of the little horn. The activities of the little
horn are included within the vision, indeed they mark
its climax, but they are not all that there is to the vision.
The vision also includes the Persian ram, the Greek
goat, and the four horns that precede the little horn of
Rome’s two phases. So when the angel asks, ‘How
long is the vision?’ the word, ‘vision’ [chazon], includes the whole of what Daniel saw in chapter 8—
from the Persian ram to the little horn. This fact
gives us an approximate starting point for the 2,300day time-period mentioned in verse 14.” Shea,
DARG, 183, 184.

“It is common but mistaken notion that the emphasis is on the entire time span of 2,300 eveningmornings. However, the stress in the question of verse
13 actually falls upon the end point of the 2,300 evenings-mornings and what is to take place from that
point of time onward. The emphasis is not duration
(how long) but termination (until when) and what follows.” BRI, 2SOD, 429.

Concerning the Daily.—
“Daniel’s prophecy indicates that the Prince of
the host is not only a royal, but also a priestly figure.
Thus it draws attention to the Prince’s intercession in
behalf of his people in the holy place of the heavenly
sanctuary. … The tamid was used with reference to the
priestly activities performed in the court and in the holy
place of the sanctuary. (We should not overlook the
significant fact that tamid is never used with reference
to an activity performed in the most holy place.) …It
is this [tamid] ministry that the horn attempts to, and
succeeds in, interrupting. Since ‘the tamid’ refers
only to the Prince’s first apartment ministry, the
question naturally arises: What about the priestly
work of the most holy place? Does the little horn
affect the annual purification of the sanctuary as
well? Daniel 8:14 answers the question.
“The expression, the tamid, used in the prophecy
points to the priestly activity of the Prince in the holy
place of the heavenly sanctuary. Since the sanctuary is
the conceptual framework of the prophecy, it would be
logical to have a reference also to his priestly activity
in the most holy place. Nisdaq provides that reference
(vs. 14). The Day of Atonement activity was the only

The Question Asked a Second Time in Daniel.—
“In a second conversation held for his benefit,
Daniel heard the question, Daniel 12:6: ‘How long
(‘ad-matay) shall it be to the end of these wonders?’
“Regarding matay, Baker and Carpenter’s Complete Word Study Dictionary: Old Testament (AMG:
2003), page 691, states, ‘With ‘ad- on the front, it has
the sense of how long, until when.’ Note, too, the answer for the question in Daniel 12:6 is also in the context of the time of the end. The end point (termination)
is again give, which was the focus of the question as
well as Daniel’s concern:
‘Dan. 12:7: ‘When he shall have accomplished to
scatter the power of the holy people, all these things
shall be finished.’” Heiks, TDSB, 128,129.
The Blood of the Martyrs asks the Same Question.—
“And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw
under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, and for the testimony which they held:
“And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How

277

GEMS FROM DANIEL
day …when the sanctuary was purified/ vindicated.”
BRI, 2SOD, 528,529,533.

finally cleanse and blot out those confessed sins of His
people from the heavenly sanctuary, and to put them on
the anti-typical scapegoat—Satan—at the end of His
priestly ministry in the Most Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary, the end of the Investigative Judgment.”
PJ (from Heiks, TDSB, 138).

Transgression of Desolation.—
“The second noun phrase in the question to be
understood in the question of Daniel 8:13 is ‘transgression of desolation.’ Rightly translated from the Hebrew, ‘the transgression of desolation’ is ‘the transgression causing horror.’ (S.R. Driver, The Book of
Daniel, pgs. 118, 150-1, 205-6.)
“ ‘Transgression’ is pesa. What is the ‘transgression that causes horror’? Turning again to the scriptures for our answer, we will see that the ‘transgression’ (pesa) is connected with God’s people:
“Dan. 9:24: ‘Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people and upon thy holy city to finish the transgression (pesa), and to make an end of sins…’
“The connection between transgression and God’s
faithful will be confirmed again in Leviticus 16. This
side of the Second Coming, the only thing that needs to
be cleansed in the heavenly sanctuary on the Day of
Atonement is the confessed sins and transgression of
God’s people that have gone beforehand to the judgment (1 Timothy 5:24):
“Lev. 16:16,21: ‘And he shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of
the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions (pesa) in all their sins…’
“ ‘And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the
head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions (pesa) in all their sins, putting them upon the
head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand
of a fit man into the wilderness.’
“Thus the pesa (‘transgressions’ or ‘sin’), as we
have seen, is connected with God’s people, and it’s
also inextricably linked to the heavenly sanctuary.
‘This word primarily expresses a rebellion against God
and His laws. In addition to the act of transgression
itself, this term can also be used to convey the guilt that
comes from the transgression (Dan. 8:12,13; 9:24).’
Baker and Carpenter, Complete Word Study Dictionary, 927.
“Since the sins of God’s people have been transferred to the sanctuary, the sanctuary must be
‘cleansed’ of its accumulated pesa before the atonement can be considered complete.
“It should be clear to all that the so-called papal
desolating power was not ‘restored’ in 1844, nor was it
‘cleansed’ in 1844; nor was it ‘vindicated’ in 1844.”
Heiks, TDSB, 136,137.

“The word, “transgression” (pesa ), is the most
terrible word for sin in the Old Testament. It basically
means a rebellion or revolt. It consists of acts in which
one breaks with God by taking away what is His, by
robbing and seizing what belongs to Him. This is the
sin of the little horn power and all who have followed
in its path.
“It is highly significant that the word, pesa
(‘transgression’), which is the heart of the above
phrase, is also used in regard to the day of atonement
cleansing which took place in the earthly sanctuary
(Lev 16:16, 21). In both Daniel 9:24 and Leviticus
16:16, 21, the word is used in connection with God’s
people.” Ferrell, BD, 87,88.
“And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the
truth to the ground; and it practiced, and prospered.”
Daniel 8:12.
“In the place of Christ, the true and divine High
Priest of God’s own appointment in heaven, she has
substituted a human, sinful, and sinning priesthood
on earth. In the place of the continual heavenly ministry of Christ in His true priesthood upon His true sacrifice, she has substituted only an interval ministry of a
human, earthly, sinful, and sinning priesthood in the
once-a-day ‘daily sacrifice of the mass.; And in the
place of the sanctuary and the true tabernacle, which
the Lord pitched, and not man, she has substituted her
own meeting-places of wood and stone, to which she
applies the term ‘sanctuary.’ Thus, instead of the one
continual High Priest, the one continual ministry, and
the one continual sanctuary in heaven, which God has
ordained, and which is the only true, she has devised
out of her own heart and substituted for the only true,
many high priests, many ministries, many sacrifices,
and many sanctuaries, on earth, which in every possible relation are only human and utterly false.
“And it can never take away sin. No earthly
priesthood, no earthly ministry, no earthly sacrifice, or
service, in any earthly sanctuary, can ever take away
sin. In the book of Hebrews, we have seen that even
the priesthood, the ministry, the sacrifice, and the service in the earthly sanctuary—the very service which
the Lord Himself ordained on earth—never took
away sin. The inspired record is that they never did
take away sin, and that they never could take away sin.
“It is only the priesthood and the ministry of
Christ that can ever take away sin. And this is a priesthood and a ministry in heaven, and of a sanctuary that
is in heaven. For when Christ was on earth He was not

“The true understanding of the ‘transgression of
desolation’ as the sin that causes desolation, supports
the understanding and doctrine of the Investigative
Judgment. It is transgression and sin that Jesus paid
the penalty for at the cross, and it is transgression and
sin that we confess and bring to Jesus Christ beforehand to judgment. And it is the work of Christ now to

278

DANIEL 8
a priest, and if He had remained on earth until this
hour, He would not yet be a priest; as it stands written,
‘If He were on earth, He should not be a priest.’ Heb.
8:4. Thus, by plain word and abundant illustration,
God has demonstrated that no earthly priesthood,
sacrifice, or ministry can ever take away sin.
“If any such could take away sin, then why could
not that which God Himself ordained on earth take
away sin? If any such could take away sin, then why
change the priesthood and the ministry from earth
to heaven? Therefore, by the plain word of the Lord,
it is plain that the priesthood, the ministry, the sacrifice, and the sanctuary which the Papacy has set up and
operates on earth can never take away sin; but, instead,
only perpetuates sin, is a fraud, an imposture, and the
very ‘transgression’ and ‘abomination of desolation.’…” Jones, CWCP, 101-103.

not how long will the first apartment ministry continue,
but ‘ad-matay —what happens when that ministry
ends? The answer was that the antitypical nisdaq,
translated ‘cleansing’ in the KJV, would begin.” Ferrell, BD, 103.

“Various usages of words which derive from the
root (smm) express three ideas: (1) a psychological
condition of a shocking horror within a person; (2)
devastation/desolation as it relates to the sanctuary/temple; and (3) judgment that is divinely decreed.
“On the basis of this background, the phrase ‘the
transgression causing horror’ seems to express an appalling horror caused by religio-cultic transgression
to which the ‘little horn’ has given rise through a
counterfeit system of ministry and meditation.
Such a system rivals the one functioning in the
heavenly sanctuary and leads individuals to transgress the truth of God’s redemptive activities.” BRI,
2SOD, 443.

Sanctuary Trodden Under Foot.—
“The earthly sanctuary was cast down and destroyed by Pagan Rome in AD 70, at which time it was
no longer holy nor did it retain any real significance.
During the middle ages the heavenly sanctuary with its
divine priesthood and services were polluted and cast
down by the papal apostasy. In 1854 Elder Uriah
Smith wrote a tract entitled, ‘The 2300 Days and the
Sanctuary,’ in which he answered the question as to
how the place of Christ’s sanctuary in heaven could be
cast down by an earthly power:
“‘We read in Daniel 8:13 about treading the sanctuary underfoot and it may be asked how a sanctuary in
heaven can be trodden underfoot. These expressions
are figurative, as will be seen from Heb. 10:29, which
speaks of treading underfoot the Son of God. In the
same sense that the Son of God is trodden underfoot,
…the pope has trodden underfoot the (heavenly)
sanctuary, by calling his own sanctuary (or temple)
the temple of God, and (by) turning away the worship of man from the temple of God in heaven to his
own sanctuary, by elevating himself above all that is
called God, and (by) assuming to be the head of the
church instead of Christ.’—Bible Doctrines for Seventh-day Adventist Colleges, p.285. If it is possible to
tread ‘underfoot the Son of God’ by counting ‘the
blood of the covenant …an unholy thing’ and by doing
‘despite unto the Spirit of grace,’ then it is just as possible to trample underfoot the sanctuary in which
Christ ministers by the institution of a counterfeit ministration. In the same way we can ‘crucify the Son of
God afresh and put Him to an open shame.’” Bunch,
BOD, 122.

“In regard to the word ‘sanctuary’ in Daniel 8, the
shift from miqdas in verses 11-12 to qodes in verses
13-14 of Daniel 8 comes about because qodes is the
key term used in Leviticus 16:16,19, and 30 relative to
the ‘cleansing’ of the sanctuary on the Day of Atonement. In other words, when the context regarding
the sanctuary deals with ‘cleansing,’ qodes is always
used. The reader will also find that qodes is another
terminological link between itself and Leviticus 16, as
qodes is used no less than seven times in Leviticus 16
to designate the Most Holy Place.” Heiks, TDSB, 139.

Sanctuary.—
“It is also significant that, instead of using the
word, miqdas (‘sanctuary’), which is found in Daniel
8:11, a different word, qodes (also translated ‘sanctuary’), is used in 8:13-14. This was purposely done to
direct our attention to Leviticus 16—the day of atonement—which is the magnificent heart of the 8:14 message. Qodes is the only word used for ‘sanctuary’ in
the day of atonement service (Lev 16:2-4, 16-17, 20,
23-24, 27, 32-33).
“The emphasis in Daniel 8:14 is on the second
apartment cleansing.” Ferrell, BD, 88.
“The qodes (‘Sanctuary’) in the question (8:13)
helps connect the question to the reply (8:14)— The
question is asked, ‘How long shall... the Sanctuary and
the host... be trodden under foot?’ Throughout the Dark
Ages, the papacy had systematically used every possible device and threat to blot Christ’s mediation from
the minds of men. The place of the Sanctuary was cast
down (8:11). The pope’s throne, and the confessional
and masses of his priests, were substituted for the
Sanctuary in heaven. The Sanctuary was trodden underfoot (8:13). The intercession of Christ for mankind
was despised and made a thing of nought. Daniel wellunderstood the sanctuary service. The question was

Host.—
“The word host is applied to the people who
worship in the outer court, and fitly represents the
Christian church, who are said to be strangers and
pilgrims on the earth, having no continuing places, but
looking for a city whose builder and maker is God.
Jeremiah, speaking of the gospel church, says, 3:19,

279

GEMS FROM DANIEL
‘But I said, How shall I put thee among the children,
and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the
host of nations?’ evidently meaning the church from
the Gentiles.” Miller, Evidence, 41.

“All difficulties regarding the ability of the Papacy to occupy the temple or sanctuary of God and pollute it with a false system, are removed when we realize that one part of the heavenly sanctuary, the
court, is on earth. Rev. 11:1-3. ‘Rise and measure
God’s Sanctuary.’—Wey. Here we are told that the
court of God’s sanctuary ‘is given unto the Gentiles,
and for forty-two months they will trample the holy
city under foot.’—Wey. …No person can read this in
connection with Dan. 7:25 and Dan. 8:10-14, without
knowing that they represent the same experience. The
‘court’ of God’s sanctuary and the ‘holy city’ are identified as one and the same thing. The ‘holy city’ is the
church or ‘the saints of the Most High’ or ‘the host
of heaven.’
“The earth cannot be the court of the heavenly
sanctuary because it is not a holy place. Also it has
been under the heel and dominion of the Gentiles for
6,000 years. But the Revelator declares that the court
or holy city would be under the dominion of the Gentiles for only 42 months or 1260 years, and this is the
exact time that the Papacy was to trample underfoot the
sanctuary of God and saints of God. The church of
God is the only sacred place on earth and is therefore the court of the Sanctuary. Sinners come out of
the wicked world into the sacred enclosure of the
church or court of God to find salvation at the altar of
Calvary. There the Priest of the heavenly Sanctuary
meets the repentant sinner and then ministers His
own blood in his behalf.
“In many texts of Scripture the church is called
‘the courts of the Lord’ and ‘the courts of our God.’
See Ps. 65:4; 84:1,2; 92:13; 96:8, 100:4; 116:19; 135:2;
Isa. 1:12; Zech. 3:7. The plural is used in all of these
texts doubtless because Solomon’s temple had several
courts which represented the church as a whole.
Commenting on Rev. 2:1 one writer said: ‘Christ is
spoken of as walking in the midst of the golden candlesticks. Thus is symbolized His relation to the churches… He is the High Priest and mediator of the sanctuary above, yet He is represented as walking up and
down in the midst of His churches on earth…. He is
the true watchman of the Lord’s house, the true
warden of the temple courts.’—Acts of the Apostles,
p.586.” Bunch, BOD, 125.

“Host” (saba) is a military term to denote an army. It is also used to denote the work of the Levites in
the sanctuary (Num. 4:3, 23, 30; 8:24-25)….
“The word, ‘host’ (saba), is associated with
‘sanctuary’ (qodes ) as being trampled underfoot. Dan.
8:10 speaks of the persecution of the host (saba) and
8:24 defines it as being the saints—‘the mighty and
holy people.’” Ferrell, BD, 86,88,89.
“‘Host’ is the second noun in the third noun
phrase of Daniel 8:13. …In the context of Daniel 8:13,
the host is clearly the people of God, and the trampling
underfoot of the host refers to none other than the persecution of the saints.
“In Daniel 8:10, 12, 24, as well as Daniel 7:25,
we witnessed a very specific time period during which
the saints were to be trodden underfoot: when the papacy was permitted to ‘practice and prosper’ for
1260 long years.
“As shown, this prophesied trampling of the
host would occur prior to 1844. It is in Daniel 12:7
that the portion of Daniel’s question regarding the
treading underfoot of the host is answered, showing
that the trampling and scattering of the saints would be
until 1798:
“Dan. 12:7: ‘And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, when he
held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven,
and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shall be for
a time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all
these things shall be finished.’
“During the Dark Ages of papal rule, when
over fifty million of God’s people were condemned
to death for their faith and loyalty to Christ, they
were judged and presented in the most dark and
malicious light before the world. The events culminating in October 22, 1844, and the renewed understanding of heaven’s sanctuary, prove that depiction
false beyond doubt. In that understanding, God again
demonstrates His faithfulness to His moral obligations.
When the investigative judgment concludes, God’s
Word reveals the saints in their true light, picturing
them in garments of purest white, with a righteous
judgment given in favor of the saints. God is vindicated, as well as the faithful of all ages. Rev. 19:8; Dan.
7:22. The ‘restoration,’ ‘cleansing,’ and ‘vindication’
(sadaq meanings) foretold in the sanctuary’s cleansing
(nitsdaq, with all of the nuances of sadaq implied for
Daniel 8:13), is finally and forever accomplished.”
Heiks, TDSB, 156.

“‘How long, O Lord, how long?’ No wonder the
Lord, in order that hope might not wholly die out of the
hearts of His downtrodden, waiting people, has shown
them the future events of the world’s history. All these
persecuting powers shall meet an utter and everlasting
destruction. For the redeemed there are unfading glories beyond the suffering and sorrow of this present
life.
“The Lord’s eye is upon His people. The furnace
will be heated no hotter than is necessary to consume
the dross. It is through much tribulation that we are
to enter the kingdom. The word ‘tribulation’ is from
tribulum, a threshing sledge. Blow after blow must be

The Host Trodden Under Foot.—

280

DANIEL 8
laid upon us, until all the wheat is beaten free from the
chaff, and we are made fit for the heavenly garner. But
not a kernel of wheat will be lost.
“Says the Lord to His people, ‘Ye are the light of
the world,’ ‘the salt of the earth.’ In His eyes there is
nothing else on the earth of consequence or importance. Hence the peculiar question here asked,
‘How long... Concerning what?—the glory of earthly
kingdoms? the skill of renowned warriors? the fame
of mighty conquerors? the greatness of human empire?—No, but concerning the sanctuary and the
host, the people and the worship of the Most High.
How long shall they be trodden underfoot? Here is
where all heaven’s interest and sympathy are enlisted.
“He who touches the people of God, touches not
mere mortals, weak and helpless, but Omnipotence.
He opens an account which must be settled in the
judgment of heaven. Soon all these accounts will be
adjusted and the iron heel of oppression will be
crushed. A people will be brought out of the furnace of
affliction prepared to shine as the stars forever and ever. Every child of God is an object of interest to
heavenly beings, one whom God loves and for whom
He is preparing a crown with immortality hereafter.
Reader, are you one of the number?” Smith, DR,
165,166.

“Now it goes after the Prince of the army/host
(sar-hassaba) and the sanctuary—its real concern. It
is powerful enough to take away (rum, Hophal form)
from the Prince His continual ministry in the sanctuary,
the tamid. By taking away from the Prince what belongs exclusively to Him, the little horn indicates that it
desires to act as a priest itself. In an effort to attain
further exaltation the horn throws down the ‘place’ of
the Prince’s sanctuary. This suggests a literal or metaphorical destruction of the base of the sanctuary. The
little horn is successful in its anti-Yahwistic activity.
“According to 8:12, the horn did something else.
…‘And a host was given over the tamid.’ What this
means is that once the horn takes away the tamid from
the Prince, it sets its own army in control of the tamid.
“The little horn has complete control over the
tamid. It also has a cultic guard ‘to protect’ the tamid.
This anti-Yawistic power is able to do this ‘through
transgression’ (bepesa). The horn revolted against
God. The rebellion (pesa), which could be expiated in
the sanctuary (Lev. 16:16), cannot be atoned for in this
case because the little horn attacks the very instruments
of expiation. This is rebellion to the utmost.
“The horn’s control over the tamid implies that it
also controls the torah (‘instruction’). This enemy of
God’s sanctuary is able to cast down to earth the truth
(emet), the divine instruction which was under the control of the priesthood. Daniel 7:25 refers to this same
activity as an attempt to ‘change the times and the law.’
“…What we have here [in Daniel 8:9-14] is an attack on the sanctuary. The angel interpreter defines
that activity as a profanation (halal). We read in 11:31:
‘Forces from him shall appear and profane [halal] the
temple and fortress, and shall take away the [tamid].
…The horn is not, therefore, a contaminating agent, but
a rebellious, profane one.’
“…The activity of the Prince is of significant importance. The little horn wants to control his activity.
Particular attention should be given to the fact that the
tamid belongs to the Prince. We have already pointed
out that the tamid activity was performed by the Israelite priests. It is logical to suggest that the Prince is a
priestly figure. As a matter of fact, the term prince
(sar) is used in the OT to designate the high priest (1
Chr. 24:5). The horn assumes the authority of the
Prince’s priestly ministry.
“However, we should not overlook the fact that
the Prince mentioned here is more than a human priest.
He is the Prince of the heavenly hosts. According to
Joshua 5:13-15, This Prince is a heavenly Being. In
the book of Daniel, He is also called ‘the Prince of
princes’ (8:25), ‘Messiah the Prince’ (9:25, KJV), and
‘Michael, the great prince’ (12:1). This Prince is probably the same Being called the “Son of man’ in chapter
7. These titles tend to suggest that the Prince is also a
royal figure. In him we have a combination of the royal and priestly functions.
“…The tamid is used only in connection with the
holy place and has to do with the work of the priest in

Both Sanctuary and the Host Trodden Under Foot.—
“God’s people cannot be separated from the
Sanctuary. What affects the Sanctuary affects them.
“Since the treading down of the Sanctuary in
verses 11, 12, brought about a treading down of the
host (the people of God), it must be evident that the
restoration and cleansing of the Sanctuary, would
include the restoration and cleansing of the host—
God’s people who worship in that Sanctuary.” John
Skeete, Sanctuary Syllabus.
“[Daniel 8: 9-14] ignores the political concerns of
the little horn. It is the horn’s attitude toward the cultus [church] and the cultic community (God’s people)
which is really emphasized. The little horn is essentially an anti-cultic power. But it is not simply opposed to
any cultic practice. This horn acts against the Yahwistic cult. It becomes great in a direction in which none
of the other beasts became great, namely, upward.
“The little horn attacks the ‘host of heaven.’ This
host (saba) probably designates a cultic guard, a kind
of Levitical guard. Among the duties of the Levites
was the responsibility of protecting the sanctuary
from the intrusion of non-cultic personnel (Num.
3:5-10; 18:1-10, 1 Chr. 9:23-27). This was one of
their most important responsibilities. The sanctuary was not to be profaned at any cost.
“When the little horn attacks the sanctuary it first
has to fight the saba, the cultic guard. In the fight
some of the cultic army (min-hassaba) are ‘cast down
to indicate defeat. The horn is able to overcome the
guard.

281

GEMS FROM DANIEL
that place. It is proper, therefore, to infer that the
Prince would be doing a work equivalent to that performed by the priest in the holy place. If we are right,
we may conclude that the little horn will somehow
affect the work of the Priest in the holy place. Says
Daniel, it will take away from the Prince the tamid, that
is, the continual ministry in the holy place.
“Anyone acquainted with the Hebrew cultus immediately will raise the question, What about the
priestly work in the most holy place? Does the little
horn affect the annual purification of the sanctuary? Here 8:13,14 becomes very important.” BRI,
2SOD, 534-537.

times in this prophecy, in 8:11, 13, and 14.
“4. References to the tamid and its use in the
context of the sanctuary is another pointer. Tamid or
‘daily/continual’ is a word commonly used in
connection with the sanctuary (approximately 30
times). In addition to that common connection the first
two references here (vss. 11-12) immediately precede
and follow the word for sanctuary. That
juxtaposition emphasizes even more strongly its
function here as a sanctuary word.
“5. The evening-morning as ‘sanctuary days.’ The
phrase ‘evening-morning’ was not the common way of
expressing time in the OT era. Yet the prophetic time
period mentioned here was measured off in eveningmornings—2300 of them. Since such a time unit is
exceptional, it must have been chosen for a special
reason.
“Aside from the specifically chronological use of
the evening and morning to demarcate the days of the
Creation week in Genesis, the evening and the morning
had a special connection with the sanctuary. One might
think first of all of the sacrifices of the burnt offering
on the alter in the court. However, the connection of
these rites with Daniel’s evening-mornings is not so
direct. The biblical references to that practice always
refer to it as taking place in the morning and the evening, never the evening and the morning.
“A more direct connection of the evening and
the morning with the sanctuary comes from God’s
instructions given in the wilderness for the lighting
of the lamps in the holy place at the evening and the
trimming of the lamps in the morning. These functions were to take place ‘continually’ (tamid), ‘from
evening to morning’ (Ex. 27:20-21; Lev 24:2-3). At the
same time the priest was to burn incense on the golden
alter in the holy place. This was also to be a ‘continual’ or ‘perpetual’ (tamid) practice (Ex. 30:6-7).
“During the wilderness wanderings the time to
carry out these activities in the sanctuary were marked
off precisely by God Himself. At evening the pillar of
cloud turned into a pillar of fire. In the morning the
pillar of fire turned into a pillar of cloud (Num. 9:1516, 21). This kind of language in the Pentateuch sounds
very much like the background for these ‘sanctuary
days’ in Daniel 8:14.
“6. The characterization of the two conversing
angels in 8:13 as ‘holy ones.’ This is an uncommon
way to refer to angels in the OT. The rarity of such
occurrences emphasizes the probability that the
terminology has been selected for special reasons.
These ‘holy ones’ appear to discuss the end of a
prophecy that deals with the ‘holy place,’ the
sanctuary. In fact, the same Hebrew root has been used
here to refer to both the sanctuary and these angels.
The direct connection between the two is thus quite
logical.
“When one thinks about angels in relation to the
sanctuary, there are two in particular who stand out—
the two cherubim who were modeled as standing on

“Both the sanctuary and host are ‘trampled’
(mirmas ). In the Old Testament, this word is only
used of being trampled to the ground by animals (Isa
5:5; 7:25; Eze 34:19) or God’s people being trampled
by an enemy (Isa 10:6; 28:18; Micah 7:10).” Ferrell,
BD, 89.
“Daniel had declared the ‘daily’ was to be taken
away, and history confirms it was largely removed
from the mindfulness of God’s people. By the
1840’s nearly all believed that the sanctuary was the
earth. Thus as previously shown, it was their faulty
interpretation that produced the bitter experience so
vividly portrayed in the book of Revelation 10. And
Revelation 11:1 has revealed to us that the restoration of knowledge of the sanctuary and its services
would not come until the passing of October 22,
1844. [Ed. note: This is what exactly happened in
history, thus proving 1844 is the correct interpretation
of the 2300 days, and that the tamid is the knowledge
of Christ’s ministry in the Holy Place of the heavenly
sanctuary.]” Heiks, TDSB, 143.
Links to the Sanctuary in Chapter 8.—
“There are many sanctuary-related words in Daniel 8:10-14 that direct our attention to the heavenly
Sanctuary.” PJ.
“[Let us examine] …the sanctuary language employed in this prophecy. There are a number of elements which contribute to its orientation around the
sanctuary. These may be reviewed here in brief.
“1. The use of sacrificial animals, the ram and
the goat, to symbolize the nations immediately gives a
sanctuary flavor to the vision immediately in chapter 8.
This usage contrasts with that of the wild beast present
in the preceding vision of chapter 7.
“2. The reference to the four horns pointing out to
the four winds to symbolize the breakup of the second
world empire mentioned alludes to altar imagery. This
reference to four horns would naturally have recalled to
the mind of an ancient Israelite imagery drawn from
the four horns of the sanctuary altars (Ex. 27:2;
30:2).
“3. The sanctuary is explicitly referred to three

282

DANIEL 8
(though the word sacrifice is not in the original text)
offered each morning and evening. See Exodus 29:38,
42. Sometimes it is translated continual or always.
One section of the Talmud is called Tamid, and it
deals with ‘all the regulations for the offering of the
regular daily sacrifices.’
“The word tamid is used also in reference to the
daily shewbread (see Exodus 25:30) in the first
apartment of the sanctuary. It is used in reference to
the lamps in the first apartment, which burned (tamid)
always before the Lord. See Exodus 27:20. Tamid
refers to the use of the incense in the first apartment.
See Exodus 30:8. In Lev. 6:13, tamid refers to the
fire on the altar of burnt offering—a fire that was to
continually burn upon the altar and never go out.
“Clearly, the word tamid has links to the sanctuary. Yet notice that the word is used only in regard
to the first apartment ministry. It is never used in
regard to the second apartment, where the judgment
takes place. Tamid is talking about the first apartment only.
“The word for ‘taken away’ in verse 11, from the
root rum, is used in connection to the sanctuary.
Though rum itself (as a root) means to ‘lift up,’ in the
context of the sanctuary, especially when it is used in
the causative verb form (as it is in Daniel 8:11), it
means to ‘take away.’ In a few places in Leviticus,
rum, often in the causative form, is translated, ‘taken
away,’ as translated in Daniel 8:11. See Leviticus 2:9;
4:8,10,19. It is used in reference to the ‘taking away’
of the carcasses of the animals in the sacrificial service.
“…Linguistically Daniel 8 can be linked to the
sanctuary service. But by looking at exactly what is
happening in some of these verses, we can establish
even greater links.” Goldstein, 1844MS, 57-59.

the ark of the covenant and looking down upon its
mercy seat. This is the kind of imagery that is
brought to mind by the reference to the two ‘holy
ones’ in Daniel 8:13.
“In summary. The use of sacrificial animals for
symbols here, the reference to four horns, the mention
of tamid and sanctuary, the use of evening-mornings as
a time unit, and the references to the two angels as ‘holy ones,’ all stress the connection of this prophecy with
the heavenly sanctuary. Chapter 8 is above all a
prophecy about the sanctuary and the relationship
to it of two powers—the Prince and the little horn.”
BRI, 2SOD, 196-198.
“1. Daniel 7 refers to a lion, a bear, a leopard, as
well as a fourth beast—all unclean animals. What kind
of animals are in Daniel 8? A ram and goat. Not only
are they clean animals, they are sanctuary animals.
And not only are they sanctuary animals, they are
animals used in the Day of Atonement service. See
Leviticus 16.
“Though these sanctuary animals don’t prove
Daniel 8 refers to Leviticus, it hints at a connection.
“The crucial links between Daniel 8 and Leviticus
are found in the language of Daniel 8, which contains
words that relate to the sanctuary service.
“Daniel 8:11, for example, has sanctuary imagery.
‘He magnified himself even to the prince of the host,
and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the
place of his sanctuary was cast down.’ The Hebrew
word for place, makon (also translated foundation) is
used in the Old Testament seventeen times, fourteen of
which directly relate to the sanctuary. In two of the
other three, it is related to the throne of God, suggesting a link to the sanctuary. See Exodus 15:17; 1 Kings
8:13; 2 Chronicles 6:2; Isaiah 18:4.
“Then there’s the word sanctuary itself! That
term alone links this chapter to Leviticus. In verse 11,
the word is translated from miqdash, a common term
for the earthly sanctuary throughout the Old Testament.
In some passages, it refers to God’s heavenly abode as
well. See Psalms 68:35; 96:6.
“In Daniel 8:14—‘Unto two thousand three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed’—
the word for sanctuary, qodesh, also links the chapter to the Levitical service. That word can refer to the
whole sanctuary, the holy place, or the most holy place.
Qodesh is used throughout Leviticus 16, where the
qodesh, the sanctuary, is to be cleansed.
“Host, found in verse 11 and 12, comes from saba, which means ‘an army,’ though in the context of
the sanctuary, the word has been used in relation to
the work of the Levites, those who ministered in the
earthly sanctuary (sometimes translated ‘service’). See
Numbers 4:3,23,30; 8:24.
“The word for daily in verse 11, tamid, has strong
links to the sanctuary. Most translations call it ‘the
daily sacrifice’ because the word tamid, in reference to
the sanctuary service, is used with the daily sacrifice

“We have earlier found that several key words in
8:10-13 are Hebrew words, repeatedly used elsewhere
in connection with the earthly sanctuary: ‘Place’ (mekon ), ‘sanctuary’ (miqdas, (qodes ), “host” (saba),
‘taken away’ (huraym ), and ‘daily’ (tamid ). All five
verses (8:10-14) are not only about the little horn, but
also the Sanctuary.” Ferrell, BD, 101.
The Question and the Answer.—
“We will address an enigma that has perplexed many a mind. In Daniel 8:13 we have three
noun phrases: ‘the daily,’ ‘the transgression of desolation,’ and ‘both the sanctuary and the host.’
Notice that the last two topics are linked together as
one: ‘to give both the sanctuary and the host to be
trodden under foot.’ We have, then, three elements
that are to be understood at the end of the vision,
which we know to be from Oct. 22, 1844. However,
Daniel 8:14, being the response to the question in verse
13 involving those three elements to be understood
when the vision ends, supplies only one answer which
is not specific to those three terms, but more comprehensive. Notice that the answer is in context of the

283

GEMS FROM DANIEL
sanctuary:
“Dan. 8:14: ‘And he said unto me, Unto two
thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed” (nitsdaq).
“How, then, does this answer in verse 14 help us
understand those three terms? Indeed, the three terms
or elements are to be comprehended in and through an
understanding of the sanctuary. Here is where the
beauty of the Hebrew language comes into play. We’ll
start with the action promised in the answer of verse
14: ‘then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.’
“…The Hebrew word for ‘cleansed’ (nitsdaq)
contains three basic English meanings, all related to the
root word sadaq. …The various stem and verb forms
of sadaq have the three basic meanings of (1) ‘to put
right’ or to ‘restore;’ (2) ‘to cleanse;’ or (3) ‘to vindicate.’
“ ‘The daily,’ the first of those noun phrases included in the question of Daniel 8:12, has to be either
(1) ‘restored’ or ‘set right’ since 1844; (2) ‘cleansed’
since 1844; or (3) ‘vindicated’ since 1844. Was the
sanctuary and the work of Christ’s priestly ministry
‘restored’ or ‘set right’ before the inhabitants of the
earth after the passing of Oct. 22, 1844? Yes.
Knowledge and understanding of Christ’s ‘continual’ heavenly mediation was reestablished or ‘restored’ to believers after that time.
“The second noun phrase in the question to be
understood in the question of Daniel 8:13 is ‘transgression of desolation.’ ‘Transgression’ is [from the
Hebrew word] pesa. …The ‘transgression’ (pesa) is
connected with God’s people:
Daniel 9:24: “Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the
transgression (pesa), and to make an end of sins, and
to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and
prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.”
“The connection between transgression and God’s
faithful will be confirmed again in Leviticus 16. This
side of the Second Coming, the only thing that needs to
be cleansed in the heavenly sanctuary on the Day of
Atonement is the confessed sins and transgression of
God’s people that have gone beforehand to the judgment (1 Timothy 5:24):
“…Let us now apply the same three verbs to the
‘sin’ interpretation of ‘transgression of desolation,’ to
see if it will stand the test of investigation. Was the
’transgression of desolation’ to be ‘restored,’
‘cleansed,’ or ‘vindicated’? Indeed, ‘transgression’
or sin will be cleansed forever from the heavenly
sanctuary and from heaven’s books of record of
God’s people.
[Editor note: Finally, let us look at the third noun
phrase—‘both the sanctuary and the host.’ Were
God’s people and the heavenly sanctuary to be ‘restored,’ ‘cleansed,’ or ‘vindicated’ since 1844? Absolutely.]” Heiks, TDSB, 129-138.

DANIEL 8:14
And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall
the sanctuary be cleansed.
Having Seen the Horror, Daniel Hears the Solution.—
“Not only did Daniel see the rise of this little horn
and see it magnify itself ‘even to the Prince of the
host,’ and ‘stand up against the Prince of princes,’ and
cast down to the ground His truth and His sanctuary
and stamp upon them, but he also, and in the same
vision, saw the truth and the sanctuary of Christ
delivered from this little horn power, rescued from
its blasphemous stamping, lifted up from the earth
and exalted to the heaven where it belongs. And it
was in this part of the transactions in the vision that the
heavenly ones seemed to be most interested; for, says
Daniel: ‘Then I heard one saint speaking, and another
saint said unto that certain saint [‘the Wonderful
Numberer’] which spake, How long shall be the vision
concerning the daily sacrifice [the continual service],
and the transgression of desolation, to give both the
sanctuary and the host to be trodden underfoot? And
He [‘the Wonderful Numberer’] said unto me, Unto
two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed.’ Dan. 8:13, 14.” Jones, CWCP,
106,107.
And He Said Unto Me.—
“The hearer will, at the first view of our text, perceive that there is something very important communicated in the question and answer given…. And that it
concerned Daniel, and us for whom the prophet wrote
his prophecy, to understand, is evident from the answer being given to Daniel—‘and he said unto
me’—instead of being given to the ‘saint,’ who
made the inquiry. Then we are not treading on forbidden ground, my dear hearer, to search to understand
the meaning and truth of our subject.” Miller, Evidence, 39.
The Answer in 8:14 is About the Key Points Mentioned in the Question of 8:13.—
“The answer must be considered in the light of
the question asked, and the question had to do with the
work of the little horn as revealed in verses 10-12. The
sanctuary to be cleansed is the same sanctuary that
was ‘cast down’ and ‘trodden under foot’ and ‘polluted’ by Papal Rome. This is self-evident to anyone
who carefully reads these verses; in fact, no other conclusion seems possible. Since the destruction of the
earthly sanctuary in AD 70, the Scriptures recognize no
other sanctuary except the one in heaven, and this is the
one polluted by the papal abomination, and this is the
one to be cleansed or purified at the close of the 2300
years.” Bunch, BOD, 121.

284

DANIEL 8
evening’—This is a major point! ‘Evening-morning’
cannot refer to the continual burnt offering, for that
offering is always called the ‘morning-evening’ continual burnt offering. In the Hebrew, it is literally
‘burnt offerings morning and evening’ (Ex 29:39; Lev
6:12-13; Num. 28:4; 2 Ki. 16:15; 1 Chron. 16:40;
23:30; 2 Chron. 2:4; 13:11; 31:3; Ezra 3:3). The continual burnt offering is never spoken of as the ‘eveningmorning’ offering. With one exception, all other sanctuary procedures were spoken of as ‘morning-evening.’
That sole exception was the lighting of the
lampstands, which were lit on a sunset to sunrise
(‘evening-morning’) basis. Doing so would ensure
that the oil would last throughout the dark hours.
“ ‘Evening-morning’ is singular—The term,
‘evening-morning’ is written in the singular number,
even though in the English, it is written ‘2300 days.’
This fact favors the view that the Hebrew expression
represents a unit of time, namely, a 24-hour day. In the
book of Daniel, the other Hebrew word for ‘days’
(yamim ), is plural in 1:12, 14; 12:11; and 12:12.
“‘Evening-morning’ means one complete
day—Now we come to the heart of the matter: What is
the real meaning of ‘evening-morning’? If I told you,
‘It’s a fine day,’ you would know I did not mean the
entire 24 hours, but only the sunny daylight hours.
Christ, the ‘Wonderful Numberer,’ chose His words
carefully, and He used the only phrase that would
definitely, absolutely mean a full 24-hour day: ‘evening-morning.’ He also chose the only phrase that
means an exact 24 hours.
“…The truth about ‘evening-morning’—In the
first chapter of Genesis, we find the grand display of
the power of God in creating our world in six days. In
order to make it very clear that each day was a literal
24-hour day, the phrase chosen to represent each 24hour day was ‘evening-morning’ (‘ereb boqer )—the
very same phrasing used in Daniel 8:14. Indeed, Daniel 8:14 (plus one other passage) is the only place outside of Genesis 1 where ‘ereb boqer is used. This fact
only adds to the weighty importance of the Daniel 8:14
time prophecy! In Genesis 1:5,8,13,19,23,31, with His
own mouth, God spoke ‘ereb boqer at the end of each
day of Creation Week. In Daniel 8:14, the same Creator spoke ‘ereb boqer again!...
“‘Ereb boqer as the meaning of a 24-hour day—
not two half days—is as solid as is the days of Creation
Week! To deny the one is to deny the other!...
“Why is ‘evening-morning’ used to signify a
24-hour day?—That is a good question. In the Bible,
the day starts at sunset. That pattern was given us during Creation Week (Gen 1:5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31). It is
confirmed by the statement in Leviticus 23:32, ‘From
even unto even, shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.’ ”
Ferrell, BD, 107-112.

The 2300 Days.—
“The 2300 days are mentioned in the midst of a
prophecy which the angel Gabriel was commanded to
make Daniel understand. Gabriel carried out this
instruction, as will be found in the study of the next
chapter.” Smith, DR, 166,167.
2300 Evenings and Mornings.—
“The actual Hebrew says it this way: ‘And he
said to me, Until evening (‘ereb ) morning (boqer ) two
thousand and three hundred, then shall the sanctuary be
nisdaq .’
“…But the facts show that 8:14 should be read as
a full 2300 days, not as 2300 sanctuary offerings or
1150 days. The morning and evening applies to
both offerings as a unit.—In Leviticus and elsewhere,
there are passages in which the ‘continual’ refers to the
morning and evening sacrifice—but it always does so
as a single unit. It is a continual burnt offering (singular ‘offering,’ not plural ‘offerings’). ‘Continual’ is a
technical term which, in the Hebrew, applies to both
sacrifices as a unit. The legislation of Exodus 29:38-42
is precise. The double sacrifice is spoken of as a singular unit (cf. Num. 28:3-6).
“To explain this in more detail, the “continual
burnt offering” consisted of two offerings, one in the
morning and the other in the late afternoon. Because
these symbolized a “continual” offering, they—the two
of them— were spoken of as being a single offering
each day. If the 8:14 time span really did refer to the
continual burnt offering (as the liberals say it does), the
time span would therefore have to be 2300, not 1150.
But, as we will learn below, 8:14 is not referring to any
offerings.
“ ‘Sacrifices’ are not in the text—It is an unproved assumption that the 2300 evening-morning expression refers to the tamid sacrifices. The word, ‘sacrifices,’ is not in 8:14; nor is it anywhere else in the
Hebrew of the book of Daniel! ‘Sacrifices’ is found 79
times in the Old Testament, but not once in Daniel (nor
is the word, ‘sacrificed,’ found in Daniel).
“The five tamid (‘daily’) instances in the KJV
where translators have added ‘sacrifices’ (‘daily sacrifice’) in Daniel are not in the Hebrew. Because tamid
(used here as an adjective) requires a noun to go with
it, the translators include ‘sacrifice.’ The words, ‘sacrificed,’ ‘sacrificeth,’ and ‘sacrificing’ are not in Daniel
either. The book has nothing to say about sacrifices.
“How we can know ‘sacrifices’ is not the noun
that should be added to tamid—From what we have
learned, it is clear that most of the little horn activities
in 8:10-12, paralleling the description in chapter 7,
were done during the Dark Ages. But at that time,
there were no earthly sacrifices being offered in the
Temple, and none were being made in heaven. The
one sacrifice on Calvary was sufficient for all time; no
more were to be made thereafter (Heb. 9:12, 25-26).
“‘Evening-morning’
is
not
‘morning-

“The expression ‘evening-morning’ is a time
phrase which has its most natural roots in Genesis 1
where the time unit on one day is expressed in the same

285

GEMS FROM DANIEL
terms and sequence as evening and morning (Gen.
1:5,8,13,17,23,31). Thus the 2300 evening-morning
phraseology is more naturally comprehended as
2300 full days. (In symbolic prophecy, this time element would be understood as 2300 symbolic days).
The expression ‘evening-morning’ is written in the
singular number. This fact favors the view that the
expression represents a unit of time, namely, one full
day.” BRI, 2SOD, 463.

Clues in Daniel 8 About the Starting and Ending of
the 2300 Days.—
“Since the vision begins with the ram, or MediaPersia (Dan. 8:20), which held sway from 539 to 331
BC, the ‘evening-morning two thousand three hundred’
vision must begin during the time of the MedoPersian Empire; in other words, sometime between
539-331. But the 2,300 evening-mornings do not end
during the Medo-Persian period, they continue until
‘the time of the end’ (v. 17); in other words, through
the Grecian and little-horn periods. So, again, the vision ‘is not limited [to Antiochus Epiphanes or] to the
‘little horn’ period alone.’ It continues ‘until the time
of the end.’
“Since the 2,300 evening-mornings begin during
the Medo-Persian period, continue through Greece and
Rome in its two phases, and only end in ‘the time of
the end’ (vs. 17), Hasel is correct in asserting that is
‘clear beyond the shadow of a doubt that the year-day
principle is functioning in Daniel 8.’ After all, the rise
and fall of just one of the empires depicted in this
prophecy covered centuries, not merely 2,300 literal
days, much less 1,150 literal days as some contend.”
Mansell, OSOA, 61.

“The 2300 evenings-mornings can be viewed as
‘sanctuary days,’ since the sequence for the lighting
of the lamps was from ‘evening to morning’ (Ex.
27:20-21). In addition, the cloud that enveloped the
Deity became a pillar of fire in the evening and returned to a pillar of cloud in the morning (Num. 9:1516).” BRI, 2SOD, 184.
“The Jewish scholars who prepared both of the
principal ancient Greek versions of the Old Testament
did in fact understand the 2300 evenings and mornings
to be 2300 days. Their translations both provide (in
Greek, of course) ‘days of evening and morning, twenty-three hundred.’
“Carl F. Keil, who edited the widely used Keil
and Delitzsch commentary more than a hundred years
ago, was on firm ground when he wrote: ‘When the
Hebrews wish to express separately day and night,
the component parts of a day of a week, then the
number of both is expressed. They say, e.g., forty
days and forty nights (Gen. vii:4,12; Ex. xxiv:18; 1
Kings xix:8), and three days and three nights (Jonah
i:17; Matt. xii:40), but not eighty (or six) days-andnights, when they wish to speak of forty (or three)
full days. A Hebrew reader could not possibly understand the period of time 2300 evening-mornings of
2300 half days or 1150 whole days, because evening
and morning at the creation constituted not the half
but the whole day…. We must therefore take the
words as they are, i.e., understand them of 2300 whole
days.’” Maxwell, 1GC, 174.

Day-For-A-Year Principle.—
“It is obvious that Daniel 8:14 is speaking about
2300 years, not 2300 days. But why did Christ, the
Wonderful Numberer, phrase it as ‘days’? …Why
were special codes used? Keep in mind that very evil
governmental and church organizations would arise
which would try to destroy the Scriptures, if they knew
that such facts were in it. When Jehoiakim learned
what Jeremiah’s scroll contained, he quickly cut it to
pieces and burned it (Jer. 36). When Christ was on
earth, He had to speak many of His public teachings in
parables because of the ‘hardness’ of hearts (Matt
13:13-15; cf. Christ’s Object Lessons, 22 ).
“The day-year principle was one part which
helps us unlock part of the puzzle. …The year-for-aday pattern is given to us in several passages; the first
two occur in legislative codes:
“Leviticus 25:1-7—This is the earliest Biblical
text in which the principle is implied. It is found in
Levitical legislation and is the ordinance of the sabbatical year. A single Sabbath is to be read as a year; a
seven-day week is to be interpreted as seven years.
The farmer was to plant and harvest crops for six
years and then rest on the seventh, or sabbatical, year.
‘When ye come into the land which I give you, the land
shall keep a sabbath unto the Lord” (Lev 25:2). The
‘sabbath’ is not a weekly Sabbath, but the ‘sabbath’ of
every seventh year. In Hebrew, we are told: ‘The
land shall sabbatize a sabbath to the Lord.’ Leviticus
25, verse 4, calls it ‘a sabbath of rest unto the land’
while verse 5 calls it ‘a year of rest unto the land.’
“Leviticus 25:8—Here we have another legislative year-for-a-day pattern. A literal translation reads:
‘You shall count seven sabbaths of years, seven years

“The cleansing of the sanctuary is marked by the
passing of 2300 ‘evenings and mornings.’ The cleansing of the sanctuary involves a work of judgment on
the Day of Atonement (Lev. 23:27-30). The evenings
and mornings’ is a phrase found only in the Creation
story (Genesis 1:5,8,13,19,23,31). Thus, the judgment
of the world is associated with the creation of the
world. This association of the judgment with Creation is also plainly seen in Rev. 14:7—the first Angel’s message: ‘Fear God, and give glory to Him for
the hour of His judgment is come. And worship
Him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and
the fountains of waters.’ Indeed, in Jewish tradition
the Day of Atonement marks the birthday of the
world—the time when the first evening-morning ever
was.” PJ from Doukhan, DVE, 61,62.

286

DANIEL 8
seven times, and to you the days of the seven sabbaths
of years shall be forty-nine years.’ The explanation
given us is that a ‘sabbath of years’ is to be understood as a period of seven years. Here we have a
day into a year arrangement.
The seventh day has been taken to stand for a
seventh year. As the seventh and concluding day of the
week, the Sabbath is understood here to stand for the
seventh year of a period of seven years. Thus each
day of the ‘weeks’ that end with these ‘sabbaths’ in
the jubilee cycle stands for one year .
Next, we discover two other patterns, or models,
for year-for-a-day applications. Both are prophetic
time spans. After providing the pattern, God immediately applied it. The first is given in a narrative and
provides a clear application of the year-day pattern to a
predicted lengthy period of time, based on a few days:
“Numbers 14:34—The Israelites were told that,
because of their rebellion, for every day the spies were
in the promised land, the nation would be forbidden to
enter it. Numbers 14:34: ‘After the number of the
days in which ye searched the land, even forty days,
each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
forty years.’
“The ‘days’ used to measure off ‘years’ were
based on events of the immediate past. This was a prophetic judgment and used the year-day principle. In
this narrative instance, a past day stood for a future
year. However, in an apocalyptic prophecy such as
we find in Daniel, a future day stands for a future
year.
“Ezekiel 4:6—This parable pointedly illustrates
the use of the year-day principle. Although it is a parable, it has a prophetic application. Ezekiel 4:5-6: ‘For
I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred and
ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house
of Israel. And when thou hast accomplished them, lie
again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity
of the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee
each day for a year.’
“The 40 years in the wilderness, marked by a
year-day principle, was a major event in Israelite history, known to all the people. But it had occurred centuries earlier. So it is significant that this additional
reminder of the year-day principle was given to
Ezekiel, not too many years before Daniel began
receiving his visions which involved year-day applications (chapters 7-12).
“The time prophecy, indicated here (390 + 40),
appears to apply to the progressively sinful state of the
Israelite nation under the divided monarchy. Careful
Bible students recognize that Ezekiel 4:4-6 is directly
linked to Numbers 14:34. Both the act of ‘bearing’ and
the ‘evil’ borne are expressed in the same way. Both
are introduced with the same phrase, referring to ‘the
number of the days,’ and both express the idea of ‘each
day for a year’ with the same twice-said phrase: ‘day
for the year... day for the year.’ The year-day principle

in both are linguistically the same.
“How the Lord got our attention—In order
to nudge us the right direction, in the Bible, the Lord
gave us year-for-year time prophecies for small,
relatively unimportant events, which the surrounding
narrative showed had to be interpreted as literal ‘years.’
The 14 years of plenty and famine in Egypt would be
an example.
“God then gave us symbolic time prophecies in
dreams and visions which, obviously, are about extremely important matters spanning centuries—and
He placed the time factors in year-for-a-day patterns. In case we might still be sleeping, He then gave
us the 1260-year prophecy seven times in several different phrases, each time warning us of terrible effects
it would bring.” Ferrell, BD, 114-120.
“The Old Testament has long recognized a relationship between days and years, and, in some cases,
though the word year is meant in the text, the literal
Hebrew word has been days. The Passover feast, for
example, was kept once a year. See Exodus 13:10.
The text in the KJV is translated: ‘thou shalt therefore
keep this ordinance in his season from year for year.’
Yet the original Hebrew reads literally ‘from days
to days,’ even though it meant from year to year!”
Goldstein, 1844MS, 75.
Jesus Confirms Year-Day Principle.—
“Recently two apostates taunted, ‘You cannot
prove the year-day theory from the Bible.’ May I say
in reply, that we don’t need to prove it, for that has
already been done for us. It has been done by no less
than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself.
“When Jesus started out in His work as the messiah His first recorded words are: ‘THE TIME IS FULFILLED.’ Mark 1:15. What time was fulfilled? The
only time prophecy that could be fulfilled is found in
Daniel 9:25: Sixty-nine weeks would reach ‘unto
Messiah the Prince.’ If it was literal time then to what
did Jesus refer? If that prophecy meant sixty-nine
weeks of literal time, then it was wrong. But prophecy
does not fail. ‘The Scriptures cannot be broken.’
“Jesus makes no mistakes. Jesus knew that these
sixty-nine weeks were prophetic time or 483 years.
Jesus was baptized and began His work in AD 27,
exactly 483 years after the going forth of the commandment to restore and rebuild Jerusalem. Our
Lord’s statement, ‘The time is fulfilled,’ confirms
the year-day principle. His statement settles the question forever. We need no other evidence. Our Lord’s
statement, ‘The time is fulfilled’ is final. He confirms
the year-day principle. The year-day of prophecy is
correct. So no other time scale is possible.” Burnside,
DPUF, 153.
Year-Day Principle Seen in Nature.—

287

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“The day is composed of ‘the evening and the
morning;’ the dark part and the light; The ‘cool’
and the ‘heat’ of the day, as the earth turns on its axis.
“So the year is composed of the winter and
summer, the ‘cold’ [and dark] of the winter, and the
‘heat’ [and light] of the summer. This significant
characteristic is common to both. During the year the
earth turns on its orbit. Our God has linked together
the two great revolutions of the earth together in a prophetic setting—‘a day for a year.’” Burnside, DPUF,
155.

which is ‘in the heavens,’ and of which the Jewish tabernacle was a type, pattern, or figure. (Hebrews 8: 1, 2;
9: 23, 24.) Which of these conflicting views is correct,
must be decided by the Scriptures. Fortunately the
testimony is neither meager nor ambiguous.” Smith,
DR, 167.
(A fifth possibility is added by Mansell—the Jewish tabernacle at the time of Antiochus Epiphanes.)
It Cannot Be the Earth.—
“The word ‘sanctuary’ occurs in the Old and New
Testament one hundred forty-four times. From the
definitions of lexicographers, and its use in the Bible,
we learn that it is used to signify a holy or sacred place,
a dwelling place for the Most High. If the earth is the
sanctuary, it must answer to this definition. But what
single characteristic pertaining to this earth will satisfy
the meaning of the term? The earth is neither a holy
nor a sacred place, nor is it a dwelling place for the
Most High. It has no mark of distinction from other
worlds, except as being a revolted planet, marred by
sin, scarred and withered by the curse of transgression. Moreover, it is nowhere in all the Scriptures
called the sanctuary.
“Only one text can be produced in favor of this
view, and that by an unreasonable application: ‘The
glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the
pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of
My sanctuary; and I will make the place of My feet
glorious.’ Isaiah 60: 13. This language undoubtedly
refers to the new earth; but even that is not called the
sanctuary, but only the ‘place’ of the sanctuary, even as
it is called ‘the place’ of the Lord’s feet. This is an
expression which probably denotes the continual presence of God with His people, as it was revealed to John
when it was said, ‘Behold, the tabernacle of God is
with men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall
be His people, and God Himself shall be with them,
and be their God.’ Revelation 21: 3. All that can be
said of the earth, therefore, is that when renewed it
will be the place where the sanctuary of God will be
located. It cannot present any claim to being the sanctuary at the present time, or the sanctuary of Daniel’s
prophecy.” Smith, DR, 167,168.

2300 Days, the Longest Time Prophecy in Bible.—
“Miller and his associates proclaimed that the
longest and last prophetic period brought to view in
the Bible was about to expire, that the judgment was
at hand, and the everlasting kingdom was to be ushered
in. …The message given by Miller and his associates
announced the termination of the 2300 days of Daniel 8:14…” Great Controversy, 351.
Sanctuary.—
“It is also significant that, instead of using the
word, miqdas (‘sanctuary’), which is found in Daniel
8:11, a different word, qodes (also translated ‘sanctuary’), is used in 8:13-14. This was purposely done to
direct our attention to Leviticus 16—the day of atonement—which is the magnificent heart of the 8:14 message. Qodes is the only word used for ‘sanctuary’ in
the day of atonement service (Lev 16:2-4, 16-17, 20,
23-24, 27, 32-33). The emphasis in Daniel 8:14 is on
the second apartment cleansing.
“…Qodes is used in the singular in Daniel 8:1314 (where the focus is on the first apartment ministry
of Christ during the Dark Ages). In the Old Testament,
it has been applied to both the earthly tabernacle (Ex
36:1, 3-4, 6) and to the heavenly Sanctuary (Ps 60:6;
68:5; 102:19; 150:1).” Ferrell, BD, 88.
If Dan. 8:14 is Connected with 8:10-13, Why are Two
Different Words Used for ‘Sanctuary’?—
“This is the best place for this question. Daniel
8:11-13 describes events during the Dark Ages, when
Christ was mediating on behalf of His people in the
first apartment of the heavenly Sanctuary. Miqdas,
used in 8:11 and 13, refers to the first apartment
ministry of Christ, conducted throughout the Dark
Ages.
“Miqdas is never used in connection with the day
of atonement services. In contrast, Qodes is used in
8:14, because the time prophecy is talking about the
yearly service, and qodes is the only word for ‘sanctuary’ in Leviticus 16.” Ferrell, BD, 101,102.

It Cannot Be the Land of Canaan.—
“So far as we may be governed by the definition
of the word ‘Canaan,’ it can present no better claim
than the earth to that distinction. If we inquire where
in the Bible it is called the sanctuary, a few texts are
brought forward which are supposed by some to furnish the requisite testimony.
“The first of these is Exodus 15: 17. Moses, in his
song of triumph and praise to God after the passage of
the Red Sea, exclaimed: ‘Thou shalt bring them in, and
plant them in the mountain of Thine inheritance, in the
place, O Lord, which Thou hast made for Thee to dwell
in, in the sanctuary, O Lord, which Thy hands have

What is the Sanctuary? Four Possibilities.—
“Several views have been held as to what the
sanctuary is, such as 1) the earth, 2) the land of Canaan, 3) the church, and 4) the sanctuary in heaven, the
‘true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man,’

288

DANIEL 8
established.’ Moses here speaks in anticipation. His
language is a prediction of what God would do for His
people. Let us see how it was accomplished.
“We turn to David, who records as a matter of
history what Moses uttered as a matter of prophecy.
(Psalm 78: 53, 54.) The subject of the psalmist is the
deliverance of Israel from Egyptian servitude, and their
establishment in the Promised Land. He says: ‘He
[God] led them on safely, so that they feared not: but
the sea overwhelmed their enemies. And He brought
them to the border of His sanctuary, even to this
mountain, which His right hand had purchased.’ The
‘mountain’ here mentioned by David is the same as the
‘mountain of Thine inheritance’ spoken of by Moses,
in which the people were to be planted. This mountain
David calls, not the sanctuary, but only the border of
the sanctuary. What, then, was the sanctuary? Verse
69 of the same psalm informs us: ‘He built His sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which He hath established forever.’ The same distinction between the
sanctuary and the land is pointed out in the prayer of
the good king Jehoshaphat: ‘Art not Thou our God,
who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before
Thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham
Thy friend forever? And they dwelt therein, and
have built Thee a sanctuary therein for Thy name.’
2 Chronicles 20: 7, 8.
“Taken alone, Exodus 15: 17 is used by some as
an inference that the mountain was the sanctuary; but
when we take in connection with it the language of
David, which is a record of the fulfillment of Moses’
prediction, and an inspired commentary upon his language, such an idea cannot be entertained. David
plainly says that the mountain was simply the ‘border’
of the sanctuary, and that in that border, or land, the
sanctuary was ‘built’ like high palaces, reference being
made to the beautiful temple of the Jews, the center and
symbol of all their worship. But whoever will read
carefully Exodus 15:17 will see that not even an inference is necessary that Moses by the word ‘sanctuary’
means the mountain of inheritance, much less the
whole land of Palestine. In the freedom of poetic license, he employs elliptical expressions, and passes
rapidly from one idea or object to another. First, the
inheritance engages his attention, and he speaks of it;
then the fact that the Lord was to dwell there, then the
place He was to provide for His dwelling there, namely, the sanctuary which He would cause to be built.
David thus associates Mount Zion and Judah together
in Psalm 78: 68, because Zion was in Judah.
“The three texts, Exodus 15:17; Psalm 78:54, 69,
are the ones chiefly relied on to prove that the land of
Canaan is the sanctuary. But, singularly enough, the
two latter, in plain language, clear away the ambiguity
of the first, and thereby disprove the claim that is based
on it.
“Respecting the earth or the land of Canaan as being the sanctuary, we offer one thought more. If either
constitutes the sanctuary, it should not only be some-

where described as such, but the same idea should be
carried through to the end, and the purification of the
earth or of Palestine should be called the cleansing of
the sanctuary. The earth is indeed defiled, and it is to
be purified by fire; but fire, as we shall see, is not the
agent which is used in the cleansing of the sanctuary. This purification of the earth, or any part of it, is
nowhere in the Bible called the cleansing of the sanctuary.” Smith, DR, 168-171.
It Cannot Be the Church.—
“The solitary text adduced to support the idea that
the church is the sanctuary is Psalm 114:1,2: ‘When
Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a
people of strange language; Judah was His sanctuary,
and Israel His dominion.’ If we take this text in its
most literal sense, it would prove that the sanctuary
was confined to one of the twelve tribes. This would
mean that a part of the church only, not the whole, constitutes the sanctuary. Why Judah is called the sanctuary in the text quoted, need not be a matter of perplexity when we remember that God chose Judah, as the
place of His sanctuary. ‘But chose,’ says David, ‘the
tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which He loved. And
He built His sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth
which He hath established forever.’ Psalm 78: 68, 69.
This clearly shows the connection which existed between Judah and the sanctuary. That tribe itself was
not the sanctuary, but it is once spoken of as such when
Israel came forth from Egypt, because God purposed
that in the midst of the territory of that tribe His
sanctuary should be located.
“If it could be shown that the church is anywhere
called the sanctuary, it would be of no consequence to
our present purpose, which is to determine what constitutes the sanctuary of Daniel 8: 13, 14; for the church
is there spoken of as something distinct: ‘To give
both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden underfoot.’ That by the term ‘host’ the people of God is here
meant, none will dispute; the sanctuary is therefore
something different from the church.” Smith, DR,
171,172.
It Cannot Be the Jewish Temple and Antiochus.—
“1 Maccabees—the primary source of information for this period of Jewish history—gives precise
dates for the suspension and resumption of the temple
sacrifices in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes. …First
Maccabees 1:54 says that Antiochus interrupted the
temple services beginning on the 15th of Kislev in the
145 of the Seleucid era, or 168 BC, and 1 Maccabees
4:52 states that the services were resumed on the 25 th
of Kislev in the 148th year of the Seleucid era, or 165
BC. This is a period of three years and ten days,
which is at least 60 days short of the 1,150 days posited by those who interpret the prophecy in that way.
Conversely, if the evening-mornings equal 2,300 days,
it is 1,210 days too long to fit Antiochus’s incursion.”
Mansell, OSOA, 50,51.

289

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Last Possibility—the Sanctuary is in Heaven.—
“There now remains but one claim to be examined, namely, that the sanctuary mentioned in the text
is identical with the one in Hebrews 8: 1, 2, which is
called ‘the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched,
and not man,’ to which is expressly given the name
of ‘the sanctuary,’ and which is located in the heavens.’ Of this sanctuary there existed in ancient times a
pattern, type, or figure, first in the tabernacle built by
Moses, and afterward in the temple at Jerusalem.
“Let us put ourselves in the place of Daniel, and
view the subject from his standpoint. What would he
understand by the term ‘sanctuary’? At the mention of
that word, his mind would inevitably turn to the sanctuary of his people; and certainly he knew well where
that was. His mind did turn to Jerusalem, the city of
his fathers, which was then in ruins, and to their ‘beautiful house,’ which, as Isaiah laments, was burned with
fire. (Isaiah 64: 11.) Accordingly, with his face turned
toward the place of their once-venerated temple, as was
his custom, Daniel prayed God to cause His face to
shine upon His sanctuary, which was at that time desolate. By the word ‘sanctuary’ he evidently understood
the temple at Jerusalem.
“On this point, the Scripture bears testimony
which is most explicit: ‘Then verily the first covenant
had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly
sanctuary.’ Hebrews 9: 1. What was the sanctuary of
the first covenant? The answer follows: ‘For there was
a tabernacle made; the first [or first apartment], wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary [‘holy place,’ A. R
.V.]. And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is
called the Holiest of all; which had the golden censer,
and the ark of the covenant overlaid roundabout with
gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and
Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the
mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.’ Hebrews 9: 2-5.
“There is no mistaking what is described here. It
is the tabernacle erected by Moses according to the
direction of the Lord (which was afterward merged into
the temple at Jerusalem), with a holy and a most holy
place, and various articles of service. A full description of this building, as well as the sacred articles of
furniture and their uses, will be found in Exodus 25 and
onward. If the reader is not familiar with this subject,
he is urged to turn and read the description of this
building. Plainly, this was the sanctuary of the first
covenant, and we wish the reader carefully to mark the
logical value of this declaration. By telling us what
constituted the sanctuary, the book of Hebrews sets us
on the right track of inquiry. It gives us a basis on
which to work. We have before us a distinct and plainly defined object, minutely described by Moses, and
declared in Hebrews to be the sanctuary during the
time of the first covenant, which reached to the days
of Christ.

“As long ago as 1733, Sir Isaac Newton, the celebrated scientist who first explained the operation of
gravity, wrote the following notice about Daniel 9 and
Antiochus Epiphanes:
“‘This last horn is by some taken for ANTIOCHUS EPIPHANES, but not very judiciously. A horn
of a beast is never taken for a single person: it always signifies a new kingdom, and the kingdom of
Antiochus was an old one. Antiochus reigned over
one of the four horns, and the little horn was a fifth
under its proper kings. This horn was at first a little
one, and waxed exceeding great, but so did not Antiochus. It is described great above all the former
horns, and so was not Antiochus. His kingdom on the
contrary was weak, and tributary to the Romans,
and he did not enlarge it. The horn was a king of
fierce countenance, and destroyed wonderfully, and
prospered and practiced; that is, he prospered in his
practices against the holy people: but Antiochus was
frightened out of Egypt by a mere message of the Romans, and afterwards routed and baffled by the Jews.
The horn was mighty by another’s power, Antiochus acted by his own. The horn stood up against the
Prince of the Host of heaven, the Prince of Princes; and
this is the character not of Antiochus, but of AntiChrist. The horn cast down the Sanctuary to the
ground, and so did not Antiochus; he left it standing. The Sanctuary and Host were trampled under foot
2300 days; and in Daniel’s prophecies days are put for
years: but the profanation of the Temple in the reign of
Antiochus did not last for so many natural days. These
were to last till the time of the end, till the last end
of the indignation against the Jews; and this indignation is not yet at an end. They were to last till the
Sanctuary which had been cast down should be
cleansed, and the Sanctuary is not yet cleansed.’ Sir
Isaac Newton’s Daniel and the Apocalypse, ed., Sir
William Whitla (London: John Murray, 1922), p.222.
“Sir Isaac Newton’s observations contrast sharply
with the note to Daniel 8:1 in the 1967 edition of the
Scofield Reference Bible, which refers to the ‘remarkably precise prediction in chapters 8 and 11 about the
reign, character, and antecedents of Antiochus
Epiphanes.’” Maxwell, 1GC, 185,186.
Earthly Sanctuary, a Pattern of Temple in Heaven.—

290

DANIEL 8
“But the language in Hebrews has greater significance even than this. It annihilates the claims put forth
that the earth, the land of Canaan, or the church, is the
sanctuary. The arguments which would prove any of
these to be the sanctuary at any time, would prove it to
be such under ancient Israel. If Canaan was at any
time the sanctuary, it was such when Israel was planted
in it. If the church was ever the sanctuary, it was such
when Israel was led forth from Egypt. If the earth was
ever the sanctuary, it was such during the same period.
But was any of these the sanctuary during that time?
The answer must be negative, for the writers of the
books of Exodus and Hebrews tell us in detail that not
the earth, not Canaan, not the church, but the tabernacle built by Moses, replaced by the temple later,
constituted the sanctuary of Old Testament times.
“This building answers in every respect to the
definition of the term, and to the use for which the
sanctuary was designed. It was the earthly dwelling
place of God. ‘Let them make Me a sanctuary,’ said
He to Moses, ‘that I may dwell among them.’ Exodus
25: 8. In this tabernacle, which they erected according to His instructions, He manifested His presence.
It was a holy, or sacred, place—‘the holy sanctuary.’
Leviticus 16: 33. In the word of God it is repeatedly
called the sanctuary. Of the more than one hundred
thirty instances in which the word is used in the Old
Testament, it refers in almost every case to this building.
“The tabernacle was at first constructed in such a
manner as to be adapted to the conditions under which
the children of Israel lived at that time. They were
entering upon their forty years’ wandering in the wilderness when this building was set up in their midst as
the habitation of God and the center of their religious
worship. Journeying was a necessity, and the tabernacle had to be moved from place to place. This was made
possible because the sides were composed of upright
boards, and the covering consisted of curtains of linen
and dyed skins. Therefore, it could be readily taken
down, conveniently transported, and easily erected at
each successive stage of their journey. After Israel
entered the Promised Land, this temporary structure
gave place in time to the magnificent temple of Solomon. In this more permanent form the sanctuary existed, except during the time it lay in ruins in Daniel’s
day, until its final destruction by the Romans, AD
70.
“This is the only sanctuary connected with the
earth concerning which the Bible gives us any instruction or history any record. But is there nowhere any
other? This one was the sanctuary of the first covenant, and with that covenant it came to an end. Is
there no sanctuary which pertains to the second, or
new, covenant? There must be; otherwise the analogy
would be lacking between these covenants. In such a
case the first covenant would have a system of worship, which, though minutely described, would be unintelligible, and the second covenant would have a sys-

tem of worship which would be indefinite and obscure.
The writer of Hebrews virtually asserts that the new
covenant, in force since the death of Christ, the testator, has a sanctuary; for when, in contrasting the two
covenants, as he does in Hebrews 9: 1, he says that the
first covenant ‘had also ordinances of divine service,
and a worldly sanctuary.’ This is the same as saying
that the new covenant has likewise its services and its
sanctuary. Furthermore, verse 8 of this chapter speaks
of the worldly sanctuary as the first tabernacle. If that
was the first, there must be a second; and as the first
tabernacle existed as long as the first covenant was in
force, when that covenant came to an end, the second
tabernacle must have taken the place of the first,
and must be the sanctuary of the new covenant.
There can be no evading this conclusion.” Smith, DR,
173-175.
“[Daniel 8:13,14 quoted.] Can this mean the
earthly sanctuary? It cannot mean the earthly sanctuary as how often was that cleansed? Every 360
days. But here it says 2300 days, so it cannot mean
the earthly sanctuary. What does it mean? Hebrews
9:23 says the heavenly things need cleansing.”
http://sabbathsermons.com/2010/10/22/8-reflectingthe-work-of-salvation-in-the-most-holy-place/
The Original Heavenly Sanctuary.—
“The question, What is the sanctuary? is clearly
answered in the Scriptures. The term ‘sanctuary,’ as
used in the Bible, refers, first, to the tabernacle built by
Moses, as a pattern of heavenly things; and, secondly,
to the ‘true tabernacle’ in heaven, to which the earthly
sanctuary pointed. At the death of Christ the typical
service ended. The ‘true tabernacle’ in heaven is the
sanctuary of the new covenant. And as the prophecy
of Daniel 8:14 is fulfilled in this dispensation, the
sanctuary to which it refers must be the sanctuary
of the new covenant. At the termination of the 2300
days, in 1844, there had been no sanctuary on earth for
many centuries. Thus the prophecy, ‘Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary
be cleansed,’ unquestionably points to the sanctuary
in heaven.” Great Controversy, 417.
“Where, then, shall we look for the sanctuary of
the new covenant? The use of the word ‘also’ in Hebrews 9: 1 intimates that this sanctuary had been spoken of before. We turn back to the beginning of the
previous chapter, and find a summing up of the foregoing arguments as follows: ‘Now of the things which
we have spoken this is the sum: We have such an high
priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of
the Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord
pitched, and not man.’ Can there be any doubt that
we have in this text the sanctuary of the new covenant?
A plain allusion is here made to the sanctuary of the
first covenant. That was pitched by man, erected by

291

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Moses; but this was pitched by the Lord, not by man.
That was the place where the earthly priests performed
their ministry; but this is the place where Christ, the
High Priest of the new covenant, performs His ministry. That was on earth; this is in heaven. That was
therefore very properly called a ‘worldly sanctuary;’ this is a ‘heavenly’ one.
“This view is further sustained by the fact that the
sanctuary built by Moses was not an original structure, but was built after a pattern. The great original
existed somewhere else, and what Moses constructed
was but a type, or model.
“Note the directions the Lord gave him on this
point: ‘According to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it.’ Exodus 25: 9.
‘Look that thou make them after their pattern which
was showed thee in the mount.’ Verse 40. (For further
clarification of this point, see Exodus 26: 30; 27: 8;
Acts 7: 44.)
“Now of what was the earthly sanctuary a type, or
figure?—Of the sanctuary of the new covenant, the
‘true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched and not man.’
The relation which the first covenant sustains to the
second is that of type to antitype. Its sacrifices were
types of the greater sacrifice of the new covenant. Its
priests were types of our Lord in His more perfect
priesthood. Their ministry was performed unto the
example and shadow of the ministry of our High Priest
above. The sanctuary where they ministered was a
type, or figure, of the true sanctuary in heaven, where
our Lord performs His ministry.
“All these facts are plainly stated in Hebrews. ‘If
He [Christ] were on earth, He should not be a priest,
seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to
the law: who serve unto the example and shadow of
heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God
when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See,
saith He, that thou make all things according to the
pattern showed to thee in the mount.’ Hebrews 8: 4, 5.
This testimony shows that the ministry of the earthly
priests was a shadow of Christ’s priesthood. The evidence is the direction which God gave to Moses to
make the tabernacle according to the pattern showed
him in the mount. This clearly identifies the pattern
showed to Moses with the sanctuary, or true tabernacle,
in heaven, where our Lord ministers, as mentioned in
Hebrews 8: 2.
“The Scripture further says: ‘The Holy Ghost this
signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not
yet made manifest, while as the first was yet standing;
which was a figure for the time then present.’ Hebrews
9: 8, 9. [The Greek original of what is here translated
‘holiest of all’ is the same as that rendered ‘sanctuary’
in Hebrews 8:2; 9:1. It should therefore be translated
‘sanctuary’ in Hebrews 9:8 also. The same original
phrase is used, too, in verses 12, 24, 25, and is more
fittingly translated ‘sanctuary’ than ‘holy place,’ so
as to convey its true meaning more clearly. In He-

brews 10:19 the original of ‘holiest’ is the same as that
in all the verses cited above, and should therefore be
also translated ‘sanctuary.’ This gives a simple, accurate, uniform, and easily understood rendering of the
same original phrase in all these passages. Moreover,
the reference of the phrase is obviously and uniformly
to the heavenly sanctuary in all these citations, with the
exception of Hebrews 9:1, 25, which refer to the earthly. The original phrases cited above have of course the
usual variations for number and case common to all
languages. The nominative form is, ta hagia, plural in
all instances here cited except in 9:1, where it is, to
hagion, singular. In Hebrews 9:2 the word ‘sanctuary’
plainly applies to the first apartment only, and would
be better translated ‘holy place’ as suggested in the
margin of the Authorized Version, while the phrase
‘holiest of all’ in verse 3, naming the second apartment,
is a true translation of a different original regularly
used to designate that apartment in distinction from the
first and from the entire sanctuary. ‘Holiest of all’ or
‘holiest’ is not therefore a true translation in either Hebrews 9:8 or 10:19.—Editors.]
“While the first tabernacle stood, and the first
covenant was in force, the ministration of the more
perfect tabernacle was not, of course, carried forward.
But when Christ came, a high priest of good things to
come, when the first tabernacle had served its purpose
and the first covenant had ceased, then Christ, raised
to the throne of the Majesty in the heavens as a minister of the true sanctuary, entered by His own
blood (verse 12) ‘into the holy place,’ that is, the
heavenly sanctuary.
“Therefore, the first tabernacle was a figure for
the time then present. If any further testimony is needed, the writer of Hebrews speaks in verse 23 of the
earthly tabernacle, with its apartments and instruments,
as ‘patterns’ of things in the heavens; and in verse
24, he calls the holy places made with hands, that is,
the earthly tabernacles and temples of ancient Israel,
‘figures’ of the true, that is, of the tabernacle in
heaven.
“This view is still further corroborated by the testimony of John. Among the things which he was
permitted to behold in heaven were seven lamps of
fire burning before the throne (Revelation 4:5), an
altar of incense, and a golden censer (Revelation
8:3), and the ark of God’s testament (Revelation
11:19). All of this was seen in connection with a
‘temple’ in heaven. (Revelation 1:19; 15:8.) These
objects every Bible reader must at once recognize as
the furniture of the sanctuary. They owed their existence to the sanctuary, and were confined to it, to be
employed in the ministration connected therewith.
Even as they would not have existed without the sanctuary, so wherever we find them, we may know that
there is the sanctuary. Hence the fact that John saw
these things in heaven after the ascension of Christ, is
proof that there is a sanctuary in heaven, and that he
was permitted to behold it.

292

DANIEL 8
“However reluctant a person may have been to
acknowledge that there is a sanctuary in heaven, the
testimony that has been presented is certainly sufficient
to prove this fact. The Bible says that the tabernacle of
Moses was the sanctuary of the first covenant. Moses
says that God showed him in the mount a pattern, according to which he as to make this tabernacle. The
book of Hebrews testifies again that Moses did make it
according to the pattern, and that the pattern was the
true tabernacle in heaven, which the Lord pitched, and
not man; and that of this heavenly sanctuary the tabernacle erected with hands was a true figure, or representation. Finally, to corroborate the statement of the
Scriptures that this sanctuary is in heaven, John bears
testimony as an eyewitness that he beheld it there.
What further testimony could be required?
“As far as the question of what constitutes the
sanctuary is concerned, we now have the sanctuary
before us in one harmonious whole. The sanctuary of
the Bible—mark it well—consists, first, of the typical
tabernacle established by the Hebrews in the exodus
from Egypt, which was the sanctuary of the first covenant. Secondly, it consists of the true tabernacle in
heaven, of which the former was a type, or figure,
which is the sanctuary of the new covenant. These
are inseparably related as type and antitype. From the
antitype we go back to the type, and from the type we
are carried forward naturally and inevitably to the antitype. Thus we see how a sanctuary service has been
provided from the Exodus to the end of probation.
“We have said that Daniel would at once understand by the word ‘sanctuary’ the sanctuary of his people at Jerusalem; so would anyone at the time of its
existence. But does the declaration of Daniel 8: 14
have reference to that sanctuary? That depends upon the time to which it applies. All the declarations
respecting the sanctuary which apply during the time of
ancient Israel, have respect of course to the sanctuary
of that time. All those declarations which apply under
the Christian Era must have reference to the sanctuary
of that era. If the 2300 days, at the termination of
which the sanctuary to be cleansed, ended before
Christ, the sanctuary to be cleansed was the sanctuary
of that time. If they reach over into the Christian
Era, the sanctuary to which reference is made is the
sanctuary of this era—the new-covenant sanctuary
in heaven. This is a point which can be determined
only by a further argument on the 2300 days. This will
be found in remarks on Daniel 9: 24, where the subject
of time is resumed and explained.” Smith, DR, 175179.

by the ‘little horn’ power. In this sense verse 13 is a
transition from the past to what is to take place at the
end-time when the 2,300 evenings-mornings (as described in verse 14) come to an end. In verse 14 the
term qodes does not include the earthly sanctuary
because the latter had been physically destroyed in
AD 70. Accordingly, the only sanctuary in existence at
the end-time is the celestial [heavenly], the new covenant sanctuary (Heb. 8).
“…It may come as a surprise to the casual reader
of the Bible that the key term for the cleansing of the
‘sanctuary’ on the Day of Atonement in Leviticus 16 is
the term qodes. It would seem that when a Hebrew
(steeped as he was in the sacrificial ritual which yearly
climaxed with the cleansing of the sanctuary on the day
of Atonement) would hear nisdaq qodes (‘the sanctuary shall be cleansed’), he would associate this function
with his concept of the Day of Atonement.” BRI,
2SOD, 454,455.
Shall Be Cleansed.—
“Gabriel spoke to Daniel in Hebrew, not English;
and he said in Hebrew, ‘Then shall the sanctuary be
nitsdaq,’ employing a word which occurs only this one
time in the entire Hebrew part of the Bible.
“Scholars know that nitsdaq is related to another
Hebrew word, tsadaq, which is a rather common term.
Tsadaq occurs in its various forms more than 250 times
in the Bible and is normally translated into the English
word, ‘righteousness.’ It is also translated into ‘to be
righteous,’ ‘to be just’ (in the Latin sense of ‘being
righteous’), and ‘to justify’ (meaning ‘to make something right’ or ‘to make it appear to be right’).
“A literal translation of Daniel 8:14 quite possible
ought to be ‘Then shall the sanctuary be made righteous.’
“But the sanctuary is a building, and neither in
English nor in Hebrew are buildings ordinarily made
righteous! So some translators have struggled with the
alternate words, ‘justified’ and ‘just’; and when these
haven’t seemed to help much, they have tried synonyms and come up with ‘vindicate’ and even ‘emerge
victorious.’
“…Gabriel knew that Daniel could understand the
passage without specific interpretation; so now we
want to know how other Jews who lived long ago understood it. We are fascinated to discover that in both
of the translations that were made into Greek in ancient
times by Jewish scholars, the word nitsdaq is translated by an ordinary word meaning ‘cleansed,’ the
same meaning as in the KJV…. Further, when the
celebrated Christian scholar, Jerome, translated the
passage into Latin around the year AD 400, after holding extensive conversations with a Jewish rabbi in regard to Old Testament idioms, he chose the Latin word
that also means ‘cleansed.’
“The cleansing of the sanctuary. With this information from Jewish authorities before us, we begin to
climb onto solid ground; for the annual highlight of the

“The change of terminology from miqdas (‘sanctuary’) in 8:11-12 to qodes (‘sanctuary’) in verses 1314 seems to reflect a design that follows the structure
from vision (verse 3-12) to audition (vss. 13-14). The
recapitulation of aspects of the vision in verse 13
appears to indicate that in this text qodes refers to
the celestial [heavenly] sanctuary, which is attacked

293

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Old Testament ritual was a solemn ceremony in which
the sanctuary was symbolically cleansed!
“The day on which the sanctuary was cleansed
is called in the …KJV the ‘day of atonement.’ It is
well known even to nonreaders of the Bible by its Hebrew name, Yom Kippur. Yom Kippur was and still is
observed on the tenth day of the seventh month of the
traditional Jewish year, a date that coincides roughly
with the month of October. In Bible times the ‘day of
atonement’ was the most portentous day in the religious calendar. It was the only day when the high
priest was permitted to enter the most holy place,
the innermost compartment of the sanctuary.”
Maxwell, 1GC, 175,176.

cosmic setting of the end-time judgment.’—Daniel and
Revelation Committee, vol. 2, pp.453, 454. In other
words, he specifically used that word to express the
idea of judgment, as well as the cleansing of the
sanctuary.” Goldstein, 1844MS, 65-67.
“In summary, a full understanding of nisdaq includes a rather broad collection of meanings—
including ‘cleansing, vindicating, justifying, setting
right, restoring.’ According to the words of the Wonderful Numberer, the actual work done in the heavenly
Sanctuary, beginning in 1844, would include all those
concepts …not only cleansing, but also the investigative judgment.” Ferrell, BD, 122.

“The words with the tsdq-root are used in parallel
constructions with words that clearly mean ‘cleansed,’
including taher [the Hebrew word for ‘cleanse” in Leviticus 16].
“Imagine a poem that says: “I have a cat/the cat
is fat.’ Fat and cat are related to each other, not by
meaning, but by sound. They rhyme. They parallel
each other phonetically (sound), not semantically
(meaning). If a poem reads: ‘I have a house/the house
is my home’ house and home are related, not by sound
(they don’t rhyme), but by meaning. They parallel
each other semantically because their meanings are
similar.
“Hebrew poetry uses this type of semantic relationship, a relationship of meanings, and in numerous
places words with the tsdq-root parallel words that
clearly mean ‘clean’ or ‘pure.’ Various scholars, even
non-Adventists, have noted these connections. In Job
4:17, for example, we see taher and tsadaq in parallel
constructions:
“Shall mortal man be more just [tsadaq] than
God? Shall a man be more pure [taher] than his maker?
“Just as house and home are related, we can see
how just and pure parallel each other in these lines of
poetry—not by sound, but by meaning.
“Many ancient translations of the Bible rendered
Dan. 8:14 ‘cleansed/purified.’ The Septuagint renders
it ‘cleansed.’ The Theodotion renders it ‘cleansed.’
The Latin Vulgate translates it ‘purified/cleansed.’ The
Syriac Peshitta renders it ‘purified/cleansed.’ The
Coptic renders it ‘purified/cleansed.’
“Also, in the Septuagint—the first Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible—the same root word used for
‘cleansed’ (katharizo) in Daniel 8:14 was used for
‘cleanse’ in its translation of Leviticus 16! Clearly, the
translators of the Septuagint saw a link between the
taher and tsadaq!
“…Dr. Hasel explains that …Daniel chose the
term nisdaq [passive form of tsadaq]—a word from a
root with rich and broad connotations, widely employed in judgment settings and legal procedures—in
order to communicate effectively the interrelated aspects of the ‘cleansing’ of the heavenly sanctuary in the

The High Priest Entered the Most Holy Place
at the end of the year to cleanse the temple of sins
that had been confessed there through the year.
“All ancient translations (Septuagint, Theodotion,
Vulgate, Syriac, and Coptic) translated the Hebrew
nisdaq in 8:14 with ‘cleansed/purified.’ This single,
direct evidence is significant.
“Nisdaq in 8:14 [has] such meanings as ‘cleansing, vindicating, justifying, setting right, restoring.’ In
whatever way one renders the Hebrew term in a modern language, the ‘cleansing’ of the sanctuary includes
actual cleansing as well as activities of vindicating,
justifying, and restoring.” BRI, 2SOS, 450,453.
The Sanctuary Restored.—
“In Revelation 11:1, referring to post-1844,
Christ’s command was given to spread the great gospel
of Christ’s present intercession for us in heaven:
“Rev. 11:1: ‘And there was given me a reed like
unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and
measure the temple of God, and the altar.’
“Why was the church then told to take a reed and
measure the temple and the altar? ‘Reed,’ in the Greek
is kanne, from which we get our word ‘cannon.’ Cannon means ‘rule’ or ‘law,’ or, as Webster defines it, ‘a
standard used in judging something; criterion.’ Criterion means ‘a standard, rule, or test by which a judgment of something can be formed.’ The Greek word
for measure, applied to a building or object, means to

294

DANIEL 8
‘preserve’ or ‘restore’ it. In other words, we are to
use the Bible, the cannon or rule of Scripture, in our
work of examining and restoring the temple and the
altar. Revelation 11:1 tells us the temple and altar
were to be restored to the knowledge of God’s people; Daniel 8:11 had prophesied that aspect of the
gospel would be ‘taken away.’
“…Since 1844 these grand truths have been restored to the world through the remnant church.
(See Daniel 8:13 and Rev. 11:1-2.) No wonder Ellen
White said:
“ ‘The correct understanding of the ministration in the heavenly sanctuary is the foundation of
our faith.’ Letter 208, Manuscript Releases, 8:245.”
Heiks, TDSB, 132,133.

“Does the reader object to the idea of there being
anything in heaven which needs to be cleansed? The
book of Hebrews plainly affirms the cleansing of
both the earthly and the heavenly sanctuary: ‘Almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and
without shedding of blood is no remission. It was
therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the
heavens should be purified [katharizesthai, cleansed]
with these; but the heavenly things themselves
[cleansed] with better sacrifices than these.’ Hebrews 9: 22, 23. In the light of foregoing arguments,
this may be paraphrased thus: ‘It was therefore necessary that the tabernacle erected by Moses, with its sacred vessels, which were patterns of the true sanctuary
in heaven, should be cleansed with the blood of calves
and goats; but the heavenly things themselves, the
sanctuary of the Christian Era, the true tabernacle,
which the Lord pitched, and not man, must be cleansed
with better sacrifices, even with the blood of Christ.’
“We now inquire, what is the nature of this
cleansing, and how is it to be done? According to the
language just quoted, it is accomplished by means of
blood. The cleansing is not, therefore, a cleansing
from physical uncleanness or impurity, for blood is not
the agent used in such a work. This consideration
should satisfy the objector’s mind in regard to the
cleansing of the heavenly things. The fact that heavenly things are to be cleansed, does not prove that there is
any physical impurity in heaven, for that is not the kind
of cleansing referred to in the Scriptures. The reason
assigned why this cleansing is performed with
blood, is that without the shedding of blood there is
no remission, no forgiveness of sin.” Smith, DR,
179,180.

“In 1844 also was the very time of the ‘days of
the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to
sound’ and when ‘the mystery of God should be finished, as He hath declared to His servants the prophets.’
“At that time there would be broken up the horror of great darkness by which the mystery of iniquity had hid from ages and generations the mystery
of God. At that time the sanctuary and the true tabernacle and the truth of it would be lifted up from the
ground where the man of sin had cast them down and
stamped upon them and would be exalted to the heaven
where they belong and whence they will shine forth in
such light as that the earth shall be lightened with the
glory… and would once more and forever stand in its
true and heavenly place in the faith of the church, accomplishing in every true believer that perfection
which is the eternal purpose of God which He purposed
in Christ Jesus our Lord.” Jones, CWCP, 112.

“In this and the previous section the author discusses the significance of several Hebrew terms such
as tamid (‘daily/continuance’), pesa (‘transgression”),
qodes (‘sanctuary’), and nisdaq (‘cleanse/ justify’).
Such phraseology (as well as the symbolic use of sacrificial animals in the vision: the ram and goat) indicates
a sanctuary setting with particular allusion to the Day
of Atonement. A Hebrew steeped in sacrificial ritual would read this prophecy—‘then shall the sanctuary be cleansed’—quite naturally in terms of the Day
of Atonement ritual.” BRI, 2SOD, 427.

Then Shall the Heavenly Sanctuary Be Cleansed.—
“[Daniel 8:13,14 quoted.] Here is an event to
transpire in the conclusion of this vision; in other
words, it occurs in the end of the gospel dispensation.
The sanctuary to be cleansed at the conclusion of the
new-covenant dispensation, must be the sanctuary of
the new covenant. A sanctuary implies of necessity a
priesthood. The cleansing of the sanctuary is that
event which completes the work of the priest who
ministers therein. When, therefore, we read of the
cleansing of the sanctuary at the end of the twentythree hundred days, we understand that this is the closing event of the priesthood of the Son of God. It is
of necessity a work which brings human probation to
a close, and marks the transition from the priesthood
to the kingly office of the Saviour.” Andrews, JEO,
83,84.

The Cleansing Is From Sin.—
“Remission of sin, then, and the putting away of
sin, is the work to be done. The cleansing, therefore,
is not physical cleansing, but a cleansing from sin.
But how did sin come to be connected with the sanctuary, either the earthly or the heavenly, that it should
need to be cleansed? This question is answered by the
ministration connected with the type, to which we now
turn.
“The closing chapters of Exodus give us an account of the construction of the earthly sanctuary, and
the arrangement of the service connected therewith.

“There is such a service connected with the institution which we have shown to be the sanctuary, and
which, in reference to both the earthly building and the
heavenly temple, is called its cleansing.

295

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Leviticus opens with an account of the ministration
which was there to be performed. All that it is our purpose to notice here is one particular branch of the service. The person who had committed sin brought his
offering, a live animal, to the door of the tabernacle.
Upon the head of this victim he placed his hand for
a moment, and, as we may reasonably infer, confessed over it his sin. By this expressive act he signified that he had sinned, and was worthy of death, but
that in his stead he consecrated his victim, and transferred his guilt to it. With his own hand (and what
must have been his emotions!) he then took the life
of the animal. The law demanded the life of the transgressor for his disobedience. The life is in the blood.
(Leviticus 17: 11, 14.) Hence without the shedding of
blood, there is no remission; but with the shedding of
blood remission is possible, for the demand of life by
the law is thus satisfied. The blood of the victim, representative of a forfeited life, and the vehicle of its
guilt, was then taken by the priest and ministered before the Lord.
“By his confession, by the slaying of the victim,
and by the ministry of the priest, the sin of the individual was transferred from himself to the sanctuary. Victim after victim was thus offered by the people. Day by day the work went forward, and thus
the sanctuary became the receptacle of the sins of
the congregation. But this was not the final disposition of these sins. The accumulated guilt was removed by a special service for the cleansing of the
sanctuary. This service, in the type, occupied one day
in the year, the tenth day of the seventh month, which
was called the Day of Atonement. On this day, while
all Israel refrained from work and afflicted their souls,
the priest brought two goats, and presented them before
the Lord at the door of the tabernacle. On these goats
he cast lots, one lot of the Lord, and the other lot for
the scapegoat. The one upon which the Lord’s lot fell
was then slain, and his blood carried by the priest into
the most holy place of the sanctuary, and sprinkled
upon the mercy seat. This was the only day on which
he was permitted to enter that apartment. Coming
forth, he was then to ‘lay both his hands upon the head
of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities
of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in
all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat.’
Leviticus 16: 21. He was then to send the goat away
by the hand of a fit man into a land not inhabited, a
land of separation, or forgetfulness, the goat never
again to appear in the camp of Israel, and the sins of
the people to be remembered against them no more.
“This service was for the purpose of cleansing
the people from their sins, and also for cleansing the
sanctuary, its furniture, and its sacred vessels from
the sins of the people. (Leviticus 16: 16, 30, 33.) By
this process, sin was entirely removed. Of course
this was only in figure, for all that work was typical.
“The reader to whom these views are new will
perhaps be ready here to inquire with some astonish-

ment, What could this strange work possibly be designed to typify, and what was it designed to prefigure
in our day? We answer, A similar work in the ministration of Christ, as the Scriptures clearly teach. After the statement in Hebrews 8: 2 that Christ is the minister of the true tabernacle, the sanctuary in heaven, it
is declared in verse 5 that the priests on earth served
‘unto the example and shadow of heavenly things.’
In other words, the work of the earthly priests was a
shadow, a type of the ministration of Christ above.”
Smith, DR, 180-183.
“Why would the Sanctuary be ‘cleansed’ at the
end of the 2300 years? What in it could need cleaning?
We are speaking about a building that is in heaven.
The earthly type explains this. The tabernacle needed
‘cleansing’ at the end of each year, even though no
physical ‘dirt’ ever entered it. The day of atonement
procedure is carefully explained in Leviticus 16. The
following points will help explain this:
“The transfer of sin— The key concern here is
‘the transfer of sin.’ In the daily service, the sin of the
person was continually transferred, either to the sacrificial animal or to the priest. The blood of the animals
was taken into the first apartment and sprinkled. That
act ceremonially transferred the sin to the tabernacle.
“…In the yearly service, the sprinkling cleanses the transferred sins out of the sanctuary. We are
repeatedly told this in Leviticus 16:18, 20-21, 24-28,
30-34. Let no one tell you that the concept, ‘cleansing
the sanctuary,’ is not Biblical.
“Leviticus 17:11 says the life is in the blood.
Physiology establishes that this is true. It is the flowing blood within your body, continually nourishing
your cells, that keeps you alive. ‘For the life of the
flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon
the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is
the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.”—
Leviticus 17:11 (cf. Deut. 12:16).
“Sin is transferred to the animal and, through the
blood sprinkling, transferred to the sanctuary. On the
day of atonement, blood is taken into the sanctuary
to cleanse it.
“It is the shedding of blood that cleanses from
sin—Here are a number of passages which you may
want to study: Heb. 9:22; 1 John 1:7; Rev. 1:5; John
6:53; Matt. 26:28 (Mark 14:24); Rom 3:25; 5:9; Eph.
1:7; Col. 1:14, 20.” Ferrell, BD, 122-125.
Sanctuary Cleansed—Church Cleansed, too.—
“ ‘Then shall the sanctuary be cleansed or justified,’ means the true sanctuary which God has built
of lively stones to his own acceptance, through Christ,
of which the temple at Jerusalem was but a type….”
Miller, Evidence, 41.
“A great deal is involved in the cleansing of the
heavenly sanctuary. It must include the cleansing of

296

DANIEL 8
which becomes the temporary nuclear waste dump for
planet earth’s sins. This was done to keep planet earth
alive temporarily. Without the heavenly sanctuary sin
would have crushed the planet into non-existence. It
would have self-destructed.
“Thank God for Jesus, our Sin-Bearer, to save us
from our sins. Thank God for Jesus, our great High
Priest in the heavenly sanctuary interceding continually
in our behalf. Thank God for Jesus our Way of escape
from this sin polluted earth.” PJ

the individual soul-temple of all sin by which means
the church-temple is cleansed and sanctified. Not
until this is accomplished on earth in the court can the
Lord blot out the sins of His people on record in the
sanctuary in heaven. What takes place in the sanctuary
above depends on what takes place in the hearts of
God’s people in the church—court on earth.” Bunch,
BOD, 126.
“An important part of the cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary is the cleansing of the court, which, according to Rev. 11 is ‘the holy city’ or church which
was trodden underfoot by the papacy for 42 prophetic
months or 1260 years. The court of the heavenly temple, which is the temple of God on earth, is cleansed
first of all by a world message exposing the false mediatorial system of the papacy by restoring the
knowledge of the true sanctuary and its services and
priesthood to God’s people. This message goes to the
world at the same time the Investigative Judgment is in
session in heaven. The court is to be cleansed also by a
great revival and reformation in the church that cleanses the earthly habitation of God from all sin so that it is
‘a glorious church not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it is holy and without blemish.’ The church wholly sanctified will be ‘preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.’ See Eph. 5:26,27; 1 Thess. 5:23.” Bunch,
BOD, 152.

Day of Atonement = Day of Judgment of Daniel 7.—
“Also on the tenth day of this seventh month
there shall be a day of atonement: it shall be an holy
convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls,
and offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
“For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from
among his people.” Leviticus 23: 27,29.
“The requirement that persons who refused to
take the day seriously should be ‘cut off’ implies that
the Day of Atonement was also a day of judgment.
Any Israelite who refused to enter seriously into the
religious promise of the day was to be investigated by
the elders, tried, sentenced, and punished.
“Jewish rabbis have long described the day as one
of judgment. …With the Day of Atonement seen to be
a day of judgment, we sense immediately that the
cleansing of the sanctuary in Daniel 8:14 is closely
parallel to the judgment scene of Daniel 7.… We are
on firm ground. Unfolding parallelism is one of the
principal keys to understanding the book of Daniel.
“The judgment in Daniel 7 compares readily with
the entry of Christ as High Priest into heaven’s most
holy place at the commencement of the celestial Day of
Atonement/Day of Judgment:
“Thrones were placed [symbolized by the ark in
the most holy place] and one that was ancient of days
[God the Father] took his seat [on heaven’s ‘mercy
seat’];… ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him [the angels, represented in the tabernacle by
the cherubim above the ark] the court sat in judgment
[heaven’s Day of Atonement], and the books were
opened.
“I saw in the night visions, and behold, with
the clouds of heaven there came [passing into heaven’s ‘most holy place’ like the earthly high priest on
the Day of Atonement] one like a son of man [Jesus,
our heavenly High Priest], and he came to the Ancient of Days…. And to him was given dominion
and glory and kingdom. [At the close of this heavenly judgment, Christ will receive a kingdom that is peopled entirely with ‘saints’ who have been fully
cleansed from sin and who have chosen at-one-ment
with God and with one another.] Daniel 7:9-14.
“…The sanctuary is God’s court of justice. The
day of Judgment is His ‘Day of Atonement,’ when
He vindicates and cleanses everyone who sincerely

“The Hebrew word for ‘cleansed’ in vs. 14 is the
same word translated ‘righteousness’ in Daniel 12:3.”
PJ
The Sanctuary—Vital for Environmental Health.—
“The sanctuary system (earthly and heavenly) is
God’s means for planet Earth to be healthy in a world
of sin. The planet in a fallen condition, is a closed system—like an aquarium. It needs an exhaust pipe, a
way to eliminate waste. The sanctuary system is the
way for planet earth to eliminate its poisonous waste
products—sin. Sin is toxic to the environment of earth.
Sin affects nature so profoundly.
“Isaiah saw this clearly: ‘The earth mourneth and
fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away,
the haughty people of the earth do languish. The earth
also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the
ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that
dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of
the earth are burned, and few men left.’ Isa 24:4-6.
“When organs of waste elimination are clogged
up or removed, the body quickly becomes toxic with
poisons, and gets sick. Death will result quickly if
there is no means of cleansing the body of the waste.
The sins of earth have a way of escape, Through the
blood of ‘the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of
the world,’ they are brought to the heavenly sanctuary,

297

GEMS FROM DANIEL
desires to be at-one with Him and when He removes
everyone who separates himself from Him. When God
has finished doing this, a shout of victory will ring
from galaxy to galaxy across the starry sky.
“God provided for another source of joy in addition to renewed innocence. In the afternoon of the Day
of Atonement every fiftieth year, at the conclusion of
seven cycles of seven years, the ‘shofar’ trumpets announced the beginning of a Year of Jubilee. Leviticus
25. Heralds were to ‘proclaim liberty throughout all
the land unto all the inhabitants thereof.’ Leviticus
25:10, KJV. Hebrew slaves were to be released. All
land that had been bought or sold since the previous
jubilee was to be returned to the descendants of the
original owners. It was a plan for curing social inequity. It taught that God, not man, is the real owner of the
earth.
“What an illustration for the book of Daniel! At
the close of heaven’s Day of Atonement/Day of Judgment, the trumpet of the Lord will sound, God will
declare His Son King of kings and Lord of lords, the
supernatural stone will smite the image, and the earth
will be taken from those who destroy it (Revelation
11:18) and given to the saints of the Most High. The
meek will inherit the earth. Matthew 5:5.
“The court shall sit in judgment [on heaven’s
Day of Atonement] and his [the little horn’s] dominion [his self-assumed authority to trample on Christ’s
tamid and on His truth and people] shall be taken
away to be consumed and destroyed to the end….
And the greatness of the kingdoms …shall be given
to the people of the saints of the Most High [at the
commencement of heaven’s year of Jubilee].” Maxwell, 1GC, 178-179, 180-181.

sion of the yearly round of service. Leviticus 16. The
services of the heavenly sanctuary are performed once
for all. The cleansing of the sanctuary must therefore have its antitype only once, and that at the close
of the priesthood of Christ. The 2,300 days mark the
time of that event. When this work is entered upon by
our Lord, it is the concluding work of his priesthood,
and the period for the finishing of human probation.”
Andrews, JEO, 86,87.
Ministration in Figure and in Fact.—
“These typical priests ministered in both apartments of the earthly tabernacle, and Christ ministers in
both apartments of the heavenly temple. That temple
in heaven has two apartments, or it was not correctly
represented by the earthly sanctuary. Our Lord officiates in both apartments, or the service of the priest on
earth was not a correct shadow of His work. It is stated
plainly in Hebrews 9: 21-24 that both the tabernacle
and all the vessels in the ministry were ‘patterns of
things in the heavens.’ Therefore the service performed by Christ in the heavenly temple corresponds to
that performed by the priests in both apartments of the
earthly building. But the work in the second apartment, or most holy place, was a special work to
close the yearly round of service and cleanse the
sanctuary. Hence Christ’s ministration in the second
apartment of the heavenly sanctuary must be a work
of like nature, and constitutes the close of His work
as our great High Priest, and the cleansing of that
sanctuary.
“As through the typical sacrifices of old the sins
of the people were transferred in figure by the priests to
the earthly sanctuary, where those priests ministered;
so ever since Christ ascended to be our intercessor in
the presence of His Father, the sins of all those who
sincerely seek pardon through Him are transferred in
fact to the heavenly sanctuary, where He ministers.
Whether Christ ministers for us in the heavenly holy
places with His blood literally, or only by virtue of its
merits, we need not stop to inquire. Suffice it to say
that His blood has been shed, and through that blood
remission of sins is obtained in fact, which was obtained only in figure through the blood of the calves
and goats of the former ministration. But those typical
sacrifices had pointed to the real sacrifice to come.
Thus those who employed them have an equal interest
in the work of Christ with those who in our era come to
Him by faith through the ordinances of the gospel.
“The continual transfer of sins to the heavenly
sanctuary makes its cleansing necessary on the same
ground that a like work was required in the earthly
sanctuary. An important distinction between the two
ministrations must here be noticed. In the earthly tabernacle, a complete round of service was accomplished
every year. On every day of the year except one, the
ministration went forward in the first apartment. One
day’s work in the most holy completed the yearly
round. The work then began again in the holy place,

“The event of the cleansing of the sanctuary in
chapter 8 as well as the event of the judgment in chapter 7 are seen in the same heavenly realm. Both
…belong to the same time of the end, the very time
that precedes the coming of the heavenly kingdom
(7:26; 8:17,26).
“The parallelism between the two chapters shows
how related the judgment and the cleansing of the sanctuary are. This particular connection is indeed suggestive to the Jewish mind, pointing to the Day of
Atonement, the only day when the judgment is
evoked and the sanctuary is cleansed.
“Already, from the beginning of chapter 8, the
imagery of the ram and the goat have paved the way
for this reference to the Day of Atonement; the association of these two animals occurs precisely on that day
(Lev. 16:5,6.). Besides their function of representation
in Daniel 8, the ram and the goat were then also designed to point to the day of Atonement.” Doukhan,
DVE, 26.
Cleansing of Sanctuary Cannot Be Repeated.—
“In a former article we have seen that the
cleansing of the earthly sanctuary marked the conclu-

298

DANIEL 8
and went forward until another Day of Atonement
completed the year’s work. And so on, year by year.
A succession of priests performed this round of service
in the earthly sanctuary. But our divine Lord ‘ever
liveth to make intercession’ for us. Hebrews 7: 25.
Hence the work of the heavenly sanctuary, instead
of being a yearly work, is performed once for all.
Instead of being repeated year by year, one grand
cycle is allotted to it, in which it is carried forward
and finished forever.
“One year’s round of service in the earthly sanctuary represented the entire work of the sanctuary
above. In the type, the cleansing of the sanctuary was
the brief closing work of the year’s service. In the
antitype, the cleansing of the sanctuary must be the
closing work of Christ, our great High Priest, in the
tabernacle in heaven. In the type, to cleanse the
sanctuary, the high priest entered into the most holy
place to minister in the presence of God before the ark
of His testament. In the antitype, when the time
comes for the cleansing of the true sanctuary, our High
Priest, in like manner, enters into the most holy place
once for all to make a final end of His intercessory
work in behalf of mankind.
“Reader, do you now see the importance of this
subject? Do you begin to perceive what an object of
interest for all the world is the sanctuary of God? Do
you see that the whole plan of salvation centers here,
and that when it is done, probation is ended, and the
cases of the saved and lost are eternally decided? Do
you see that the cleansing of the sanctuary is a brief
and special work by which the great plan of salvation is
forever finished? Do you see that if it can be ascertained when the work of cleansing begins we shall
know when salvation’s last mighty hour has come,
when that most solemn announcement of the prophetic
word is due to the world—‘Fear God, and give glory to
Him; for the hour of His judgment is come’? Revelation 14: 7. This is exactly what the prophecy is designed to show; it is known the commencement of this
momentous work. ‘Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.’ The
heavenly sanctuary is the one in which the decision of
all cases is to be rendered. The progress of the work
there, should be the special concern of mankind. If
people understood the bearing of these subjects on their
eternal interests, they would give them their most careful and prayerful study.” Smith, DR, 183-187.

2300 Day Prophecy Opens Up for Study After 1798.—
“Following the captivity of Pope Pius VI, in
1798, there was wide recognition on both sides of the
Atlantic of the fulfillment of the close of the fateful
1,260 years. That left only the closing events of Daniel
7 yet to be accomplished—with the awesome judgment
scenes at the end of the world.
“And now came the remarkable shift of immediate interest and study from Daniel 7 over to Daniel 8
and the 2,300-day prophecy. Among varying interpretations there arose—not only in Britain and Europe, but
extending down into Africa and even over into India,
and especially here in America—some threescore of
earnest students of prophecy, in various denominations
and language areas, sounding this new note, that the
2,300 year-days would end around 1843, 1844, or
1847, though they differed as to just what would then
take place. And a thousand pulpits in Britain alone, we
are told, echoed this contention, with scores in North
America declaring the same. Never had there been
such a chorus since prophetic interpretation began.”
Froom, 4PF00F, 208.
History of the Study & Preaching of this Prophecy in
America.—
WILLIAM MILLER—“The prophecy which
seemed most clearly to reveal the time of the second
advent was that of Daniel 8:14: ‘Unto two thousand
and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be
cleansed.’ Following his rule of making Scripture its
own interpreter, Miller learned that a day in symbolic
prophecy represents a year (Numbers 14:34; Ezekiel
4:6); he saw that the period of 2300 prophetic days, or
literal years, would extend far beyond the close of the
Jewish dispensation, hence it could not refer to the
sanctuary of that dispensation. Miller accepted the
generally received view that in the Christian age the
earth is the sanctuary, and he therefore understood that
the cleansing of the sanctuary foretold in Daniel 8:14
represented the purification of the earth by fire at the
second coming of Christ. If, then, the correct starting
point could be found for the 2300 days, he concluded
that the time of the second advent could be readily ascertained. Thus would be revealed the time of that
great consummation, the time when the present state,
with ‘all its pride and power, pomp and vanity, wickedness and oppression, would come to an end;’ when
the curse would be ‘removed from off the earth, death
be destroyed, reward be given to the servants of God,
the prophets and saints, and them who fear His name,
and those be destroyed that destroy the earth.’—Bliss,
p. 76.
“With a new and deeper earnestness, Miller continued the examination of the prophecies, whole nights
as well as days being devoted to the study of what now
appeared of such stupendous importance and allabsorbing interest.
“In the eighth chapter of Daniel he could find no
clue to the starting point of the 2300 days; the angel

Daily Services Continued on Day of Atonement.—
“It is important to remember that on the Day of
Atonement the morning and evening sacrifices continued (Num. 28:3,4), just as Christ continues His
intercessory ministry since 1844 (Heb. 7:25); otherwise, nobody’s sins could today be forgiven. However,
since 1844 Christ in addition to the ministry of intercession is performing a ministry of cleansing—the preAdvent judgment.” Pfandl, DTSOB, 89

299

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Gabriel, though commanded to make Daniel understand the vision, gave him only a partial explanation.
As the terrible persecution to befall the church was
unfolded to the prophet’s vision, physical strength gave
way. He could endure no more, and the angel left him
for a time. Daniel ‘fainted, and was sick certain days.’
‘And I was astonished at the vision,’ he says, ‘but none
understood it.’
“Yet God had bidden His messenger: ‘Make this
man to understand the vision.’ That commission must
be fulfilled. In obedience to it, the angel, some time
afterward, returned to Daniel, saying: ‘I am now come
forth to give thee skill and understanding;’ ‘therefore
understand the matter, and consider the vision.’
Daniel 8:27,16; 9:22,23,25-27. There was one important point in the vision of chapter 8 which had been
left unexplained, namely, that relating to time—the
period of the 2300 days; therefore the angel, in resuming his explanation, dwells chiefly upon the subject of
time:
“ ‘Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people
and upon thy Holy City.... Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to
restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the
Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two
weeks: the street shall be built again, and the wall, even
in troublous times. And after threescore and two
weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for Himself....
And He shall confirm the covenant with many for one
week: and in the midst of the week He shall cause the
sacrifice and the oblation to cease.’
“The angel had been sent to Daniel for the express purpose of explaining to him the point which he
had failed to understand in the vision of the eighth
chapter, the statement relative to time—‘unto two
thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.’ After bidding Daniel ‘understand the
matter, and consider the vision,’ the very first words of
the angel are: ‘Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people and upon thy Holy City.’ The word here
translated ‘determined’ literally signifies ‘cut off.’
Seventy weeks, representing 490 years, are declared
by the angel to be cut off, as specially pertaining to
the Jews. But from what were they cut off? As the
2300 days was the only period of time mentioned in
chapter 8, it must be the period from which the seventy
weeks were cut off; the seventy weeks must therefore
be a part of the 2300 days, and the two periods must
begin together. The seventy weeks were declared by
the angel to date from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem. If the date
of this commandment could be found, then the starting
point for the great period of the 2300 days would be
ascertained.
“In the seventh chapter of Ezra the decree is
found. Verses 12-26. In its completest form it was
issued by Artaxerxes, king of Persia, 457 BC. But in
Ezra 6:14 the house of the Lord at Jerusalem is said to
have been built ‘according to the commandment [‘de-

cree,’ margin] of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes
king of Persia.’ These three kings, in originating, reaffirming, and completing the decree, brought it to the
perfection required by the prophecy to mark the beginning of the 2300 years. Taking 457 BC, the time
when the decree was completed, as the date of the
commandment, every specification of the prophecy
concerning the seventy weeks was seen to have been
fulfilled.
“ ‘From the going forth of the commandment to
restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the
Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two
weeks’—namely, sixty-nine weeks, or 483 years. The
decree of Artaxerxes went into effect in the autumn
of 457 BC. From this date, 483 years extend to the
autumn of AD 27. At that time this prophecy was
fulfilled. The word ‘Messiah’ signifies ‘the Anointed One.’ In the autumn of AD 27 Christ was baptized by John and received the anointing of the
Spirit. The apostle Peter testifies that ‘God anointed
Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with
power.’ Acts 10:38. And the Saviour Himself declared:
‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath
anointed Me to preach the gospel to the poor.’ Luke
4:18. After His baptism He went into Galilee, ‘preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying, The
time is fulfilled.’ Mark 1:14,15.
“ ‘And He shall confirm the covenant with many
for one week.’ The ‘week’ here brought to view is the
last one of the seventy; it is the last seven years of the
period allotted especially to the Jews. During this
time, extending from AD 27 to AD 34, Christ, at
first in person and afterward by His disciples, extended the gospel invitation especially to the Jews.
As the apostles went forth with the good tidings of the
kingdom, the Saviour’s direction was: ‘Go not into the
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans
enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel.’ Matthew 10:5,6.
“ ‘In the midst of the week He shall cause the
sacrifice and the oblation to cease.’ In AD 31, three
and a half years after His baptism, our Lord was
crucified. With the great sacrifice offered upon Calvary, ended that system of offerings which for four thousand years had pointed forward to the Lamb of God.
Type had met antitype, and all the sacrifices and oblations of the ceremonial system were there to cease.
“The seventy weeks, or 490 years, especially allotted to the Jews, ended, as we have seen, in AD 34.
At that time, through the action of the Jewish Sanhedrin, the nation sealed its rejection of the gospel by the
martyrdom of Stephen and the persecution of the
followers of Christ. Then the message of salvation, no
longer restricted to the chosen people, was given to the
world. The disciples, forced by persecution to flee
from Jerusalem, ‘went everywhere preaching the
word.’ ‘Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and
preached Christ unto them.’ Peter, divinely guided,
opened the gospel to the centurion of Caesarea, the

300

DANIEL 8
God-fearing Cornelius; and the ardent Paul, won to the
faith of Christ, was commissioned to carry the glad
tidings ‘far hence unto the Gentiles.’ Acts 8:4, 5;
22:21.
“Thus far every specification of the prophecies is
strikingly fulfilled, and the beginning of the seventy
weeks is fixed beyond question at 457 BC, and their
expiration in AD 34. From this data there is no difficulty in finding the termination of the 2300 days. The
seventy weeks—490 days—having been cut off from
the 2300, there were 1810 days remaining. After the
end of 490 days, the 1810 days were still to be fulfilled.
From AD 34, 1810 years extend to 1844. Consequently the 2300 days of Daniel 8:14 terminate in
1844. At the expiration of this great prophetic period,
upon the testimony of the angel of God, ‘the sanctuary
shall be cleansed.’ Thus the time of the cleansing of
the sanctuary—which was almost universally believed
to take place at the second advent—was definitely
pointed out.
“Miller and his associates at first believed that the
2300 days would terminate in the spring of 1844,
whereas the prophecy points to the autumn of that year.
The misapprehension of this point brought disappointment and perplexity to those who had fixed upon the
earlier date as the time of the Lord’s coming. But this
did not in the least affect the strength of the argument
showing that the 2300 days terminated in the year
1844, and that the great event represented by the
cleansing of the sanctuary must then take place.
“Entering upon the study of the Scriptures as he
had done, in order to prove that they were a revelation
from God, Miller had not, at the outset, the slightest
expectation of reaching the conclusion at which he had
now arrived. He himself could hardly credit the results
of his investigation. But the Scripture evidence was
too clear and forcible to be set aside.
“He had devoted two years to the study of the Bible, when, in 1818, he reached the solemn conviction
that in about twenty-five years Christ would appear for
the redemption of His people. ‘I need not speak,’ says
Miller, ‘of the joy that filled my heart in view of the
delightful prospect, nor of the ardent longings of my
soul for a participation in the joys of the redeemed.
The Bible was now to me a new book. It was indeed a
feast of reason; all that was dark, mystical, or obscure
to me in its teachings, had been dissipated from my
mind before the clear light that now dawned from its
sacred pages; and, oh, how bright and glorious the
truth appeared! All the contradictions and inconsistencies I had before found in the word were gone; and
although there were many portions of which I was not
satisfied I had a full understanding, yet so much light
had emanated from it to the illumination of my before darkened mind, that I felt a delight in studying
the Scripture which I had not before supposed
could be derived from its teachings.’—Bliss, pages
76,77.
“ ‘With the solemn conviction that such momen-

tous events were predicted in the Scriptures to be fulfilled in so short a space of time, the question came
home to me with mighty power regarding my duty to
the world, in view of the evidence that had affected my
own mind.’—Ibid., page 81. He could not but feel
that it was his duty to impart to others the light
which he had received. He expected to encounter
opposition from the ungodly, but was confident that all
Christians would rejoice in the hope of meeting the
Saviour whom they professed to love. His only fear
was that in their great joy at the prospect of glorious
deliverance, so soon to be consummated, many would
receive the doctrine without sufficiently examining the
Scriptures in demonstration of its truth. He therefore
hesitated to present it, lest he should be in error and be
the means of misleading others. He was thus led to
review the evidences in support of the conclusions at
which he had arrived, and to consider carefully every
difficulty which presented itself to his mind. He found
that objections vanished before the light of God’s
word, as mist before the rays of the sun. Five years
spent thus left him fully convinced of the correctness of
his position.
“And now the duty of making known to others
what he believed to be so clearly taught in the Scriptures, urged itself with new force upon him. ‘When I
was about my business,’ he said, ‘it was continually
ringing in my ears, “Go and tell the world of their danger.” This text was constantly occurring to me: “When
I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely
die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his
way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his
blood will I require at thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou
warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do not
turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou
hast delivered thy soul.’ Ezekiel 33:8, 9. I felt that if
the wicked could be effectually warned, multitudes
of them would repent; and that if they were not
warned, their blood might be required at my
hand.’—Bliss, page 92.
“He began to present his views in private as he
had opportunity, praying that some minister might feel
their force and devote himself to their promulgation.
But he could not banish the conviction that he had a
personal duty to perform in giving the warning. The
words were ever recurring to his mind: ‘Go and tell it
to the world; their blood will I require at thy hand.’
For nine years he waited, the burden still pressing
upon his soul, until in 1831 he for the first time publicly gave the reasons of his faith.
“As Elisha was called from following his oxen in
the field, to receive the mantle of consecration to the
prophetic office, so was William Miller called to leave
his plow and open to the people the mysteries of the
kingdom of God. With trembling he entered upon his
work, leading his hearers down, step by step, through
the prophetic periods to the second appearing of Christ.
With every effort he gained strength and courage as
he saw the widespread interest excited by his words.

301

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“It was only at the solicitation of his brethren, in
whose words he heard the call of God, that Miller consented to present his views in public. He was now fifty
years of age, unaccustomed to public speaking, and
burdened with a sense of unfitness for the work before
him. But from the first his labors were blessed in a
remarkable manner to the salvation of souls. His
first lecture was followed by a religious awakening in
which thirteen entire families, with the exception of
two persons, were converted. He was immediately
urged to speak in other places, and in nearly every
place his labor resulted in a revival of the work of God.
Sinners were converted, Christians were roused to
greater consecration, and deists and infidels were led to
acknowledge the truth of the Bible and the Christian
religion. The testimony of those among whom he labored was: ‘A class of minds are reached by him not
within the influence of other men.’—Ibid., page 138.
His preaching was calculated to arouse the public
mind to the great things of religion and to check the
growing worldliness and sensuality of the age.
“In nearly every town there were scores, in some,
hundreds, converted as a result of his preaching. In
many places Protestant churches of nearly all denominations were thrown open to him, and the invitations to
labor usually came from the ministers of the several
congregations. It was his invariable rule not to labor
in any place to which he had not been invited, yet he
soon found himself unable to comply with half the requests that poured in upon him. Many who did not
accept his views as to the exact time of the second advent were convinced of the certainty and nearness of
Christ’s coming and their need of preparation. In some
of the large cities his work produced a marked impression. Liquor dealers abandoned the traffic and turned
their shops into meeting rooms; gambling dens were
broken up; infidels, deists, Universalists, and even the
most abandoned profligates were reformed, some of
whom had not entered a house of worship for years.
Prayer meetings were established by the various denominations, in different quarters, at almost every
hour, businessmen assembling at midday for prayer
and praise. There was no extravagant excitement, but
an almost universal solemnity on the minds of the people. His work, like that of the early Reformers, tended
rather to convince the understanding and arouse the
conscience than merely to excite the emotions.
“In 1833 Miller received a license to preach,
from the Baptist Church, of which he was a member.
A large number of the ministers of his denomination
also approved his work, and it was with their formal
sanction that he continued his labors. He traveled and
preached unceasingly, though his personal labors were
confined principally to the New England and Middle
States. For several years his expenses were met
wholly from his own private purse, and he never
afterward received enough to meet the expense of
travel to the places where he was invited.” Great
Controversy, 324-328.

The First Disappointment.—
“With unspeakable desire those who had received
the message watched for the coming of their Saviour.
The time when they expected to meet Him was at hand.
They approached this hour with a calm solemnity.
They rested in sweet communion with God, and earnest
of the peace that was to be theirs in the bright hereafter.
None who experienced this hope and trust can forget
those precious hours of waiting. For some weeks preceding the time, worldly business was for the most part
laid aside. The sincere believers carefully examined
every thought and emotion of their hearts as if upon
their deathbeds and in a few hours to close their eyes
upon earthly scenes. There was no making of ‘ascension robes’; but all felt the need of internal evidence
that they were prepared to meet the Saviour; their
white robes were purity of soul—characters
cleansed from sin by the atoning blood of Christ.
Would that there were still with the professed people of
God the same spirit of heart searching, the same earnest, determined faith. Had they continued thus to
humble themselves before the Lord and press their petitions at the mercy seat they would be in possession of
a far richer experience than they now have. There is
too little prayer, too little real conviction of sin, and the
lack of living faith leaves many destitute of the grace
so richly provided by our Redeemer.
“God designed to prove His people. His hand
covered a mistake in the reckoning of the prophetic
periods. Adventists did not discover the error, nor was
it discovered by the most learned of their opponents.
The latter said: ‘Your reckoning of the prophetic periods is correct. Some great event is about to take place;
but it is not what Mr. Miller predicts; it is the conversion of the world, and not the second advent of Christ.’
“The time of expectation passed, and Christ
did not appear for the deliverance of His people.
Those who with sincere faith and love had looked
for their Saviour, experienced a bitter disappointment. Yet the purposes of God were being accomplished; He was testing the hearts of those who professed to be waiting for His appearing. There were
among them many who had been actuated by no higher
motive than fear. Their profession of faith had not
affected their hearts or their lives. When the expected
event failed to take place, these persons declared that
they were not disappointed; they had never believed
that Christ would come. They were among the first to
ridicule the sorrow of the true believers.
“But Jesus and all the heavenly host looked with love
and sympathy upon the tried and faithful yet disappointed ones. Could the veil separating the visible
world have been swept back, angels would have been
seen drawing near to these steadfast souls and shielding
them from the shafts of Satan.” Great Controversy,
373,374.
“Those who sincerely love Jesus can appreciate

302

DANIEL 8
the feelings of those who watched with the most intense longing for the coming of their Saviour. The
point of expectation was nearing. The time when we
hoped to meet Him was close at hand. We approached this hour with a calm solemnity. The true
believers rested in a sweet communion with God—
an earnest of the peace that was to be theirs in the
bright hereafter. None who experienced this hope
and trust can ever forget those precious hours of waiting.
“Worldly business was for the most part laid
aside for a few weeks. We carefully examined every
thought and emotion of our hearts, as if upon our
deathbeds and in a few hours to close our eyes forever upon earthly scenes. There was no making of
‘ascension robes’ for the great event; we felt the need
of internal evidence that we were prepared to meet
Christ, and our white robes were purity of soul, character cleansed from sin by the atoning blood of our Saviour.
“But the time of expectation passed. This was
the first close test brought to bear upon those who
believed and hoped that Jesus would come in the
clouds of heaven. The disappointment of God's
waiting people was great. The scoffers were triumphant and won the weak and cowardly to their ranks.
Some who had appeared to possess true faith seemed to
have been influenced only by fear; and now their courage returned with the passing of the time, and they
boldly united with the scoffers, declaring they had never been duped to really believe the doctrine of Miller,
who was a mad fanatic. Others, naturally yielding or
vacillating, quietly deserted the cause. I thought, If
Christ had surely come, what would have become of
those weak and changing ones? They professed to
love and long for the coming of Jesus; but when He
failed to appear, they seemed greatly relieved, and
went back to a state of carelessness and disregard of
true religion.
“We were perplexed and disappointed, yet did not
renounce our faith. Many still clung to the hope that
Jesus would not long delay His coming; the word of
the Lord was sure, it could not fail. We felt that we
had done our duty, we had lived up to our precious
faith; we were disappointed, but not discouraged. The
signs of the times denoted that the end of all things was
at hand; we must watch and hold ourselves in readiness
for the coming of the Master at any time. We must
wait with hope and trust, not neglecting the assembling
of ourselves together for instruction, encouragement,
and comfort, that our light might shine forth into the
darkness of the world.
“Calculation of the time was so simple and
plain that even children could understand it. From
the date of the decree of the king of Persia, found in
Ezra 7, which was given in 457 before Christ, the 2300
years of Daniel 8:14 must terminate with 1843. Accordingly we looked to the end of this year for the
coming of the Lord. We were sadly disappointed when

the year entirely passed away and the Saviour had not
come.” 1 Testimonies, 51,52.
The Tarrying Time.—“When the time passed at which the Lord’s coming was first expected—in the spring of 1844—those
who had looked in faith for His appearing were for a
season involved in doubt and uncertainty. While the
world regarded them as having been utterly defeated and proved to have been cherishing a delusion,
their source of consolation was still the word of
God. Many continued to search the Scriptures, examining anew the evidences of their faith and carefully
studying the prophecies to obtain further light. The
Bible testimony in support of their position seemed
clear and conclusive. Signs which could not be mistaken pointed to the coming of Christ as near. The
special blessing of the Lord, both in the conversion
of sinners and the revival of spiritual life among
Christians, had testified that the message was of
Heaven. And though the believers could not explain
their disappointment, they felt assured that God had led
them in their past experience.
“Interwoven with prophecies which they had regarded as applying to the time of the second advent
was instruction specially adapted to their state of
uncertainty and suspense, and encouraging them to
wait patiently in the faith that what was now dark to
their understanding would in due time be made plain.
“Among these prophecies was that of Habakkuk
2:1-4: ‘I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon
the tower, and will watch to see what He will say unto
me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved. And
the Lord answered me, and said, Write the vision, and
make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth
it. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the
end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait
for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.
Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in
him: but the just shall live by his faith.’
“As early as 1842 the direction given in this
prophecy to ‘write the vision, and make it plain upon
tables, that he may run that readeth it,’ had suggested
to Charles Fitch the preparation of a prophetic chart to
illustrate the visions of Daniel and the Revelation. The
publication of this chart was regarded as a fulfillment
of the command given by Habakkuk. No one, however, then noticed that an apparent delay in the accomplishment of the vision—a tarrying time—is
presented in the same prophecy. After the disappointment, this scripture appeared very significant:
‘The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end
it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it;
because it will surely come, it will not tarry.... The just
shall live by his faith.’
“A portion of Ezekiel’s prophecy also was a
source of strength and comfort to believers: ‘The word
of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, what is
that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying,

303

GEMS FROM DANIEL
The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth? Tell
them therefore, Thus saith the Lord God.... The days
are at hand, and the effect of every vision.... I will
speak, and the word that I shall speak shall come to
pass; it shall be no more prolonged.’ ‘They of the
house of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many
days to come, and he prophesieth of the times that are
far off. Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
God; There shall none of My words be prolonged
any more, but the word which I have spoken shall
be done.’ Ezekiel 12:21-25,27,28.
“The waiting ones rejoiced, believing that He
who knows the end from the beginning had looked
down through the ages and, foreseeing their disappointment, had given them words of courage and hope.
Had it not been for such portions of Scripture, admonishing them to wait with patience and to hold
fast their confidence in God’s word, their faith
would have failed in that trying hour.
“The parable of the ten virgins of Matthew 25 also illustrates the experience of the Adventist people.
…The coming of Christ, as announced by the first
angel’s message, was understood to be represented
by the coming of the bridegroom. The widespread
reformation under the proclamation of His soon coming, answered to the going forth of the virgins. In this
parable, as in that of Matthew 24, two classes are represented. All had taken their lamps, the Bible, and by
its light had gone forth to meet the Bridegroom. But
while ‘they that were foolish took their lamps, and took
no oil with them,’ ‘the wise took oil in their vessels
with their lamps.’ The latter class had received the
grace of God, the regenerating, enlightening power of
the Holy Spirit, which renders His word a lamp to the
feet and a light to the path. In the fear of God they had
studied the Scriptures to learn the truth, and had earnestly sought for purity of heart and life. These had a
personal experience, a faith in God and in His word,
which could not be overthrown by disappointment and
delay. Others ‘took their lamps, and took no oil with
them.’ They had moved from impulse. Their fears had
been excited by the solemn message, but they had depended upon the faith of their brethren, satisfied with
the flickering light of good emotions, without a thorough understanding of the truth or a genuine work of
grace in the heart. These had gone forth to meet the
Lord, full of hope in the prospect of immediate reward;
but they were not prepared for delay and disappointment. When trials came, their faith failed, and
their lights burned dim.
“‘While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.’ By the tarrying of the bridegroom
is represented the passing of the time when the Lord
was expected, the disappointment, and the seeming
delay. In this time of uncertainty, the interest of the
superficial and halfhearted soon began to waver, and
their efforts to relax; but those whose faith was based
on a personal knowledge of the Bible had a rock beneath their feet, which the waves of disappointment

could not wash away. ‘They all slumbered and slept;’
one class in unconcern and abandonment of their faith,
the other class patiently waiting till clearer light
should be given. Yet in the night of trial the latter
seemed to lose, to some extent, their zeal and devotion.
The halfhearted and superficial could no longer lean
upon the faith of their brethren. Each must stand or fall
for himself.” Great Controversy, 391-395.

The 1843 Prophecy Chart
More Light Comes—The Midnight Cry.—
“ ‘While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry
made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to
meet him. Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed
their lamps.’ Matthew 25:5-7. In the summer of 1844,
midway between the time when it had been first
thought that the 2300 days would end, and the autumn of the same year, to which it was afterward
found that they extended, the message was proclaimed
in the very words of Scripture: ‘Behold, the Bridegroom cometh!’
“That which led to this movement was the discovery that the decree of Artaxerxes for the restoration of Jerusalem, which formed the starting point
for the period of the 2300 days, went into effect in
the autumn of the year 457 BC, and not at the beginning of the year, as had been formerly believed.
Reckoning from the autumn of 457, the 2300 years
terminate in the autumn of 1844.

304

DANIEL 8
“Arguments drawn from the Old Testament types
also pointed to the autumn as the time when the event
represented by the ‘cleansing of the sanctuary’ must
take place. This was made very clear as attention was
given to the manner in which the types relating to the
first advent of Christ had been fulfilled.
“The slaying of the Passover lamb was a shadow
of the death of Christ. Says Paul: ‘Christ our Passover
is sacrificed for us.’ 1 Corinthians 5:7. The sheaf of
first fruits, which at the time of the Passover was
waved before the Lord, was typical of the resurrection
of Christ. Paul says, in speaking of the resurrection of
the Lord and of all His people: ‘Christ the first fruits;
afterward they that are Christ's at His coming.’ 1 Corinthians 15:23. Like the wave sheaf, which was the
first ripe grain gathered before the harvest, Christ is the
first fruits of that immortal harvest of redeemed ones
that at the future resurrection shall be gathered into the
garner of God.
“These types were fulfilled, not only as to the
event, but as to the time. On the fourteenth day of the
first Jewish month, the very day and month on which
for fifteen long centuries the Passover lamb had been
slain, Christ, having eaten the Passover with His disciples, instituted that feast which was to commemorate
His own death as ‘the Lamb of God, which taketh away
the sin of the world.’ That same night He was taken by
wicked hands to be crucified and slain. And as the
antitype of the wave sheaf our Lord was raised from
the dead on the third day, ‘the first fruits of them that
slept,’ a sample of all the resurrected just, whose ‘vile
body’ shall be changed, and ‘fashioned like unto His
glorious body.’ Verse 20; Philippians 3:21.
“In like manner the types which relate to the second advent must be fulfilled at the time pointed out
in the symbolic service. Under the Mosaic system the
cleansing of the sanctuary, or the great Day of Atonement, occurred on the tenth day of the seventh Jewish
month (Leviticus 16:29-34), when the high priest, having made an atonement for all Israel, and thus removed
their sins from the sanctuary, came forth and blessed
the people. So it was believed that Christ, our great
High Priest, would appear to purify the earth by the
destruction of sin and sinners, and to bless His waiting
people with immortality. The tenth day of the seventh month, the great Day of Atonement, the time of
the cleansing of the sanctuary, which in the year
1844 fell upon the twenty-second of October, was
regarded as the time of the Lord’s coming. This was
in harmony with the proofs already presented that the
2300 days would terminate in the autumn, and the conclusion seemed irresistible.
“In the parable of Matthew 25 the time of waiting
and slumber is followed by the coming of the bridegroom. This was in accordance with the arguments
just presented, both from prophecy and from the types.
They carried strong conviction of their truthfulness;
and the ‘midnight cry’ was heralded by thousands of
believers.

“Like a tidal wave the movement swept over
the land. From city to city, from village to village,
and into remote country places it went, until the
waiting people of God were fully aroused. Fanaticism disappeared before this proclamation like early
frost before the rising sun. Believers saw their doubt
and perplexity removed, and hope and courage animated their hearts. The work was free from those extremes
which are ever manifested when there is human excitement without the controlling influence of the word
and Spirit of God. It was similar in character to those
seasons of humiliation and returning unto the Lord
which among ancient Israel followed messages of reproof from His servants. It bore the characteristics that
mark the work of God in every age. There was little
ecstatic joy, but rather deep searching of heart, confession of sin, and forsaking of the world. A preparation to meet the Lord was the burden of agonizing
spirits. There was persevering prayer and unreserved consecration to God.
“Said Miller in describing that work: ‘There is no
great expression of joy: that is, as it were, suppressed
for a future occasion, when all heaven and earth will
rejoice together with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
There is no shouting: that, too, is reserved for the shout
from heaven. The singers are silent: they are waiting to
join the angelic hosts, the choir from heaven.... There is
no clashing of sentiments: all are of one heart and of
one mind.’—Bliss, pages 270,271.
“Another who participated in the movement testified: ‘It produced everywhere the most deep searching
of heart and humiliation of soul before the God of high
heaven. It caused a weaning of affections from the
things of this world, a healing of controversies and
animosities, a confession of wrongs, a breaking down
before God, and penitent, brokenhearted supplications
to Him for pardon and acceptance. It caused selfabasement and prostration of soul, such as we never
before witnessed. As God by Joel commanded, when
the great day of God should be at hand, it produced a
rending of hearts and not of garments, and a turning
unto the Lord with fasting, and weeping, and mourning. As God said by Zechariah, a spirit of grace and
supplication was poured out upon His children; they
looked to Him whom they had pierced, there was a
great mourning in the land, ...and those who were looking for the Lord afflicted their souls before Him.’—
Bliss, in Advent Shield and Review, vol. I, p.271 (January, 1845).
“Of all the great religious movements since the
days of the apostles, none have been more free from
human imperfection and the wiles of Satan than
was that of the autumn of 1844. Even now, after the
lapse of many years, all who shared in that movement
and who have stood firm upon the platform of truth
still feel the holy influence of that blessed work and
bear witness that it was of God.” Great Controversy,
399-401.

305

GEMS FROM DANIEL
1844. To deny that the days ended at that time was to
involve the whole question in confusion, and to renounce positions which had been established by unmistakable fulfillments of prophecy.
“But God had led His people in the great advent
movement; His power and glory had attended the work,
and He would not permit it to end in darkness and disappointment, to be reproached as a false and fanatical
excitement. He would not leave His word involved in
doubt and uncertainty.” Great Controversy, 409-410.

The Great Disappointment.-“The scripture which above all others had been
both the foundation and the central pillar of the
advent faith was the declaration: ‘Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.’ Daniel 8:14. These had been familiar words to all believers in the Lord’s soon coming.
By the lips of thousands was this prophecy repeated as
the watchword of their faith. All felt that upon the
events therein foretold depended their brightest expectations and most cherished hopes. These prophetic
days had been shown to terminate in the autumn of
1844. In common with the rest of the Christian world,
Adventists then held that the earth, or some portion of
it, was the sanctuary. They understood that the cleansing of the sanctuary was the purification of the earth by
the fires of the last great day, and that this would take
place at the second advent. Hence the conclusion that
Christ would return to the earth in 1844.
“But the appointed time had passed, and the
Lord had not appeared. The believers knew that
God’s word could not fail; their interpretation of the
prophecy must be at fault; but where was the mistake? Many rashly cut the knot of difficulty by denying that the 2300 days ended in 1844. No reason could
be given for this except that Christ had not come at the
time they expected Him. They argued that if the prophetic days had ended in 1844, Christ would then have
returned to cleanse the sanctuary by the purification of
the earth by fire; and that since He had not come, the
days could not have ended.
“To accept this conclusion was to renounce the
former reckoning of the prophetic periods. The 2300
days had been found to begin when the commandment
of Artaxerxes for the restoration and building of Jerusalem went into effect, in the autumn of 457 BC. Taking this as the starting point, there was perfect harmony
in the application of all the events foretold in the explanation of that period in Daniel 9:25-27. Sixty-nine
weeks, the first 483 of the 2300 years, were to reach to
the Messiah, the Anointed One; and Christ’s baptism
and anointing by the Holy Spirit, AD 27, exactly fulfilled the specification. In the midst of the seventieth
week, Messiah was to be cut off. Three and a half
years after His baptism, Christ was crucified, in the
spring of AD 31. The seventy weeks, or 490 years,
were to pertain especially to the Jews. At the expiration of this period the nation sealed its rejection of
Christ by the persecution of His disciples, and the
apostles turned to the Gentiles, AD 34. The first 490
years of the 2300 having then ended, 1810 years would
remain. From AD 34, 1810 years extend to 1844.
‘Then,’ said the angel, ‘shall the sanctuary be
cleansed.’ All the preceding specifications of the
prophecy had been unquestionably fulfilled at the
time appointed.
“With this reckoning, all was clear and harmonious, except that it was not seen that any event answering to the cleansing of the sanctuary had taken place in

“I was shown the grievous disappointment of
the people of God that they did not see Jesus at the
expected time. They knew not why their Saviour did
not come; for they could see no evidence that prophetic
time had not ended. Said the angel, ‘Has God’s word
failed? Has God failed to fulfill His promises? No; He
has fulfilled all that He promised. Jesus has risen up
and shut the door of the holy place of the heavenly
sanctuary and has opened a door into the most holy
place and entered in to cleanse the sanctuary. All
who wait patiently shall understand the mystery.
Man has erred; but there has been no failure on the part
of God. All was accomplished that God promised;
but man erroneously believed the earth to be the
sanctuary to be cleansed at the end of the prophetic
periods. It is man’s expectation, not the promise of
God, that has failed.’” Early Writings, 250,251.
Experience Parallel to Disciples’ Disappointment.—
“I was shown the disappointment of the disciples
as they came to the sepulcher and found not the body
of Jesus. Mary said, ‘They have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid Him.’ Angels
told the sorrowing disciples that their Lord had risen,
and would go before them into Galilee.
“In like manner I saw that Jesus regarded with the
deepest compassion the disappointed ones who had
waited for His coming; and He sent His angels to direct
their minds that they might follow Him where He was.
He showed them that this earth is not the sanctuary, but
that He must enter the most holy place of the heavenly
sanctuary to make an atonement for His people and to
receive the kingdom from His Father, and that He
would then return to the earth and take them to dwell
with Him forever. The disappointment of the first
disciples well represents the disappointment of
those who expected their Lord in 1844.
“I was carried back to the time when Christ rode
triumphantly into Jerusalem. The joyful disciples believed that He was then to take the kingdom and reign a
temporal prince. They followed their King with high
hopes. They cut down the beautiful palm branches,
and took off their outer garments, and with enthusiastic
zeal spread them in the way; and some went before,
and others followed, crying, ‘Hosanna to the Son of
David: Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
Lord; Hosanna in the highest.’ The excitement disturbed the Pharisees, and they wished Jesus to rebuke

306

DANIEL 8
His disciples. But He said unto them, ‘If these should
hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry
out.’ The prophecy of Zechariah 9:9 must be fulfilled;
yet the disciples were doomed to a bitter disappointment. In a few days they followed Jesus to Calvary, and beheld Him bleeding and mangled upon the
cruel cross. They witnessed His agonizing death and
laid Him in the tomb. Their hearts sank with grief;
their expectations were not realized in a single particular, and their hopes died with Jesus. But as He
arose from the dead and appeared to His sorrowing
disciples, their hopes revived. They had found Him
again.
“I saw that the disappointment of those who
believed in the coming of the Lord in 1844 was not
equal to the disappointment of the first disciples.
Prophecy was fulfilled in the first and second angels’
messages. They were given at the right time and accomplished the work which God designed to accomplish by them.” Early Writings, 244,245.

weeks, so Adventists were mistaken in regard to the
event to take place at the expiration of the 2300 days.
In both cases there was an acceptance of, or rather
an adherence to, popular errors that blinded the
mind to the truth. Both classes fulfilled the will of
God in delivering the message which He desired to
be given, and both, through their own misapprehension of their message, suffered disappointment.”
Great Controversy, 352,353.
Aftermath of the Great Disappointment.—
“Christ did not return as confidently expected.
Many abandoned the Advent movement altogether, and
many of those who left it derided those who still believed that god had been in the movement. Some of
those who stayed with the movement speculated that
the mistake that had been made lay in the calculations
and that the end of the 2,300 days was still in the future. These latter Advent believers constituted the major portion of the Millerites. They repeatedly set dates
for the Lord’s return, only to be repeatedly disappointed.
“A smaller group could find no fault with Snow’s
calculations and believed that something indeed had
happened on October 22, 1844. The larger portion of
this minority held that Christ had come ‘spiritually’ on
that day; these believers became known as ‘Spiritualizers.’ A small fragment of those who accepted
Snow’s Calculations, consisting of perhaps as few as
fifty individuals, came to understand that the sanctuary Christ was to cleanse at the end of the 2,300
days/years was located not on earth, but in heaven.
They believed that on October 22, 1844, He did indeed
begin the work of cleansing the heavenly sanctuary and
that when this work has been completed, He would
come the second time.
“In time these Adventists saw that Christ’s work
of cleansing the sanctuary involved a work of judgment
(Dan. 7:11) and the blotting out of the record of sins
confessed and forgiven (see Acts 3:19-21). They believed prophecy predicted the restoration of biblical
‘truth’ concerning Christ’s ‘continual [mediation]’ in
the heavenly sanctuary, which the little horn had ‘cast
down …to the ground’ (Dan. 8:11,12; cp. 12:11) and
replaced with the sacrifice of the Mass and a false sacerdotal system.” Mansell, OSOA, 76.

“The experience of the disciples who preached
the ‘gospel of the kingdom’ at the first advent of
Christ, had its counterpart in the experience of
those who proclaimed the message of His second
advent. As the disciples went out preaching, ‘The
time is fulfilled, the kingdom of God is at hand,’ so
Miller and his associates proclaimed that the longest
and last prophetic period brought to view in the Bible
was about to expire, that the judgment was at hand, and
the everlasting kingdom was to be ushered in. The
preaching of the disciples in regard to time was based
on the seventy weeks of Daniel 9. The message given
by Miller and his associates announced the termination
of the 2300 days of Daniel 8:14, of which the seventy
weeks form a part. The preaching of each was based
upon the fulfillment of a different portion of the
same great prophetic period.
“Like the first disciples, William Miller and his
associates did not, themselves, fully comprehend the
import of the message which they bore. Errors that had
been long established in the church prevented them
from arriving at a correct interpretation of an important
point in the prophecy. Therefore, though they proclaimed the message which God had committed to
them to be given to the world, yet through a misapprehension of its meaning they suffered disappointment.
“…Those who proclaimed this warning gave the
right message at the right time. But as the early disciples declared, ‘The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom
of God is at hand,’ based on the prophecy of Daniel 9,
while they failed to perceive that the death of the Messiah was foretold in the same scripture, so Miller and
his associates preached the message based on Daniel
8:14 and Revelation 14:7, and failed to see that there
were still other messages brought to view in Revelation
14, which were also to be given before the advent of
the Lord. As the disciples were mistaken in regard to
the kingdom to be set up at the end of the seventy

Disappointment Explained: Sanctuary Restored.—
“Though many abandoned their former reckoning
of the prophetic periods and denied the correctness of
the movement based thereon, others were unwilling to
renounce points of faith and experience that were sustained by the Scriptures and by the witness of the Spirit
of God. They believed that they had adopted sound
principles of interpretation in their study of the prophecies, and that it was their duty to hold fast the truths
already gained, and to continue the same course of Biblical research. With earnest prayer they reviewed their
position and studied the Scriptures to discover their

307

GEMS FROM DANIEL
mistake. As they could see no error in their reckoning of the prophetic periods, they were led to examine more closely the subject of the sanctuary.
“In their investigation they learned that there is
no Scripture evidence sustaining the popular view
that the earth is the sanctuary; but they found in the
Bible a full explanation of the subject of the sanctuary,
its nature, location, and services; the testimony of the
sacred writers being so clear and ample as to place the
matter beyond all question. The apostle Paul, in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, says: ‘Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a
worldly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made;
the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table,
and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary. And
after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the
holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark
of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod
that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it
the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercy seat.’
Hebrews 9:1-5.
“The sanctuary to which Paul here refers was the
tabernacle built by Moses at the command of God as
the earthly dwelling place of the Most High. ‘Let them
make Me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them’
(Exodus 25:8), was the direction given to Moses while
in the mount with God….
“Turning again to the book of Hebrews, the seekers for truth found that the existence of a second, or
new-covenant sanctuary, was implied in the words of
Paul already quoted: ‘Then verily the first covenant
had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly
sanctuary.’ And the use of the word ‘also’ intimates
that Paul has before made mention of this sanctuary.
Turning back to the beginning of the previous chapter,
they read: ‘Now of the things which we have spoken
this is the sum: We have such an High Priest, who is
set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the
heavens; a Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true
tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.’
Hebrews 8:1, 2.

“Here is revealed the sanctuary of the new covenant. The sanctuary of the first covenant was pitched
by man, built by Moses; this is pitched by the Lord, not
by man. In that sanctuary the earthly priests performed
their service; in this, Christ, our great High Priest, ministers at God’s right hand. One sanctuary was on earth,
the other is in heaven.
“Further, the tabernacle built by Moses was made
after a pattern. The Lord directed him: ‘According to
all that I show thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even
so shall ye make it.’ And again the charge was given,
‘Look that thou make them after their pattern, which
was showed thee in the mount.’ Exodus 25:9, 40. And
Paul says that the first tabernacle ‘was a figure for the
time then present, in which were offered both gifts and
sacrifices;’ that its holy places were ‘patterns of
things in the heavens;’ that the priests who offered
gifts according to the law served ‘unto the example
and shadow of heavenly things,’ and that ‘Christ is
not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.’ Hebrews 9:9,23; 8:5; 9:24.
“The sanctuary in heaven, in which Jesus ministers in our behalf, is the great original, of which the
sanctuary built by Moses was a copy. God placed His
Spirit upon the builders of the earthly sanctuary. The
artistic skill displayed in its construction was a manifestation of divine wisdom. The walls had the appearance of massive gold, reflecting in every direction the
light of the seven lamps of the golden candlestick. The
table of shewbread and the altar of incense glittered
like burnished gold. The gorgeous curtain which
formed the ceiling, inwrought with figures of angels in
blue and purple and scarlet, added to the beauty of the
scene. And beyond the second veil was the holy Shekinah, the visible manifestation of God’s glory, before
which none but the high priest could enter and live.

308

DANIEL 8
“The matchless splendor of the earthly tabernacle
reflected to human vision the glories of that heavenly
temple where Christ our forerunner ministers for us
before the throne of God. The abiding place of the
King of kings, where thousand thousands minister unto
Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before
Him (Daniel 7:10); that temple, filled with the glory of
the eternal throne, where seraphim, its shining guardians, veil their faces in adoration, could find, in the most
magnificent structure ever reared by human hands, but
a faint reflection of its vastness and glory. Yet important truths concerning the heavenly sanctuary and
the great work there carried forward for man’s redemption were taught by the earthly sanctuary and its services.
“The holy places of the sanctuary in heaven are
represented by the two apartments in the sanctuary on
earth. As in vision the apostle John was granted a view
of the temple of God in heaven, he beheld there ‘seven
lamps of fire burning before the throne.’ Revelation
4:5. He saw an angel ‘having a golden censer; and
there was given unto him much incense, that he should
offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden
altar which was before the throne.’ Revelation 8:3.
Here the prophet was permitted to behold the first
apartment of the sanctuary in heaven; and he saw
there the ‘seven lamps of fire’ and ‘the golden altar,’ represented by the golden candlestick and the
altar of incense in the sanctuary on earth. Again,
‘the temple of God was opened’ (Revelation 11:19),
and he looked within the inner veil, upon the holy of
holies. Here he beheld ‘the ark of His testament,’ represented by the sacred chest constructed by Moses to
contain the law of God.
“Thus those who were studying the subject found
indisputable proof of the existence of a sanctuary in
heaven. Moses made the earthly sanctuary after a pattern which was shown him. Paul teaches that that pattern was the true sanctuary which is in heaven. And
John testifies that he saw it in heaven.
“…As the prophecy of Daniel 8:14 is fulfilled in
this dispensation, the sanctuary to which it refers must
be the sanctuary of the new covenant. At the termination of the 2300 days, in 1844, there had been no sanctuary on earth for many centuries. Thus the prophecy,
‘Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then
shall the sanctuary be cleansed,’ unquestionably
points to the sanctuary in heaven.” Great Controversy, 411-415.

Jesus cannot yet come to earth. They must endure
greater trials for His sake. They must give up errors and traditions received from men and turn
wholly to God and His Word. They must be purified,
made white, and tried. Those who endure that bitter
trial will obtain an eternal victory.’
“Jesus did not come to the earth as the waiting,
joyful company expected, to cleanse the sanctuary by
purifying the earth by fire. I saw that they were correct
in their reckoning of the prophetic periods; prophetic
time closed in 1844, and Jesus entered the most holy
place to cleanse the sanctuary at the ending of the
days. Their mistake consisted in not understanding
what the sanctuary was and the nature of its cleansing. As I looked again at the waiting, disappointed
company, they appeared sad. They carefully examined
the evidences of their faith and followed down through
the reckoning of the prophetic periods, but could discover no mistake. The time had been fulfilled, but
where was their Saviour? They had lost Him.
“I was shown the disappointment of the disciples
as they came to the sepulcher and found not the body
of Jesus. Mary said, ‘They have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid Him.’ Angels
told the sorrowing disciples that their Lord had risen,
and would go before them into Galilee.
“In like manner I saw that Jesus regarded with the
deepest compassion the disappointed ones who had
waited for His coming; and He sent His angels to direct their minds that they might follow Him where
He was. He showed them that this earth is not the
sanctuary, but that He must enter the most holy
place of the heavenly sanctuary to make an atonement for His people and to receive the kingdom
from His Father, and that He would then return to
the earth and take them to dwell with Him forever.
The disappointment of the first disciples well represents the disappointment of those who expected their
Lord in 1844.” Early Writings, 243,244.
The Sanctuary Cleansed.—
“But the most important question remains to
be answered: What is the cleansing of the sanctuary? That there was such a service in connection with
the earthly sanctuary is stated in the Old Testament
Scriptures. But can there be anything in heaven to
be cleansed? In Hebrews 9 the cleansing of both the
earthly and the heavenly sanctuary is plainly
taught. ‘Almost all things are by the law purged with
blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission.
It was therefore necessary that the patterns of
things in the heavens should be purified with these
[the blood of animals]; but the heavenly things
themselves with better sacrifices than these’ (Hebrews 9:22, 23), even the precious blood of Christ.
“The cleansing, both in the typical and in the real
service, must be accomplished with blood: in the former, with the blood of animals; in the latter, with the
blood of Christ. Paul states, as the reason why this

“All who cherished the light shed upon them were
gazing upward with intense interest, and Jesus looked
upon them with sweet approbation. They expected
Him to come and longed for His appearing. They
did not cast one lingering look to earth. But again a
cloud settled upon the waiting ones, and I saw them
turn their weary eyes downward. I inquired the
cause of this change. Said my accompanying angel,
‘They are again disappointed in their expectations.

309

GEMS FROM DANIEL
cleansing must be performed with blood, that without
shedding of blood is no remission. Remission, or putting away of sin, is the work to be accomplished. But
how could there be sin connected with the sanctuary,
either in heaven or upon the earth? This may be
learned by reference to the symbolic service; for the
priests who officiated on earth, served ‘unto the
example and shadow of heavenly things.’ Heb. 8:5.
“The ministration of the earthly sanctuary consisted of two divisions; the priests ministered daily in
the holy place, while once a year the high priest performed a special work of atonement in the most holy,
for the cleansing of the sanctuary. Day by day the
repentant sinner brought his offering to the door of
the tabernacle and, placing his hand upon the victim’s head, confessed his sins, thus in figure transferring them from himself to the innocent sacrifice.
The animal was then slain. ‘Without shedding of
blood," says the apostle, there is no remission of sin.
‘The life of the flesh is in the blood.’ Leviticus 17:11.
The broken law of God demanded the life of the transgressor. The blood, representing the forfeited life of
the sinner, whose guilt the victim bore, was carried
by the priest into the holy place and sprinkled before the veil, behind which was the ark containing
the law that the sinner had transgressed. By this
ceremony the sin was, through the blood, transferred in figure to the sanctuary. In some cases the
blood was not taken into the holy place; but the flesh
was then to be eaten by the priest, as Moses directed
the sons of Aaron, saying: ‘God hath given it you to
bear the iniquity of the congregation.’ Leviticus 10:17.
Both ceremonies alike symbolized the transfer of the
sin from the penitent to the sanctuary.
“Such was the work that went on, day by day,
throughout the year. The sins of Israel were thus transferred to the sanctuary, and a special work became
necessary for their removal. God commanded that an
atonement be made for each of the sacred apartments.
‘He shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and
because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so
shall he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that
remaineth among them in the midst of their uncleanness.’ An atonement was also to be made for the altar,
to ‘cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the
children of Israel.’ Leviticus 16:16, 19.
“Once a year, on the great Day of Atonement,
the priest entered the most holy place for the cleansing of the sanctuary. The work there performed completed the yearly round of ministration. On the Day of
Atonement two kids of the goats were brought to the
door of the tabernacle, and lots were cast upon them,
‘one lot for the Lord, and the other lot for the scapegoat.’ Verse 8. The goat upon which fell the lot for the
Lord was to be slain as a sin offering for the people.
And the priest was to bring his blood within the veil
and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat and before the mercy seat. The blood was also to be sprinkled upon the

altar of incense that was before the veil.
“ ‘And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the
head of the live goat, and confess over him all the
iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon
the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the
hand of a fit man into the wilderness: and the goat
shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not
inhabited.’ Verses 21, 22. The scapegoat came no
more into the camp of Israel, and the man who led him
away was required to wash himself and his clothing
with water before returning to the camp.
“The whole ceremony was designed to impress
the Israelites with the holiness of God and His abhorrence of sin; and, further, to show them that they could
not come in contact with sin without becoming polluted. Every man was required to afflict his soul while
this work of atonement was going forward. All business was to be laid aside, and the whole congregation
of Israel were to spend the day in solemn humiliation
before God, with prayer, fasting, and deep searching of
heart.
“Important truths concerning the atonement are
taught by the typical service. A substitute was accepted in the sinner’s stead; but the sin was not canceled by
the blood of the victim. A means was thus provided
by which it was transferred to the sanctuary. By the
offering of blood the sinner acknowledged the authority of the law, confessed his guilt in transgression, and
expressed his desire for pardon through faith in a Redeemer to come; but he was not yet entirely released
from the condemnation of the law. On the Day of
Atonement the high priest, having taken an offering
from the congregation, went into the most holy place
with the blood of this offering, and sprinkled it upon the mercy seat, directly over the law, to make
satisfaction for its claims. Then, in his character of
mediator, he took the sins upon himself and bore
them from the sanctuary. Placing his hands upon the
head of the scapegoat, he confessed over him all
these sins, thus in figure transferring them from
himself to the goat. The goat then bore them away,
and they were regarded as forever separated from the
people.
“Such was the service performed ‘unto the example and shadow of heavenly things.’ And what was
done in type in the ministration of the earthly sanctuary
is done in reality in the ministration of the heavenly
sanctuary. After His ascension our Saviour began His
work as our high priest. Says Paul: ‘Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to
appear in the presence of God for us.’ Hebrews 9:24.
“The ministration of the priest throughout the
year in the first apartment of the sanctuary, ‘within the
veil’ which formed the door and separated the holy
place from the outer court, represents the work of ministration upon which Christ entered at His ascension. It
was the work of the priest in the daily ministration to

310

DANIEL 8
present before God the blood of the sin offering, also
the incense which ascended with the prayers of Israel.
So did Christ plead His blood before the Father in behalf of sinners, and present before Him also, with the
precious fragrance of His own righteousness, the prayers of penitent believers. Such was the work of ministration in the first apartment of the sanctuary in
heaven.
“Thither the faith of Christ’s disciples followed
Him as He ascended from their sight. Here their hopes
centered, ‘which hope we have,’ said Paul, ‘as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which
entereth into that within the veil; whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest
forever.’ ‘Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but
by His own blood He entered in once into the holy
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.’ Hebrews 6:19, 20; 9:12.
“For eighteen centuries this work of ministration continued in the first apartment of the sanctuary. The blood of Christ, pleaded in behalf of penitent believers, secured their pardon and acceptance
with the Father, yet their sins still remained upon
the books of record. As in the typical service there
was a work of atonement at the close of the year, so
before Christ’s work for the redemption of men is
completed there is a work of atonement for the removal
of sin from the sanctuary. This is the service which
began when the 2300 days ended. At that time, as
foretold by Daniel the prophet, our High Priest entered the most holy, to perform the last division of
His solemn work—to cleanse the sanctuary.
“As anciently the sins of the people were by faith
placed upon the sin offering and through its blood
transferred, in figure, to the earthly sanctuary, so in the
new covenant the sins of the repentant are by faith
placed upon Christ and transferred, in fact, to the
heavenly sanctuary. And as the typical cleansing of
the earthly was accomplished by the removal of the
sins by which it had been polluted, so the actual cleansing of the heavenly is to be accomplished by the removal, or blotting out, of the sins which are there recorded. But before this can be accomplished, there
must be an examination of the books of record to
determine who, through repentance of sin and faith
in Christ, are entitled to the benefits of His atonement. The cleansing of the sanctuary therefore involves a work of investigation—a work of judgment.
This work must be performed prior to the coming of
Christ to redeem His people; for when He comes, His
reward is with Him to give to every man according to
his works. Rev. 22:12.
“Thus those who followed in the light of the
prophetic word saw that, instead of coming to the
earth at the termination of the 2300 days in 1844,
Christ then entered the most holy place of the heavenly sanctuary to perform the closing work of
atonement preparatory to His coming.
“It was seen, also, that while the sin offering

pointed to Christ as a sacrifice, and the high priest represented Christ as a mediator, the scapegoat typified
Satan, the author of sin, upon whom the sins of the
truly penitent will finally be placed. When the high
priest, by virtue of the blood of the sin offering, removed the sins from the sanctuary, he placed them
upon the scapegoat. When Christ, by virtue of His own
blood, removes the sins of His people from the heavenly sanctuary at the close of His ministration, He will
place them upon Satan, who, in the execution of the
judgment, must bear the final penalty. The scapegoat
was sent away into a land not inhabited, never to come
again into the congregation of Israel. So will Satan be
forever banished from the presence of God and His
people, and he will be blotted from existence in the
final destruction of sin and sinners.
“The subject of the sanctuary was the key
which unlocked the mystery of the disappointment
of 1844. It opened to view a complete system of
truth, connected and harmonious, showing that
God’s hand had directed the great advent movement and revealing present duty as it brought to
light the position and work of His people.
“Both the prophecy of Daniel 8:14, ‘Unto two
thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed,’ and the first angel’s message, ‘Fear
God, and give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment is come,’ pointed to Christ’s ministration in
the most holy place, to the investigative judgment,
and not to the coming of Christ for the redemption of
His people and the destruction of the wicked. The
mistake had not been in the reckoning of the prophetic periods, but in the event to take place at the
end of the 2300 days. Through this error the believers
had suffered disappointment, yet all that was foretold
by the prophecy, and all that they had any Scripture
warrant to expect, had been accomplished. At the very
time when they were lamenting the failure of their
hopes, the event had taken place which was foretold by
the message, and which must be fulfilled before the
Lord could appear to give reward to His servants.
“Christ had come, not to the earth, as they expected, but, as foreshadowed in the type, to the most
holy place of the temple of God in heaven. He is
represented by the prophet Daniel as coming at this
time to the Ancient of Days: ‘I saw in the night visions,
and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came’—not to the earth, but—
‘to the Ancient of Days, and they brought Him near
before Him.’ Daniel 7:13.
“This coming is foretold also by the prophet Malachi: ‘The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come
to His temple, even the Messenger of the covenant,
whom ye delight in: behold, He shall come, saith the
Lord of hosts.’ Malachi 3:1. The coming of the Lord to
His temple was sudden, unexpected, to His people.
They were not looking for Him there. They expected
Him to come to earth, ‘in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the

311

GEMS FROM DANIEL
gospel.’ 2 Thessalonians 1:8.”
417-424.

Great Controversy,

used our time, our pen, our voice, our money, our influence? What have we done for Christ, in the person
of the poor, the afflicted, the orphan, or the widow?
God has made us the depositaries of His holy word;
what have we done with the light and truth given us to
make men wise unto salvation? No value is attached to
a mere profession of faith in Christ; only the love
which is shown by works is counted genuine. Yet it is
love alone which in the sight of Heaven makes any
act of value. Whatever is done from love, however
small it may appear in the estimation of men, is accepted and rewarded of God.
“The hidden selfishness of men stands revealed in
the books of heaven. There is the record of unfulfilled
duties to their fellow men, of forgetfulness of the Saviour’s claims. There they will see how often were given to Satan the time, thought, and strength that belonged to Christ. Sad is the record which angels bear
to heaven. Intelligent beings, professed followers of
Christ, are absorbed in the acquirement of worldly possessions or the enjoyment of earthly pleasures. Money,
time, and strength are sacrificed for display and selfindulgence; but few are the moments devoted to
prayer, to the searching of the Scriptures, to humiliation of soul and confession of sin.
“Satan invents unnumbered schemes to occupy
our minds, that they may not dwell upon the very work
with which we ought to be best acquainted. The archdeceiver hates the great truths that bring to view an
atoning sacrifice and an all-powerful mediator. He
knows that with him everything depends on his diverting minds from Jesus and His truth.” Great
Controversy, 486-488.

The Books Were Opened in the Judgment.—
“At the time appointed for the judgment—the
close of the 2300 days, in 1844—began the work of
investigation and blotting out of sins. All who have
ever taken upon themselves the name of Christ must
pass its searching scrutiny. Both the living and the
dead are to be judged ‘out of those things which were
written in the books, according to their works.’
“Sins that have not been repented of and forsaken
will not be pardoned and blotted out of the books of
record, but will stand to witness against the sinner in
the day of God. He may have committed his evil deeds
in the light of day or in the darkness of night; but they
were open and manifest before Him with whom we
have to do. Angels of God witnessed each sin and
registered it in the unerring records. Sin may be
concealed, denied, covered up from father, mother,
wife, children, and associates; no one but the guilty
actors may cherish the least suspicion of the wrong; but
it is laid bare before the intelligences of heaven. The
darkness of the darkest night, the secrecy of all deceptive arts, is not sufficient to veil one thought from the
knowledge of the Eternal. God has an exact record of
every unjust account and every unfair dealing. He
is not deceived by appearances of piety. He makes no
mistakes in His estimation of character. Men may be
deceived by those who are corrupt in heart, but God
pierces all disguises and reads the inner life.
“How solemn is the thought! Day after day, passing into eternity, bears its burden of records for the
books of heaven. Words once spoken, deeds once
done, can never be recalled. Angels have registered
both the good and the evil. The mightiest conqueror
upon the earth cannot call back the record of even a
single day. Our acts, our words, even our most secret motives, all have their weight in deciding our
destiny for weal or woe. Though they may be forgotten by us, they will bear their testimony to justify or
condemn.
“As the features of the countenance are reproduced with unerring accuracy on the polished plate of
the artist, so the character is faithfully delineated in the
books above. Yet how little solicitude is felt concerning that record which is to meet the gaze of heavenly
beings. Could the veil which separates the visible from
the invisible world be swept back, and the children of
men behold an angel recording every word and deed,
which they must meet again in the judgment, how
many words that are daily uttered would remain unspoken, how many deeds would remain undone.
“In the judgment the use made of every talent will
be scrutinized. How have we employed the capital lent
us of Heaven? Will the Lord at His coming receive His
own with usury? Have we improved the powers entrusted us, in hand and heart and brain, to the glory
of God and the blessing of the world? How have we

A Period of Great Events.—
“The passing of the time in 1844 was a period
of great events, opening to our astonished eyes the
cleansing of the sanctuary transpiring in heaven,
and having decided relation to God’s people upon
the earth, [also] the first and second angels’ messages and the third, unfurling the banner on which was
inscribed, ‘The commandments of God and the
faith of Jesus.’ One of the landmarks under this
message was the temple of God, seen by His truthloving people in heaven, and the ark containing the
law of God. The light of the Sabbath of the fourth
commandment flashed its strong rays in the pathway of the transgressors of God’s law.” Counsels to
Writers & Editors , 30.
Our Duty At This Solemn Time.—
“Those who would share the benefits of the Saviour’s mediation should permit nothing to interfere
with their duty to perfect holiness in the fear of God.
The precious hours, instead of being given to pleasure,
to display, or to gain seeking, should be devoted to an
earnest, prayerful study of the word of truth. The subject of the sanctuary and the investigative judgment
should be clearly understood by the people of God.

312

DANIEL 8
All need a knowledge for themselves of the position
and work of their great High Priest. Otherwise it will
be impossible for them to exercise the faith which is
essential at this time or to occupy the position which
God designs them to fill. Every individual has a soul
to save or to lose. Each has a case pending at the bar of
God. Each must meet the great Judge face to face.
How important, then, that every mind contemplate
often the solemn scene when the judgment shall sit
and the books shall be opened, when, with Daniel,
every individual must stand in his lot, at the end of
the days.
“All who have received the light upon these subjects are to bear testimony of the great truths which
God has committed to them. The sanctuary in
heaven is the very center of Christ’s work in behalf
of men. It concerns every soul living upon the
earth. It opens to view the plan of redemption, bringing us down to the very close of time and revealing the
triumphant issue of the contest between righteousness
and sin. It is of the utmost importance that all should
thoroughly investigate these subjects and be able to
give an answer to everyone that asketh them a reason
of the hope that is in them.
“The intercession of Christ in man’s behalf in
the sanctuary above is as essential to the plan of
salvation as was His death upon the cross. By His
death He began that work which after His resurrection
He ascended to complete in heaven. We must by faith
enter within the veil, ‘whither the forerunner is for us
entered.’ Hebrews 6:20. There the light from the cross
of Calvary is reflected. There we may gain a clearer
insight into the mysteries of redemption. The salvation
of man is accomplished at an infinite expense to heaven; the sacrifice made is equal to the broadest demands
of the broken law of God. Jesus has opened the way to
the Father’s throne, and through His mediation the sincere desire of all who come to Him in faith may be
presented before God.
“‘He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but
whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.’ Proverbs 28:13. If those who hide and excuse
their faults could see how Satan exults over them, how
he taunts Christ and holy angels with their course, they
would make haste to confess their sins and to put them
away. Through defects in the character, Satan works to
gain control of the whole mind, and he knows that if
these defects are cherished, he will succeed. Therefore he is constantly seeking to deceive the followers
of Christ with his fatal sophistry that it is impossible
for them to overcome. But Jesus pleads in their behalf His wounded hands, His bruised body; and He
declares to all who would follow Him: ‘My grace is
sufficient for thee.’ 2 Corinthians 12:9. ‘Take My yoke
upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My
yoke is easy, and My burden is light.’ Matthew 11:29,
30. Let none, then, regard their defects as incurable. God will give faith and grace to overcome

them.
“We are now living in the great day of atonement. In the typical service, while the high priest was
making the atonement for Israel, all were required to
afflict their souls by repentance of sin and humiliation
before the Lord, lest they be cut off from among the
people. In like manner, all who would have their
names retained in the book of life should now, in the
few remaining days of their probation, afflict their
souls before God by sorrow for sin and true repentance. There must be deep, faithful searching of
heart. The light, frivolous spirit indulged by so many
professed Christians must be put away. There is earnest warfare before all who would subdue the evil
tendencies that strive for the mastery. The work of
preparation is an individual work. We are not saved in
groups. The purity and devotion of one will not offset
the want of these qualities in another. Though all nations are to pass in judgment before God, yet He will
examine the case of each individual with as close and
searching scrutiny as if there were not another being
upon the earth. Everyone must be tested and found
without spot or wrinkle or any such thing.
“Solemn are the scenes connected with the closing work of the atonement. Momentous are the interests involved therein. The judgment is now passing in
the sanctuary above. For many years this work has
been in progress. Soon—none know how soon--it
will pass to the cases of the living. In the awful
presence of God our lives are to come up in review.
At this time above all others it behooves every soul
to heed the Saviour’s admonition: ‘Watch and pray:
for ye know not when the time is.’ Mark 13:33. ‘If
therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as
a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come
upon thee.’ Revelation 3:3.
“When the work of the investigative judgment
closes, the destiny of all will have been decided for life
or death. Probation is ended a short time before the
appearing of the Lord in the clouds of heaven.
Christ in the Revelation, looking forward to that time,
declares: ‘He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and
he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is
righteous let him be righteous still: and he that is holy,
let him be holy still. And, behold, I come quickly;
and My reward is with Me, to give every man according as his work shall be.’ Revelation 22:11,12.
“The righteous and the wicked will still be living
upon the earth in their mortal state—men will be planting and building, eating and drinking, all unconscious
that the final, irrevocable decision has been pronounced in the sanctuary above. Before the Flood,
after Noah entered the ark, God shut him in and shut
the ungodly out; but for seven days the people, knowing not that their doom was fixed, continued their careless, pleasure-loving life and mocked the warnings of
impending judgment. ‘So,’ says the Saviour, ‘shall
also the coming of the Son of man be.’ Mt. 24:39. Silently, unnoticed as the midnight thief, will come the

313

GEMS FROM DANIEL
decisive hour which marks the fixing of every man’s
destiny, the final withdrawal of mercy’s offer to guilty
men.
“ ‘Watch ye therefore:... lest coming suddenly He
find you sleeping.’ Mark 13:35, 36. Perilous is the
condition of those who, growing weary of their watch,
turn to the attractions of the world. While the man
of business is absorbed in the pursuit of gain, while the
pleasure lover is seeking indulgence, while the daughter of fashion is arranging her adornments—it may be
in that hour the Judge of all the earth will pronounce
the sentence: ‘Thou art weighed in the balances, and
art found wanting.’ Daniel 5:27.” Great Controversy,
488-491.

Daniel understand the vision. It was addressed to Gabriel, a name that signifies ‘the strength of God,’ or
‘man of God.’ He continues his instruction to Daniel
in chapter 9. Centuries later this same angel was commissioned to announce the birth of John the Baptist to
his father Zacharias, and that of the Messiah to the virgin Mary. (Luke 1: 26.) To Zacharias, he introduced
himself with these words: ‘I am Gabriel, that stand in
the presence of God.’ Luke 1: 19. From this it appears that Gabriel was here addressed by one still
higher in rank, who had power to command and
control his work. This one was probably none other
than the Archangel, Michael, or Christ.” Smith, DR,
187.

“The work which Christ is doing in the sanctuary
above will engage the thoughts, and be the burden of
the conversation, because by faith he has entered into
the sanctuary. He is on earth, but his sympathies are in
harmony with the work that Christ is doing in heaven.
Christ is cleansing the heavenly sanctuary from the sins
of the people, and it is the work of all who are laborers together with God to be cleansing the sanctuary
of the soul from everything that is offensive to him.
Everything like evil surmising, envy, jealousy, enmity,
and hatred, will be put away; for such things grieve the
Holy Spirit of God, and put Christ to an open shame.
Love of self will not exist, nor will any engage in this
work be puffed up. The example of Christ’s life, the
consistency of His character, will make his influence
far-reaching. He will be a living epistle, known and
read of all men.” Paulson Collection, 53.

“Daniel’s second vision greatly puzzled him, especially that part which related to the career of the little
horn. ..Four different times Daniel asks for a further explanation of the vision concerning the little
horn.” Bunch, BOD, 127.
Between the Banks of the Ulai.—
“Ulai represents the river of time, which has its
source in eternity. Time with which we have to deal is
but an infinitely small fraction of eternity, as a drop in
the bucket; as the stream to the ocean. But on the
banks of this river all nations are located; there they
rise and there they fall. Christ presides over the waters, and his voice was heard from between the
banks of the river calling to Gabriel, ‘Make this
man to understand the vision.’ Nation may contend
with nation on its banks, but the ‘Holy Watcher’ is ever
near. This river contains the water of life for all who
will drink, but all nations have built river walls exceeding the height of those of Babylon, to keep men away
from the waters and to break the influence of Him who
calls from between the banks.” Haskell, SDP. 117.

DANIEL 8:15,16
And it came to pass, when I, even I
Daniel, had seen the vision, and sought for
the meaning, then, behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man.
And I heard a man’s voice between the
banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.

Gabriel.—
“Gabriel is the angel of prophecy, the messenger
who bears the light of truth to men. To the father of
John the Baptist he said, ‘I am Gabriel, that stand in the
presence of God.’ To Daniel he said, ‘There is none
that holdeth with me in these things but Michael,
your prince,’ Christ himself. Gabriel is then the personal attendant of the Son of God, holding the position
as light bearer which Satan occupied before his fall. It
was Gabriel who announced the birth of the Saviour to
Mary in Nazareth. It was he who led the angel choir on
the plains of Bethlehem; he with others, as the star,
guided the wise men to the Babe of Bethlehem.”
Haskell, SDP, 115,116.

When I Had Seen the Vision.—
“The Hebrew word for ‘vision’ is chazon, which
refers to the entire vision of ch. 8:1-14. See comments
on vs. 26a and ch. 9:23 for more information.” PJ
Daniel Sought For the Meaning.—
“We now enter upon the interpretation of the vision. We have already mentioned Daniel’s longing to
understand these things. He sought for the meaning.
Immediately there stood before the prophet one who
had the appearance of a man. Daniel heard a man’s
voice, that is, the voice of an angel as of a man speaking. The commandment was given to make this man

Make This Man to Understand the Vision.—
“The angel Gabriel, though commanded to
make Daniel understand the vision, gave him only a
partial explanation. As the terrible persecution to
befall the church was unfolded to the prophet’s vision,
physical strength gave way. He could endure no more,

314

DANIEL 8
and the angel left him for a time. Daniel ‘fainted, and
was sick certain days.’ ‘And I was astonished at the
vision,’ he says, ‘but none understood it.’
“Yet God had bidden His messenger: ‘Make
this man to understand the vision.’ That commission must be fulfilled. In obedience to it, the angel,
some time afterward, returned to Daniel, saying: ‘I am
now come forth to give thee skill and understanding;’
‘therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision.’ Daniel 8:27,16; 9:22, 23, 25-27. There was one
important point in the vision of chapter 8 which had
been left unexplained, namely, that relating to time—
the period of the 2300 days; therefore the angel, in resuming his explanation, dwells chiefly upon the subject
of time.” Great Controversy, 325.

“On Feb. 13, 1798, Napoleon’s general Berthier
entered Rome, proclaimed a republic, and took Pope
Pius VI a prisoner to France where he died in exile the
next year. It had been Napoleon’s purpose to bring an
end to the political power of the pope in Italy, and this
was accomplished in 1798. To signalize the termination of papal rule a statue of the Goddess of Liberty
trampling on the papal tiara was set up at the Castle of
St. Angelo. It is of interest to note that 1798 was
also the year when ‘at the time of the end’ Napoleon
made himself master of Egypt and thus became the
king of the South who pushed against the papal
power as described in Daniel 11:40,41.” Thiele,
OSID, 81.
“The attention of the people should be called to
the momentous event which is so near at hand. The
signs of the times should be kept fresh before their
minds. The prophetic visions of Daniel and John
foretell a period of moral darkness and declension;
but at the time of the end, the time in which we are
now living, the vision was to speak and not lie.
When the signs predicted begin to come to pass, the
waiting, watching ones are bidden to look up and lift
up their heads and rejoice because their redemption
draweth nigh.” 5 Testimonies, 9,10.

The Vision.—
“The Hebrew word here for ‘vision’ is not chazon
as in the previous verse, but mareh, which refers to the
part of the vision that Jesus and Gabriel particularly
wanted Daniel (and us) to understand—the time
prophecy of the 2300 days of vs.13,14. See comments on vs. 26a and ch. 9:23 for more info.” PJ.

DANIEL 8:17,18
So he came near where I stood: and
when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon
my face: but he said unto me, Understand,
O son of man: for at the time of the end
shall be the vision.
Now as he was speaking with me, I was
in a deep sleep on my face toward the
ground: but he touched me, and set me upright.

The Vision.—
“The Hebrew word for ‘vision’ is chazon, which
refers to the entire vision of ch. 8:1-14. See comments
on vs. 26a (and ch. 9:23) for more information.” PJ.
“The 2,300 evening-mornings were to reach to
‘the time of the end’ Dan. 8:17, 26), so the 2,300 evening-mornings must stand for 2,300 years. Therefore
the 70 weeks must be weeks of years, not literal
weeks.” Mansell, OSOA, 65.
Set Me Upright.—
“It was not for the purpose of worship that Daniel
fell before the angel, for it is forbidden to worship angels. (See Revelation 19: 10, 22: 8, 9.) Daniel seems
to have been completely overcome by the majesty of
the heavenly messenger.
“He prostrated himself with his face to the
ground. The angel laid his hand upon him to give him
assurance (how many times have mortals been told by
heavenly beings to ‘fear not’!), and from this helpless
and prostrate condition set him upright.” Smith, DR,
187,188.

At the Time of the End Shall Be the Vision.—
“A close study of Daniel 12:4-9 reveals when the
‘time of the end’ would be. Daniel is told to shut up
the words and seal the book until the time of the end.
Vs. 4. The angel asks how long that would be? Vs. 6.
The answer is given that it would be for 1260 prophetic
days, or 1260 literal years. Vs. 7. Daniel asks again,
when the time of the end would be? Vs. 8. He is told
that the words are closed up and sealed till the time of
end.
“The 1260 day prophecy began in 538 AD when
the last of the three heretical horns were plucked up by
the Eastern Roman Empire to allow the papacy full
civil and religious power in Western Europe. The end
of the 1260 days came in 1798 when the pope lost his
civil powers and was taken captive. This would
mark the beginning of the ‘time of the end,’ which
continues to the second Coming of Jesus Christ.”
PJ

“I am the LORD your God, which brought you
forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be
their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your
yoke, and made you go upright.” Leviticus 26:13.

DANIEL 8:19
315

GEMS FROM DANIEL

And he said, Behold, I will make thee
know what shall be in the last end of the
indignation: for at the time appointed the
end shall be.

“They come from a far country, from the end of
heaven, even the LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.” Isaiah 13:5.
“Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers,
and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were
for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.”
Isaiah 26:20.

The Last End.—
“Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like his!” Numbers 23:10.
“How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of
every field wither, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds;
because they said, He shall not see our last end.” Jeremiah 12:4.

“Behold, the name of the LORD cometh from far,
burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is
heavy: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue
as a devouring fire.” Isaiah 30:27.
“But the LORD is the true God, he is the living
God, and an everlasting king: at his wrath the earth
shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide
his indignation.” Jeremiah 10:10.

The Last End of the Indignation.—
“With a general statement that at the time appointed the end shall be, and that he will make him to
know ‘what shall be in the last end of the indignation,’
the angel enters upon an interpretation of the vision.
‘The indignation’ must be understood to cover a
period of time. What period of time? God told His
people Israel that He would pour upon them His indignation for their wickedness; and thus He gave directions concerning the ‘profane wicked prince of Israel:’
‘Remove the diadem, and take off the crown.... I
will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be
no more, until He come whose right it is; and I will
give it Him.’ Ezekiel 21: 25-27, 31.
“Here is the period of God’s indignation against
His covenant people, the period during which the sanctuary and host are to trodden underfoot. The diadem
was removed, and the crown taken off, when Israel was
subjected to the kingdom of Babylon. It was overturned by the Medes and Persians, again by the Grecians, again by the Romans, corresponding to the three
times the word is repeated by the prophet. The Jews,
having rejected Christ, were soon scattered abroad over
the face of the earth. Spiritual Israel has taken the
place of the literal seed; but they are in subjection to
earthly powers, and will be until the throne of David is
again set up—until He who is its rightful heir, the
Messiah, the Prince of peace, shall come. Then the
indignation will have ceased. The events that shall
take place in the end of the period are now to be made
known to Daniel by the angel.” Smith, DR, 188.

“Who can stand before his indignation? and who
can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is
poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by
him.” Nahum 1:6.
“Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the
kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even
all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured
with the fire of my jealousy.” Zephaniah 3:8.
Satan’s Indignation.—
“Satan will excite indignation against the
humble minority who conscientiously refuse to accept popular customs and traditions. Men of position and reputation will join with the lawless and the
vile to take counsel against the people of God. Wealth,
genius, education, will combine to cover them with
contempt. Persecuting rulers, ministers, and church
members will conspire against them. With voice and
pen, by boasts, threats, and ridicule, they will seek to
overthrow their faith. By false representations and
angry appeals, they will stir up the passions of the people. Not having a ‘Thus saith the Scriptures’ to bring
against the advocates of the Bible Sabbath, they will
resort to oppressive enactments to supply the lack. To
secure popularity and patronage, legislators will yield
to the demand for a Sunday law.... On this battlefield
comes the last great conflict of the controversy between truth and error.” 5 Testimonies, 450, 451.

“The Lord will not suddenly cast off all transgressors or destroy entire nations; but He will punish cities
and places where men have given themselves up to the
possession of Satanic agencies. Strictly will the cities
of the nations be dealt with, and yet they will not be
visited in the extreme of God’s indignation, because
some souls will yet break away from the delusions of
the enemy, and will repent and be converted, while the
mass will be treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath.” Manuscript 35, 1906.

“The work which the church has failed to do in a
time of peace and prosperity, she will have to do in a
terrible crisis, under most discouraging, forbidding,
circumstances. The warnings that worldly conformity
has silenced or withheld, must be given under the
fiercest opposition from enemies of the faith. And at
that time the superficial, conservative class, whose

316

DANIEL 8
influence has steadily retarded the progress of the
work, will renounce the faith, and take their stand with
its avowed enemies, toward whom their sympathies
have long been tending. These apostates will then
manifest the most bitter enmity, doing all in their
power to oppress and malign their former brethren,
and to excite indignation against them. This day is
just before us. The members of the church will individually be tested and proved. They will be placed in
circumstances where they will be forced to bear witness for the truth. Many will be called to speak before
councils and in courts of justice, perhaps separately and
alone. The experience which would have helped them
in this emergency they have neglected to obtain, and
their souls are burdened with remorse for wasted opportunities and neglected privileges.” 5 Testimonies,
463.

divisions. These were represented by the second
phase of the goat, when it had four horns which
came up in the place of the first, which had been
broken. These divisions did not stand in his power.
None of them possessed the strength of the original
kingdom. These great waymarks of history on which
the historian has written volumes, the inspired penman
here gives us in sharp outline, with a few strokes of the
pen.” Smith, DR, 189.
The Great Horn is the First King of Grecia.—
“There is no other fact of history so well known
as that Alexander the Great conquered the world.
‘But,’ says one, ‘Alexander was king of Macedon, and
it was Greece, according to the prophecy, that overthrew Medo-Persia.’ Very true; but it was a king of
Greece, and not as king of Macedon, that Alexander
started out on his career of conquest. If he had not had
united Greece at his back, even he could not have become master of the world. Grote says:—
“ ‘After displaying his force in various portions of
Peloponnesus, Alexander returned to Corinth, where he
convened deputies from the Grecian cities generally….
Alexander asked from the assembled deputies the same
appointment which the victorious Philip had required
and obtained two years before—the hegemony or
headship of the Greeks collectively for the purpose
of prosecuting war against Persia. To the request of
a prince at the head of an irresistible army, one answer
only was admissible. He was nominated imperator
with full powers, by land and sea. Overawed by the
presence and sentiment of Macedonian force, all acquiesced in this vote except the Lacedaemonians.
“ ‘The convention sanctioned by Alexander was
probably the same as that settled by and with his father
Philip. Its grand and significant feature was, that it
recognized Hellas [Greece] as a confederacy under the
Macedonian price as imperator, or executive head and
arm. It crowned him with a legal sanction as keeper of
the peace with Greece, and conqueror abroad in the
name of Greece.”—History of Greece, chap. 91.”
Waggoner, PL, 76,77.

“The miracle-working power manifested through
spiritualism will exert its influence against those who
choose to obey God rather than men. Communications
from the spirits will declare that God has sent them to
convince the rejecters of Sunday of their error, affirming that the laws of the land should be obeyed as the
law of God. They will lament the great wickedness in
the world and second the testimony of religious teachers that the degraded state of morals is caused by the
desecration of Sunday. Great will be the indignation
excited against all who refuse to accept their testimony.” Great Controversy, 590,591.

DANIEL 8:20-22
The ram which thou sawest having two
horns are the kings of Media and Persia.
And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is between his
eyes is the first king.
Now that being broken, whereas four
stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand
up out of the nation, but not in his power.

DANIEL 8:23,24
And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are come to
the full, a king of fierce countenance, and
understanding dark sentences, shall stand
up.
And his power shall be mighty, but not
by his own power: and he shall destroy
wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the
holy people.

The Vision Interpreted.—
“As the disciples said to the Lord, so may we here
say of the angel who spoke to Daniel, ‘Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb.’ This explanation of the vision is in language plain to be understood. The distinguishing feature of the Persian
Empire, the union of the two nationalities which
composed it, is represented by the two horns of the
ram. Grecia attained its greatest glory as a unit under
the leadership of Alexander the Great, a general as famous as the world has ever seen. This part of her history is represented by the first phase of the goat, during
which time the one notable horn symbolized Alexander the Great. Upon his death, the kingdom fell
into fragments, but soon consolidated into four grand

When Transgressors Are Come to the Full.—

317

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“When do the transgressors ‘come to the full’?
All along, the connection between God’s people and
their oppressors is kept in view. It was on account of
the transgressions of His people that they were sold
into captivity. Their continuance in sin brought more
and more severe punishment. At no time were the
Jews as a nation more corrupt morally than at the
time they came under the jurisdiction of the Romans.” Smith, DR,190.

Papal Rome—Mighty, but Not by His Own Power.—
“The success of the Romans was owing largely
to the aid of their allies, and divisions among their
enemies, of which they were ever ready to take advantage. Papal Rome also was mighty by means of
the secular powers over which she exercised spiritual control.” Smith, DR, 190.
“No merely human power could do what this
kingdom would do. As light and love and power come
from above to those whose eyes are directed heavenward, so a power from beneath takes possession of
individuals and nations which resist the love of
God.” Haskell, SDP,110.

A King of Fierce Countenance.—
“This power succeeds to the four divisions of the
goat kingdom in the latter time of their kingdom, that
is, toward the termination of their career. It is of
course the same as the little horn of verse 9 and onward. Apply it to Rome, as set forth in remarks on
verse 9, and all is harmonious and clear.
“In predicting punishment to come upon the Jews
from this same power, Moses calls it ‘a nation of
fierce countenance, [which shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young.]’ Deuteronomy 28:50. No people made a more formidable
appearance in warlike array than Romans.” Smith,
DR,189.

“This power is more than human. It has mysterious power. It is certainly not divine power. It is the
opposite to divine. It is ‘opposed to all that is called
God.’” Burnside, DPUF, 149.
“The dragon gave him his power, and his seat,
and great authority.” Rev. 13:2.
“While the Papacy becomes ‘exceeding great’ and
exhibits ‘mighty power,’ it is a delegated power, for it
is ‘not by his own power.’ Whose agent is the Papacy
and by whose power and authority does it operate in
the world? Surely not divine power for its operations
are against God and his people. The answer is given in
Rev. 13:2, 5-7. In Rev. 12:9 the dragon is identified
as ‘the Devil and Satan.’ In the wilderness temptation
of Christ, Satan ‘showed unto Him the kingdoms of the
world’ and then said to Him, ‘All this power will I
give thee, and the glory of them: for that is delivered
unto me; and to whosoever I will, I will give it. If thou
therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.’ Luke
4:5-7. Because they worshiped him and did his bidding, the prince of this world gave the throne and dominion of this world to Egypt, Assyria, Babylon,
Medo-Persia and pagan Rome. When Pagan Rome fell
the prince of this world delegated this power and authority ‘over all kindreds, and tongues, and nation’ to
Papal Rome. ‘And it was to the dragon that he owed
his power, and his throne, and his wide dominion.’—
Rev. 13:2. Wey. ‘To him the dragon gave his own
power and his own seat and great authority.’ Moffatt.
The offer that Christ refused, was accepted by him
who claims to be the successor and vicegerent of
Christ.” Bunch, BOD, 115.

“This prophecy was exactly fulfilled by the Romans. The enemies of Rome testified that they were
terrified by ‘the looks of their opponents.’ They said
that the eyes of the Romans looked like fire, and
their faces and expressions like those of madmen.’
Livy’s History of Rome, Bk.7, Ch.33.” Burnside,
DPUF, 178.
“By the Spirit of Inspiration, looking far down the
ages, Moses pictured the terrible scenes of Israel’s final
overthrow as a nation, and the destruction of Jerusalem by the armies of Rome: ‘The Lord shall bring a
nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth,
as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou
shalt not understand; a nation of fierce countenance,
which shall not regard the person of the old, nor show
favor to the young.’” Patriarchs & Prophets, 467.
Understanding Dark Sentences.—
“As to ‘understanding dark sentences,’ Moses
says in the scripture before mentioned, ‘Whose tongue
thou [the Jews] shalt not understand.’ This could not
be said of the Babylonians, Persians, or Greeks, in reference to the Jews; for the Chaldean and Greek languages were used to some extent in Palestine. This
was not the case, however, with the Latin.” Smith,
DR, 190.

He Shall Destroy Wonderfully.—
“The Lord told the Jews by the prophet Ezekiel
that He would deliver them to men who were ‘skilful to
destroy’ (Ezekiel 21: 31); and the slaughter of eleven
hundred thousand Jews at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman army, was a terrible confirmation of the prophet’s words. Rome in its second, or

“The LORD shall bring a nation against thee from
far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand; A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not
regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the
young.” Deuteronomy 28:49,50.

318

DANIEL 8
“While Romanism is based upon deception, it
is not a coarse and clumsy imposture. The religious
service of the Roman Church is a most impressive ceremonial. Its gorgeous display and solemn rites fascinate the senses of the people and silence the voice of
reason and of conscience. The eye is charmed. Magnificent churches, imposing processions, golden altars,
jeweled shrines, choice paintings, and exquisite sculpture appeal to the love of beauty. …The pomp and
ceremony of the Catholic worship has a seductive,
bewitching power, by which many are deceived; and
they come to look upon the Roman Church as the very
gate of heaven. …The worship of images and relics,
the invocation of saints, and the exaltation of the
pope are devices of Satan to attract the minds of the
people from God and from His Son. To accomplish
their ruin, he endeavors to turn their attention from
Him through whom alone they can find salvation.
He will direct them to any object that can be substituted for the One who has said: ‘Come unto Me, all ye
that labor and are heavy-laden, and I will give you
rest.’ Matthew 11:28. …It is Satan’s constant effort to
misrepresent the character of God, the nature of sin,
and the real issues at stake in the great controversy. His
sophistry lessens the obligation of the divine law and
gives men license to sin. …Through this mammoth
system of deception the prince of evil achieves his purpose of bringing dishonor to God and wretchedness to
man.” Great Controversy, 566-570.

papal, phase was responsible for the death of millions of martyrs.” Smith, DR, 190.
“Rome extended her territory around the Mediterranean; there was no place where her arms were not
victorious. Some of the greatest battles which history
records were fought by the Roman armies. The pen of
inspiration says, ‘He [the little horn] shall destroy
wonderfully.’ Cities which dared resist the power of
Rome were blotted out of existence.” Haskell, SDP,
110.
“The word “wonderful” is a word to describe the
mighty works of God: ‘Oh that men would praise the
LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful works
to the children of men!’ Psalm 107:8. In fact, Jesus
himself is called ‘Wonderful.’ Isaiah 9:6. Here, Daniel is pointing us to the fact that this power would destroy God’s people, but it would be done ‘wonderfully,’ that is, as a religious entity, as if he were representting God, but realy, as a wolf in sheep’s clothing.
Such was the work of papal Rome during the years
it practiced and prospered.” PJ
And Shall Prosper, and Practice.—
“This describes the work of Papal Rome and refers back to Daniel 8:12: ‘And an host was given him
against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression,
and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it practised, and prospered.’
The papacy practiced and
prospered for 1260 years in the Dark Ages, and will
practice and prosper for a short time at the end.” PJ.

“‘Through his policy also he shall cause craft to
prosper in his hand.’ Rome has been distinguished
above all other powers for a policy of craft, by means
of which it brought the nations under its control. This
is true of both pagan and papal Rome. Thus by peace it
destroyed many.” Smith, DR, 190.

He Shall Destroy the Mighty and the Holy People.—
“He shall …wear out the saints of the Most
High.” Daniel 7:25.
“And it was given unto him to make war with
the saints, and to overcome them: and power was
given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.”
Revelation 13:7.

“The resemblance of the eyes of the little horn to
those of a man (7:8) has been interpreted above as a
reference to the perverse type of intelligence exercised
in this context. …it is being elaborated upon more
specifically in 8:24-25.” BRI, 2SOD, 188.

“In this vision the persecuted people of God are
designated as ‘the host of heaven’ which Gabriel
interpreted to be ‘the holy people.’ …The destruction of the ‘mighty and holy people’ must mean the
same as ‘the saints of the Most High’ in Daniel 7:25.”
Bunch, BOD, 115.

He Shall Magnify Himself in His Heart.—
“I will ascend into heaven; I will exalt my
throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the
mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north; I
will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be
like the most High.” Isaiah 14:13,14.

DANIEL 8:25
And through his policy also he shall
cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he
shall magnify himself in his heart, and by
peace shall destroy many: he shall also
stand up against the Prince of princes; but
he shall be broken without hand.

“This spirit is seen permeating the entire papal
system with its bejeweled ecclesiastical potentates
and exalted princes of the church. When a mere man
assumes to be the Supreme Pontiff, the Holy Father, or
the Vicar of Christ it can hardly be said that he is walking in the footsteps of the meek and lowly Master.”
Thiele, OSID, 89.

He Shall Cause Craft to Prosper in His Hand.—

The Daniel—Paul Connection.—

319

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Now the church was in fearful peril. Prison,
torture, fire, and sword were blessings in comparison with this. Some of the Christians stood firm, declaring that they could make no compromise. Others
were in favor of yielding or modifying some features of
their faith and uniting with those who had accepted a
part of Christianity, urging that this might be the means
of their full conversion. That was a time of deep anguish to the faithful followers of Christ. Under a cloak
of pretended Christianity, Satan was insinuating himself into the church, to corrupt their faith and turn their
minds from the word of truth.
“Most of the Christians at last consented to lower their standard, and a union was formed between
Christianity and paganism.” Great Controversy, 42,43.

“They came to Thessalonica.” “Paul …three
sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.” Acts 17:1,2.
“Some of them believed… not a few.” Acts
17:4. To these Thessalonian saints Paul wrote two
epistles. Evidently they had forgotten some things and
concluded from the first letter that Christ would return
in their day. To correct this mistake Paul wrote.
“Remember ye not, that when I was yet with
you, I told you these things.” 2 Thess. 2:5.
“Paul had explained these things when He had
‘reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.’ That was
out of the Old Testament, as they were the only Scriptures then written. From the Scriptures Paul had
warned of the ‘falling away’ and the ‘man of sin.’
Where did Paul find this? In the same place as Jesus—
in ‘Daniel the prophet.’ We follow in good footsteps
when we gather to study ‘Daniel the Prophet.’
“Note the parallel between Daniel and 2 Th. 2:1-4:
Daniel
Paul
*By reason of transgression. Man of sin.
The transgression of
(For sin is the transdesolation.
gression of the law.)
*He shall think to change
That Wicked—the
the law.
lawless one.
*He magnified himself
He exalted himself
*He magnified himself even
He exalted himself above
to the Prince of the host.
all that is called God.
*Through his policy he shall The mystery of iniquity.

“By worldly friendships, by the charms of beauty,
by pleasure seeking, mirth, feasting, or the wine
cup, he [Satan] tempts to the violation of the seventh
commandment.” Patriarchs and Prophets, 457
He Shall Stand Up Against the Prince of Princes.—
“Rome crucified him whom Heaven sent. The
dragon was wroth, and made war with the seed of
the woman–Christ–who had been promised when sin
entered the world. This was paganism in its greatest
strength. It was in its dying throes, and with the agony
of death it smote the truth. What Satan could not accomplish through open opposition, he sought to accomplish by policy and strategy. Silently, stealthily,
the principles of evil crept into the church of Christ,
which had grown up in spite of the pagan opposition.
...Wrangling, disputes, theological controversies drove
out the spirit of life. Self-exaltation put men in power;
the equal rights of all fell before the rising power of a
hierarchy. … Rome became nominally a Christian
empire. Her emperor professed the name of Christ, and
carried before his army the banner of the cross. Decrees were issued causing men to worship according to
the dictates of Rome. Then it was that man–the emperor–and the empire attempted to exalt themselves
above the God of heaven. The principles of Lucifer
himself had crowded out the truth of Christ, and, as
was shown to Daniel, the truth was cast down to the
ground. …The eleventh and twelfth verses of Daniel
eight are parallel with the twenty-first and twenty-fifth
verses of the seventh chapter, where the little horn
makes war with the saints, and speaks great words
against the Most High, attempting even to change his
times and laws. Twice Daniel had been shown the
twofold history of Rome: first as a pagan power, when
it was more cruel than any pagan government before it;
and later as a professedly Christian power, when its
cruelty far surpassed all the workings of paganism.”
Haskell, SDP, 111,112.

cause craft to prosper in his hand.

*He shall be broken without
hand.
Given to the burning flame.

Whom the Lord shall
destroy with the brightness of His coming.

“It is clear that Paul when writing 2 Thess. 2:3-8
was dealing with the seventh and eighth chapters of
‘Daniel the Prophet’ and it was from these chapters that
he ‘told you these things’ when he was in Thessalonica. It is also clear that these prophecies are fulfilled in
Rome, and in its latter phase more than the former.”
Burnside, DPUF, 141,142.
.
By Peace Shall Destroy Many.—
“The great adversary now endeavored to gain by
artifice what he had failed to secure by force. Persecution ceased, and in its stead were substituted the dangerous allurements of temporal prosperity and worldly
honor. Idolaters were led to receive a part of the Christian faith, while they rejected other essential truths.
They professed to accept Jesus as the Son of God and
to believe in His death and resurrection, but they had
no conviction of sin and felt no need of repentance or
of a change of heart. With some concessions on their
part they proposed that Christians should make concessions, that all might unite on the platform of belief in
Christ.

He Shall Be Broken Without Hand.—

320

DANIEL 8
“This parallels the prophecy of Daniel 2: 34,
where the stone ‘cut out without hands’ destroys all
earthly powers.” Smith, DR, 191.

“The Hebrew word here for ‘vision’ is mareh,
which refers to the part of the vision that Jesus and
Gabriel particularly wanted Daniel (and us) to understand—the time prophecy of the 2300 days of
vs.13,14. Gabriel’s words, ‘The vision of the evening
and the morning’ obviously refers to the 2300 days
(evenings and mornings) of Daniel 8:14. See ch. 9:23
for more information.” PJ.

“The description concludes with the assurance
that this alien power represented by the horn will come
to this end—‘by no human hand, he shall be broken’
(8:25).
“Although this account does not indicate the victory of the saints as in 7:22,27, the reader may infer
this conclusion. The saints have been severely victimized by the horn kingdom for an extended period.
Since the passage makes it clear that the horn meets its
just fate, one may naturally conclude that the saints
receive their rewards. It is significant that the prophecy of both chapter 2 and chapter 8 indicate that the
deliverance comes without human action (2:45—‘by
no human hand’; and 8:25—‘by no human hand’).”
BRI, 2SOD, 359.

The Evening And The Morning.—
“In Daniel 8:14, we are told ‘evening-morning’;
and, in 8:26, it is rendered ‘the evening-the morning.’
…We have already noted that ‘evening-morning’ is the
single, most solid phrase defining a 24-hour day in the
Hebrew Old Testament—because it is the definition
used in Genesis 1. God spoke much of what is in the
first chapter of Genesis, and God spoke the answer in
Daniel 8:14. We can rely on both passages.
“Why then does Daniel 8:26 use the expression,
‘the evening-the morning’? (In English, we would say,
‘the evening-morning.’) …Why is 8:26 different than
8:14? In 8:14, the phrase, ‘evening-morning,’ is given
as a prediction. It is the normal way, found six times in
Genesis 1, to describe a 24-hour day. But in 8:26, the
angel is not giving the prediction but referring back
to it, and he names that prediction as one would
name an object: ‘the evening-morning [prophecy].’
In 8:26, Gabriel was not giving a prediction, but mentioning the time prophecy of 8:14, by the abbreviated
name, ‘the evening-morning.’
“‘Evening-morning’ (8:13) and ‘the evening-the
morning’ (8:26) both mean the same; one 24-hour day.
God planned that the phrase be written both ways in
order to render the meaning more certain—for both
phrases (with and without the articles) refer to the
prophecy of 8:14 and both are speaking of 24-hour
units of time.” Ferrell, BD, 113,114.
In 8:26, Gabriel repeats the message of 8:14, that
the end is far in the future. This is also the message of
8:17 and 8:19, where the fact is stated that the 2300day prophecy would reach its conclusion ‘at the time of
the end.’

DANIEL 8:26
And the vision of the evening and the
morning which was told is true: wherefore
shut thou up the vision; for it shall be for
many days.
The Vision.—
“The use of two Hebrew words in Daniel 8 and 9
provide a link between these two chapters—
specifically, between the 70 weeks of years prophecy
in chapter 9 and the 2,300 days/years prophecy of
chapter 8:14. This link is important, because without it
we would have no starting point for the 2,300 years.
“The two Hebrew words are chazon and mareh.
While both terms can—and are—translated ‘vision,’
they are not exactly synonymous. Chazon means ‘a
vision in the ecstatic [i.e., prophetic] state.’ [The New
Brown-Driver-Briggs-Gesenius Hebrew and English
Lexicon, p. 909b.] This word is used to refer to the
whole vision of chapter 8 (see, eg., vs. 1, 2, 13, 15, 17,
26b). Mareh, on the other hand, means a ‘sight,
phenomenon, spectacle, appearance.’ [Ibid., p.
302b.] This word is used of the ‘appearance’ within
the vision of the two beings, one of whom raises the
question ‘Until when …?’ that the other answers with
‘till evening-morning two thousand three hundred’
(see vs. 16, 26a, 27).
“It was the mareh that, in verse 16, Gabriel was
commissioned to help Daniel understand. But at the
close of chapter 8, Daniel says he ‘was astonished by
the mareh’ and did not understand it. Then, in Daniel
9:23, Gabriel appears to the prophet again and tells
him to ‘consider the word and understand the
mareh.’ So, Gabriel’s explanation in chapter 9 was
given specifically to explain the 2,300 eveningmornings of chapter 8.” Mansell, OSOA, 62,63.

‘The vision of the evening and the morning’ refers to the period of 2300 days. In view of the long
period of oppression, and the calamities which were to
come upon his people, Daniel fainted and was sick
certain days. He was astonished at the vision, but
did not understand it. Why did not Gabriel at this
time fully carry out his instructions, and cause Daniel
to understand the vision? Undoubtedly because Daniel
had received all that he could then bear. Further instruction is therefore deferred to a future time.” Smith,
DR, 191.
“Through another vision further light was thrown
upon the events of the future; and it was at the close of
this vision that Daniel heard ‘one saint speaking, and

321

GEMS FROM DANIEL
another saint said unto that certain saint which spake,
How long shall be the vision?’ Daniel 8:13. The answer that was given, ‘Unto two thousand and three
hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed’
(verse 14), filled him with perplexity. Earnestly he
sought for the meaning of the vision. He could not
understand the relation sustained by the seventy years’
captivity, as foretold through Jeremiah, to the twentythree hundred years that in vision he heard the heavenly visitant declare should elapse before the cleansing of
God’s sanctuary. The angel Gabriel gave him a partial
interpretation; yet when the prophet heard the words,
‘The vision ...shall be for many days,’ he fainted
away. ‘I Daniel fainted,’ he records of his experience,
‘and was sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did
the king’s business; and I was astonished at the vision,
but none understood it.’ Verses 26, 27.” Prophets &
Kings, 554.

I was Astonished at the Vision.—
“The evidence, therefore, appears conclusive that,
having been told that at the end of the 2,300 years the
sanctuary would be nisdaq (variously translated
‘cleansed,’ ‘purified,’ ‘emerge victorious,’ ‘put in a
right condition,’ ‘restored to its rightful place,’ ‘declared right,’ etc.), Daniel concluded that the Jewish
temple and its services would remain in a desolate condition far beyond the 70 years prophesied by Jeremiah.
Hence, the 2,300 days/years would not reach their termination until ‘the time of the end’—many centuries in
the future.
“The hope of all pious Jews in Daniel’s day was
that at the end of Jeremiah’s 70 years, they would be
free to return to their homeland, rebuild Jerusalem, and
restore the temple’s services. So, it is little wonder
that Daniel ‘was astonished by the vision’ and that
he ‘fainted and was sick for days’ (v. 27, NKJV).”
Mansell, OSOA, 62.

Shut Thou Up the Vision.—
“The Hebrew word for ‘vision’ is chazon, which
refers to the entire vision of ch. 8:1-14. See the previous word for vision in this verse, and ch. 9:23 for more
information.” PJ

At the Vision.—
“The Hebrew word here for ‘vision’ is mareh,
which refers to the part of the vision that Jesus and
Gabriel particularly wanted Daniel (and us) to understand—the time prophecy of the 2300 days of
vs.13,14. See vs. 26a and ch. 9:23 for more information.” PJ.

“And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words
are closed up and sealed till the time of the end.”
Daniel 12:9.
“The book of Daniel and especially, this vision of
chapter 8 was ‘shut up’, and not ‘opened’ till ‘the time
of the end.’ See Daniel 12:6-9. The vision of John in
Rev. 10:2 depicts the time when the little book of Daniel would be ‘opened’ at the ‘the time of the end’ when
the prophetic ‘time, times, and half a time’ would be
fulfilled. At the end of this prophetic time period, the
dominion of the little horn (the papal phase of the Roman empire) would end. This was fulfilled in 1798,
when the pope was taken captive and his civil power
taken away. God’s people, seeing this wonderful fulfillment of the 1260 day prophecy, began to open the
book of Daniel and study the vision of Daniel 8 that
contains the longest time prophecy in the Bible—the
2300 days in verse 14.” PJ.

But None Understood It.—
“Shortly before the fall of Babylon, when Daniel
was meditating on these prophecies and seeking God
for an understanding of the times, a series of visions
was given him concerning the rise and fall of kingdoms. With the first vision, as recorded in the seventh
chapter of the book of Daniel, an interpretation was
given; yet not all was made clear to the prophet. ‘My
cogitations much troubled me,’ he wrote of his experience at the time, ‘and my countenance changed in me:
but I kept the matter in my heart.’ Daniel 7:28.
“Through another vision further light was thrown
upon the events of the future; and it was at the close of
this vision that Daniel heard ‘one saint speaking, and
another saint said unto that certain saint which spake,
How long shall be the vision?’ Daniel 8:13. The answer that was given, ‘Unto two thousand and three
hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed’
(verse 14), filled him with perplexity. Earnestly he
sought for the meaning of the vision. He could not
understand the relation sustained by the seventy
years’ captivity, as foretold through Jeremiah, to
the twenty-three hundred years that in vision he
heard the heavenly visitant declare should elapse
before the cleansing of God’s sanctuary. The angel
Gabriel gave him a partial interpretation; yet when the
prophet heard the words, ‘The vision... shall be for
many days,’ he fainted away. ‘I Daniel fainted,’ he
records of his experience, ‘and was sick certain days;
afterward I rose up, and did the king’s business; and I

DANIEL 8:27
And I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did the
king’s business; and I was astonished at the
vision, but none understood it.
And I Daniel Fainted, and Was Sick.—
“Daniel fainted, for the crucifixion of the Saviour
had just been revealed to him, and the view was more
than he could endure. Further explanation was delayed
until a later vision.” Haskell, SDP, 114.

322

DANIEL 8
was astonished at the vision, but none understood
it.’ Verses 26, 27.” Prophets & Kings, 553,554.

323

GEMS FROM DANIEL

324

DANIEL 8

325

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER NINE
1 In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of
the Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans;
2 In the first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books the
number of the years, whereof the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in
the desolations of Jerusalem.
3 And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes:
4 And I prayed unto the LORD my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the
covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep
his commandments;
5 We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts
and from thy judgments:
6 Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets,
which spake in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.
7 O LORD, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us
confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and
that are far off, through all the countries whither thou hast driven them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed
against thee.
8 O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to
our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against
thee.
9 To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses,
though we have rebelled against him;
10 Neither have we obeyed the voice of the LORD our God, to
walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the
prophets.
11 Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing,
that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured
upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the
servant of God, because we have sinned against him.
12 And he hath confirmed his words, which he spake against
us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a
great evil: for under the whole heaven hath not been done as
hath been done upon Jerusalem.
13 As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil is come upon
us: yet made we not our prayer before the LORD our God, that
we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.
14 Therefore hath the LORD watched upon the evil, and
brought it upon us: for the LORD our God is righteous in all his
works which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice.
15 And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people
forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast got-

ten thee renown, as at this day; we have sinned, we have done
wickedly.
16 O LORD, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee,
let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us.
17 Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant,
and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake.
18 O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and
behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name:
for we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.
19 O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do;
defer not, for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city and thy
people are called by thy name.
20 And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my
sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the LORD my God for the holy mountain of my God;
21 Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel,
whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to
fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation.
22 And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.
23 At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment
came forth, and I am come to shew thee; for thou art greatly
beloved: therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision.
24 Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon
thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of
sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy,
and to anoint the most Holy.
25 Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth
of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the
Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two
weeks: the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.
26 And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut
off, but not for himself: and the people of the prince that shall
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war desolations
are determined.
27 And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week:
and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the
oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he
shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that
determined shall be poured upon the desolate.

DANIEL 9:1,2
In the first year of Darius the son of
Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, which
was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans;
In the first year of his reign I Daniel
understood by books the number of the
years, whereof the word of the LORD came
to Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of

Jerusalem.
In the First Year of King Darius.—
“Actually thirteen active years (551-538 BC)
elapsed between chapter 8 and 9.” Maxwell, 1GC, 189.
“Daniel’s prayer had been offered ‘in the first
year of Darius’ (verse 1), the Median monarch whose
general, Cyrus, had wrested from Babylonia the scepter
of universal rule. The reign of Darius was honored of
God. To him was sent the angel Gabriel, ‘to confirm
and to strengthen him.’ Daniel 11:1. Upon his death,

326

DANIEL 9
end of the 70 years was at hand.
“Daniel naturally concluded that the sanctuary
that was polluted, defiled and trodden underfoot was
the temple at Jerusalem which was then in ruins, and
that the cleansing of the sanctuary [Dan. 8:14] would
come with its restoration at the end of the 70 years.
But he had been told by the angel Gabriel that the
2300-day time-prophecy would not be fulfilled ‘for
many days’ and would reach ‘the time of the end.’
“He felt that the two time prophecies must be related, but he could not harmonize them.
“A crisis was near for God’s people, and Daniel
sought by prayer and fasting to understand the matter.”
Taken from Haskell, SDP, 118,119; Bunch, BOD, 128;
Smith, DR, 193,194.

within about two years of the fall of Babylon, Cyrus
succeeded to the throne, and the beginning of his
reign marked the completion of the seventy years
since the first company of Hebrews had been taken by
Nebuchadnezzar from their Judean home to Babylon.”
Prophets & Kings, 556.
“Inasmuch as the events of Daniel 9 occurred during Darius’s one-year reign, we can calculate that Daniel’s experience with the angel who protected him from
the lions occurred either shortly before or shortly after
his visit from the angel Gabriel.” Maxwell, 1GC, 189.
I Understood by Books.—
“Daniel’s second effort to obtain light on his vision was through the study of prophecy. Here is an
instance where one prophet searched the writings of
others for light. If it is necessary for a prophet to
search the Scriptures, it is even more essential that
we should do so.” Bunch, BOD, 128.

“Through another vision further light was thrown
upon the events of the future; and it was at the close of
this vision that Daniel heard ‘one saint speaking, and
another saint said unto that certain saint which spake,
How long shall be the vision?’ Daniel 8:13. The answer that was given, ‘Unto two thousand and three
hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed’
(verse 14), filled him with perplexity. Earnestly he
sought for the meaning of the vision. He could not
understand the relation sustained by the seventy
years’ captivity, as foretold through Jeremiah, to
the twenty-three hundred years that in vision he
heard the heavenly visitant declare should elapse
before the cleansing of God’s sanctuary. The angel
Gabriel gave him a partial interpretation; yet when the
prophet heard the words, ‘The vision... shall be for
many days,’ he fainted away. ‘I Daniel fainted,’ he
records of his experience, ‘and was sick certain days;
afterward I rose up, and did the king’s business; and I
was astonished at the vision, but none understood it.’
Verses 26, 27.
“Still burdened in behalf of Israel, Daniel studied
anew the prophecies of Jeremiah. They were very
plain—so plain that he understood by these testimonies
recorded in books ‘the number of the years, whereof
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, that
He would accomplish seventy years in the desolations
of Jerusalem.’ Daniel 9:2.
“With faith founded on the sure word of
prophecy, Daniel pleaded with the Lord for the
speedy fulfillment of these promises. He pleaded for
the honor of God to be preserved. In his petition he
identified himself fully with those who had fallen
short of the divine purpose, confessing their sins as
his own.” Prophets & Kings, 554,555.

The Number of Years in Jeremiah.—
“While Daniel’s hands were filled with court duties and business cares pressed him, he still had time
for prayer and study.
“Daniel’s knowledge and use of the writings of
Jeremiah, show that Jeremiah was early regarded as a
divinely inspired prophet; otherwise his writings would
not have been so soon collected, and so extensively
copied. Though for a time contemporary with him,
Daniel had a copy of his works which he carried with
him in his captivity. Though he was so great a prophet
himself, he was not above studying carefully what God
might reveal to others of His servants.
“The prophecies of Jeremiah were the only
ones which told plainly the length of the captivity.
“Twice in the book of Jeremiah the length of the
captivity is stated. ‘These nations shall serve the
king of Babylon seventy years. And it shall come to
pass, when seventy years are accomplished that I
will punish the king of Babylon.’ Again the prophet
had said, ‘After seventy years be accomplished at
Babylon I will visit you, and perform my good work
toward you, in causing you to return to this place.’
[Jeremiah 25:11,12; 29:10.] Babylon had fallen, and
Jerusalem had been desolate nearly seventy years.
“Dating the period of the seventy years of captivity from 606 BC, Daniel understood that they
were now drawing to their close, and that God had
even begun the fulfillment of the prophecy by overthrowing the kingdom of Babylon by Cyrus, the
Persian general.
“Isaiah had foretold that Cyrus would restore to
the Jews their freedom and would make a decree to
rebuild Jerusalem and the temple: “That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my
pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built;
and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.” Isaiah
44:28. The time of their deliverance drew near. The

“Jeremiah declared that they were to wear the
yoke of servitude for seventy years, and the captives
that were already in the hands of the king of Babylon,
and the vessels of the Lord’s house which had been
taken, were also to remain in Babylon till that time had
elapsed. But at the end of the seventy years God
would deliver them from their captivity, and would

327

GEMS FROM DANIEL
also recognized in the Bible (Zech. 1:12), where in the
second year of Darius (Zech. 1:1), 520 BC, the question was asked as to how long the Lord would not have
mercy on Jerusalem against which he had had ‘indignation these threescore and ten years’ (Zech. 1:12).
Because of serious opposition from their enemies, the
Jews had ceased their work of rebuilding the temple
and did not begin it again until the second year of Darius (Ezra 4:24), under the admonitions of Haggai
(Hag. 1:1-15) and Zechariah (Zech. 1:1,7,16).” Thiele,
OSID, 111.

punish their oppressors, and bring into subjection
the proud king of Babylon.” Signs, 2/12/1880.
“While those who had remained loyal to God in
the midst of Babylon were seeking the Lord and studying the prophecies foretelling their deliverance, God
was preparing the hearts of kings to show favor to
his repentant people.” R&H, 3/21/1907.
What Chapters in Jeremiah Did Daniel Study?—
“A copy of the letters sent by Jeremiah to the
Hebrew captives in Babylon, and of the letters sent by
the false prophets to these captives and to the authorities of Jerusalem, together with a story of the controversy between the true and the false, is found in the
twenty-seventh to the twenty-ninth chapters of Jeremiah.
“It was immediately after this interchange of letters between Jeremiah and the elders of the Israelites in
captivity, that the prophet was instructed to write in a
book all that had been revealed to him regarding the
restoration of Israel. This is recorded in the thirtieth
and the thirty-first chapters of Jeremiah.
“These, with the prophecies of the twenty-fifth
chapter, are the letters and the records that Daniel
the prophet, during ‘the first year of the reign of
Darius the Mede,’ prayerfully studied, three-score
years and more after they were written.” Review &
Herald, 3/21/1907.

DANIEL 9:3
And I set my face unto the Lord God,
to seek by prayer and supplications, with
fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes:
I Set My Face Unto the Lord God.—
“Daniel was praying over an open Bible (vs. 2),
as he thought about these things. This is an example
we would do well to follow. We find precious promises in God’s Word; it’s fitting, then, for us to take these
to Him in prayer, pleading for their fulfillment in our
lives and in the church.” Shea, DARG, 143.
“As the prophet read these scriptures in Jeremiah,
he decided that he would follow the counsel of God.
Knowing that light came to those who sought the Lord
and who studied God’s word, the prophet determined
to follow to the letter the instruction given through the
weeping prophet. It is written: ‘Then shall ye call upon Me, and ye shall go and pray unto Me, and I will
hearken unto you. And ye shall seek Me, and find Me,
when ye shall search for Me with all your heart.’ Jer.
29:12, 13. Daniel therefore sought the Lord by prayer
and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.” Gilbert, MIHS, 128.

Two Sets of 70 Years.—
“In the first year of Cyrus a decree was issued
permitting the Jews to return to their homeland from
their exile in Babylon and to rebuild their temple (2
Chr. 36:21-23; Ezra 1-11). This decree of Cyrus was
issued in 538 BC. Although that was the year when a
number of the Jews returned to Jerusalem under
Zerubbabel as governor and Jeshua as the high priest
(Ezra 2:1,2), they did not begin their work of rebuilding the temple until the second year of their return (Ezra 3:6-8), in the year 536/535 BC. Since Daniel was
taken to Babylon in the third year of Jehoiakim (Daniel
1:1), 605, and since that was the year when the work of
desolating the temple began, it was a period of seventy
years from the time when the spoiling of the temple
commenced under Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon to the
time when its rebuilding was begun under Cyrus of
Persia.
“For a number of years, however, the temple continued to exist and its services were carried on until
finally, because of repeated rebellions on the part of the
Jews, Nebuchadnezzar in his 19th year completely destroyed the temple (2 King 25:8,9). That was in 586
BC. The work of rebuilding the temple was completed
and its dedication took place in the sixth year of Darius
(Ezra 6:15), 516. Thus it was also a period of seventy years from the utter desolation of the temple under Nebuchadnezzar to the completion of its rebuilding under Darius. This seventy year period is

By Prayer and Supplications.-“Daniel’s example of prayer and confession is
given for our instruction and encouragement. For nearly seventy years, Israel had been in captivity. The land
which God had chosen for his own possession was
given into the hands of the heathen. The beloved city,
the recipient of heaven’s light, once the joy of the
whole earth, was now despised and degraded. The
temple that had contained the ark of God’s covenant
and the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy
seat, was in ruins. Its very site was desecrated by unholy feet. Faithful men who knew of the former glory
were filled with anguish at the desolation of the holy
house that had distinguished Israel as God’s chosen
people. These men had been witnesses to the denunciations of God because of the sins of his people. They
had been witnesses to the fulfillment of this word.
They had been witnesses also to the promises of his
favor if Israel would return to God, and walk circum-

328

DANIEL 9
spectly before him. Aged, gray-headed pilgrims went
up to Jerusalem to pray amid its ruins. They kissed its
stones, and wet them with their tears, as they entreated
the Lord to have mercy on Zion, and cover her with the
glory of his righteousness. Daniel knew that the appointed time for Israel’s captivity was nearly ended;
but he did not feel that because God had promised
to deliver them, they themselves had no part to act.
With fasting and contrition he sought the Lord, confessing his own sins and the sins of the people.”
R&H, 2/09/1897

tion with his life of prayer.”
7/9/1903.

Youth Instructor,

“In this present prayer Daniel did at least six
things that deserve our attention.
“1. He prayed very much in earnest. 2. He depended on God’s righteousness, not his own. 3. He
used the Bible. 4. He confessed his own sins and the
sins of his group. 5. He sought the glory of God and of
His sanctuary. 6. He claimed God’s promises.” Maxwell, 1GC, 194.

“O, how solemn and important is the work entrusted to us! How far reaching this work is in its results! How are we to obtain strength and wisdom
necessary for its successful accomplishment? As
Daniel sought the Lord, so we are to seek him. Daniel declares, ‘I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek
by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes.’ We are to seek the Lord in humility
and contrition, confessing our own sins, and coming
into close unity with one another. Brethren and sisters,
pray, pray, for your own sakes, and for the sake of others.” R&H, 4/29/1909.

DANIEL 9:4
And I prayed unto the LORD my God,
and made my confession, and said, O Lord,
the great and dreadful God, keeping the
covenant and mercy to them that love him,
and to them that keep his commandments.
I Prayed and Made My Confession.—
“In his prayer, Daniel counts himself as an sinner
with Israel seventeen times.” Unknown Source.

“[Verses 3, 4 first part, quoted.] Though Daniel
had long been in the service of God, and had been spoken of by heaven as ‘greatly beloved,’ yet he now appeared before God as a sinner, urging the great need
of the people he loved. His prayer was eloquent in its
simplicity, and intensely earnest. Hear him pleading:
[Verses 4-9, 16-19 quoted.]” Prophets & Kings, 555.

Daniel’s Remarkable Prayer.—
“As the time approached for the close of the seventy years’ captivity, Daniel’s mind became greatly
exercised upon the prophecies of Jeremiah. He saw
that the time was at hand when God would give His
chosen people another trial; and with fasting, humiliation, and prayer, he importuned the God of heaven in
behalf of Israel, in these words: [Daniel 9:4-6 quoted].”
Sanctified Life, 46.

“Because God has promised, we are not released
from the responsibility of beseeching Him for the fulfillment of His word. Daniel might have reasoned in
this manner: God has promised to release His people at
the end of seventy years, and He will accomplish this
promise; I need not therefore concern myself at all in
the matter. Daniel did not thus reason; but as the time
drew near for the accomplishment of the word of the
Lord, he set himself to seek the Lord with all his heart.
“How earnestly he engaged in the work, even
with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes! This was
probably the year when Daniel was cast into the
lions’ den. The reader will recall that the decree
approved by the king had forbidden all his subjects
to ask any petition of any god except the king, on
pain of death. But regardless of the decree, Daniel
prayed this prayer three times a day with his windows
open toward Jerusalem.” Smith, DR, 194.

“We here have opening of Daniel’s wonderful
prayer, a prayer expressing such humiliation and contrition of heart that one must be without feeling who
can read it unmoved. He begins by acknowledging the
faithfulness of God, who never fails in any of His engagements with His followers. It was not from any
lack on God’s part in defending and upholding them,
that the Jews were then in captivity, but only on account of their sins.” Smith, DR, 194.
“From Jeremiah’s prophecy of the seventy years
Daniel knew that this was the end of the period that his
people were to be under the heel of the oppressor. But
the vision of Dan. 8, according to which it would be
2300 prophetic days or literal years before the sanctuary would be restored and God’s people would come
out from under the power of the oppressor, left him in
utter perplexity and distress.
“Daniel knew that the reason for the Babylonian
captivity was the iniquity of his nation. And now he
was fearful that because of these iniquities God
would not now permit the return to Jerusalem, but
would permit the enemy to prevail and the sanctuary to lie desolate for over two millenniums, to the

By Prayer and Supplications, With Fastings.-“He who strives for the mastery must be temperate in all things. Daniel’s clearness of mind and
firmness of purpose, his power in acquiring
knowledge and in resisting temptation, were due in
a great degree to the plainness of his diet, in connec-

329

GEMS FROM DANIEL
very ‘time of the end.’ So in ch. 9 Daniel offers a most
earnest prayer, confessing the transgression of his people which had brought a just retribution upon them,
praying God that He would now lead His people to
repent and turn from their iniquities, begging Him to
forgive their transgressions and not to defer the lookedfor restoration (Dan. 9:4-19).” Thiele, OSID, 110.

With deep humiliation, with tears and rending of
heart, he pleads for himself and for his people. He
lays his soul open before God, confessing his own unworthiness and acknowledging the Lord’s greatness
and majesty.” Sanctified Life, 46,47.
“We read that Daniel, the prophet of God, was a
man ‘greatly beloved’ of heaven. He held a high position in the courts of Babylon and served and honored
God alike in prosperity and trial, and yet he humbled
himself and confessed his sin and the sin of his people.
With deep sorrow of heart he acknowledged: ‘[Verse
5-7 quoted.]’
“Daniel did not seek to excuse himself or his people before God; but in humility and contrition of soul
he confessed the full extent and demerit of their transgressions, and vindicated God’s dealings as just toward
a nation that had set at nought His requirements and
would not profit by His entreaties.
“There is great need today of just such sincere,
heartfelt repentance and confession. Those who have
not humbled their souls before God in acknowledging
their guilt have not yet fulfilled the first condition of
acceptance. If we have not experienced that repentance
which is not to be repented of, and have not confessed
our sin with true humiliation of soul and brokenness of
spirit, abhorring our iniquity, we have never sought
truly for the forgiveness of sin; and if we have never
sought we have never found the peace of God. The
only reason why we may not have remission of sins
that are past is that we are not willing to humble our
proud hearts and comply with the conditions of the
word of truth. There is explicit instruction given concerning this matter. Confession of sin, whether public
or private, should be heartfelt and freely expressed. It
is not to be urged from the sinner. It is not to be made
in a flippant and careless way or forced from those who
have no realizing sense of the abhorrent character of
sin. The confession that is mingled with tears and sorrow, that is the outpouring of the inmost soul, finds its
way to the God of infinite pity. Says the psalmist:
‘The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
heart; and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit.’” 5
Testimonies, 635-637.

“Daniel then uttered one of the most deeply spiritual prayers in the Bible. He first confessed his sin and
that of his people (verses 4-11a). Next he described the
results of his sin and that of his people (verses 11b-14),
and finally he interceded before God, asking Him to
restore Israel to its land (verses 15-19).” Bohr, ND9, 1.
“Daniel no doubt feared that Israel had not yet
sufficiently repented of its sins to permit God to carry
out the prophecy of the seventy years.
“We have sinned and done wickedly and have rebelled—vs. 5.
“To us belongeth confusion of face.—vs. 8.
“To the Lord belong mercies though we have rebelled.—vs. 9.
“All Israel have transgressed thy law, therefore
the curse is upon us.—vs. 12.
“We have sinned, we have done wickedly.—vs.
15.
“Let thy fury be turned from Jerusalem, thy holy
mountain.—vs. 16.
“Cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary
which is desolate.—vs. 17.
“Behold our desolations and the city which is
called by thy name.—vs. 18.
“Defer not, for thine own sake.—vs. 19.” Thiele,
OSID, 111,112.

DANIEL 9:5,6
We have sinned, and have committed
iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments:
Neither have we hearkened unto thy
servants the prophets, which spake in thy
name to our kings, our princes, and our
fathers, and to all the people of the land.

“This man, whom heaven called ‘greatly beloved,’ in whom no fault could be found, even by his
bitterest enemies, placed himself beneath the load of
sin which was oppressing Israel. Bowed before God,
he met the Father with the words, ‘We have sinned
and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and
have rebelled;’ ‘neither have we hearkened unto thy
servants the prophets.’ ‘O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, to our
kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we
have sinned;...we have rebelled against him; neither
have we obeyed;...the curse is poured upon us;’ ‘all
this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer
before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our

We Have Sinned.—
“[Dan 9:4-6 quoted.] Daniel does not proclaim
his own fidelity before the Lord. Instead of claiming to
be pure and holy, this honored prophet humbly identifies himself with the really sinful of Israel. The wisdom which God had imparted to him was as far superior to the wisdom of the great men of the world as the
light of the sun shining in the heavens at noonday is
brighter than the feeblest star. Yet ponder the prayer
from the lips of this man so highly favored of Heaven.

330

DANIEL 9
iniquities; we obeyed not his voice; ‘we have sinned,
we have done wickedly;’ ‘because for our sins and for
the iniquities of our fathers,’ ‘behold our desolations;’
‘we do not present our supplications before thee for
our righteousnesses.’
“Before the Father we have one, even Christ,
who ‘hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows,’ ‘who his own self bare our sins in his own
body.’ Daniel was a representative of Christ, and he
had lived so close to God, and knew him so intimately,
that the spirit which distinguished Christ from all others was manifest in Daniel also.” Haskell, SDP,
120,121.

tempt of the heathen. Yet the purpose of God must
be accomplished. The knowledge of His will must
be spread abroad in the earth. God brought the hand
of the oppressor upon His people and scattered them as
captives among the nations. In affliction many of them
repented of their transgressions and sought the Lord.
Scattered throughout the countries of the heathen,
they spread abroad the knowledge of the true God.
The principles of the divine law came in conflict
with the customs and practices of the nations. Idolaters endeavored to crush out the true faith. The Lord in
His providence brought His servants, Daniel, Nehemiah, Ezra, face to face with kings and rulers, that these
idolaters might have an opportunity to receive the light.
Thus the work which God had given His people to
do in prosperity, in their own borders, but which
had been neglected through their unfaithfulness,
was done by them in captivity, under great trial and
embarrassment.” 5 Testimonies, 455.

Neither Have We Hearkened Unto Thy Prophets.—
“Foremost among those who were rapidly leading
the nation to ruin was Zedekiah their king. Forsaking
utterly the counsels of the Lord as given through the
prophets, forgetting the debt of gratitude he owed Nebuchadnezzar, violating his solemn oath of allegiance
taken in the name of the Lord God of Israel, Judah’s
king rebelled against the prophets, against his benefactor, and against his God.” Prophets & Kings, 450,451.

Unto Us Confusion of Face.—
“As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is
the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their
princes, and their priests, and their prophets. Saying to
a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast
brought me forth: for they have turned their back
unto me, and not their face: but in the time of their
trouble they will say, Arise, and save us.” Jeremiah
2:26,27.

“In his study of the books of Isaiah and Jeremiah,
and especially the latter, Daniel found that the captivity of his people and the destruction of Jerusalem
and the temple were the results of their individual
and national sins; a punishment for their rebellions
against the Lord in refusing to hearken to His messages
of warning through the prophets. Jeremiah declared
that he had faithfully warned them for 23 years, but
they refused to hearken. Jer. 25:3,4,11. The captivity
and desolation came as the result.” Bunch, BOD, 128.

“Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings.
“Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the
LORD our God. Truly in vain is salvation hoped for
from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains:
truly in the LORD our God is the salvation of Israel.
For shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their
sons and their daughters. We lie down in our shame,
and our confusion covereth us: for we have sinned
against the LORD our God, we and our fathers, from
our youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the
voice of the LORD our God.” Jeremiah 3:22-25.

DANIEL 9:7,8
O LORD, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at
this day; to the men of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and that are far off,
through all the countries whither thou hast
driven them, because of their trespass that
they have trespassed against thee.
O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of
face, to our kings, to our princes, and to
our fathers, because we have sinned against
thee.

“The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle
the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make
cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to
anger. Do they provoke me to anger? saith the LORD:
do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of
their own faces?” Jeremiah 7:18,19.

Through All the Countries Whither Thou Hast Driven Them.—
“But they did not keep their covenant with God.
They followed after the idolatrous practices of other
nations, and instead of making their Creator’s name a
praise in the earth their course held it up to the con-

DANIEL 9:9
To the Lord our God belong mercies
and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him;
331

GEMS FROM DANIEL
To God Belong Mercies and Forgivenesses.—
“The most striking feature of this covenant of
peace is the exceeding richness of the pardoning
mercy expressed to the sinner if he repents and
turns from his sin. The Holy Spirit describes the
gospel as salvation through the tender mercies of
our God. ‘I will be merciful to their unrighteousness,’
the Lord declares of those who repent, ‘and their sins
and their iniquities will I remember no more’ (Hebrews
8:12). Does God turn from justice in showing mercy to
the sinner? No; God cannot dishonor His law by suffering it to be transgressed with impunity. Under the
new covenant, perfect obedience is the condition of
life. If the sinner repents and confesses his sins, he will
find pardon. By Christ’s sacrifice in his behalf, forgiveness is secured for him. Christ has satisfied the
demands of the law for every repentant, believing sinner....” God’s Amazing Grace, 138.

They measured their holiness by the multitude of their
ceremonies, while their hearts were filled with hypocrisy, pride, and avarice. The curse of God was upon
them for their iniquities, while they professed to be
the only righteous nation upon earth.” Spirit of
Prophecy, Vol. 2, 108.

DANIEL 9:10-13
Neither have we obeyed the voice of
the LORD our God, to walk in his laws,
which he set before us by his servants the
prophets.
Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy
law, even by departing, that they might not
obey thy voice; therefore the curse is
poured upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God,
because we have sinned against him.
And he hath confirmed his words,
which he spake against us, and against our
judges that judged us, by bringing upon us
a great evil: for under the whole heaven
hath not been done as hath been done upon
Jerusalem.
As it is written in the law of Moses, all
this evil is come upon us: yet made we not
our prayer before the LORD our God, that
we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.

“Daniel had studied the curses for disobedience
which the Lord pronounced through Moses and which
are recorded in Lev. 26, and Deut. 27,28. He declared
that these curses were being visited upon the nation
because of their sins. He declared that in all human
history there never had been such a severe punishment as was visited upon Jerusalem which indicated
the enormity of their sins.” Bunch, BOD, 129.

He Hath Confirmed His Words.—
“The LORD hath done that which he had devised;
he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded
in the days of old. He hath thrown down, and hath not
pitied: and he hath caused thine enemy to rejoice over
thee.” Lamentations 2:17.
As It is Written in the Law of Moses.—
“Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou
commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the nations.
Nehemiah 1:8.

“And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me,
but walk contrary unto me; 28 Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you
seven times for your sins.
“29 And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and
the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat. 30 And I will
destroy your high places, and cut down your images,
and cast your carcasses upon the carcasses of your
idols, and my soul shall abhor you. 31 And I will
make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries
unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of
your sweet odours. 32 And I will bring the land into
desolation: and your enemies which dwell therein shall
be astonished at it. 33 And I will scatter you among
the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you:
and your land shall be desolate, and your cities
waste. 34 Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as
long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies’
land; even then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths. 35 As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt
upon it.
“…40 If they shall confess their iniquity, and the
iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they
trespassed against me, and that also they have walked
contrary unto me; 41 And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be
humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of
their iniquity: 42 Then will I remember my covenant

Therefore the Curse is Poured Upon Us.—
“The Jews had so far fallen from the ancient
teachings of Jehovah that they held that they would be
righteous in the sight of God, and receive the fulfillment of his promises, if they strictly kept the letter of
the law given them by Moses.
“The zeal with which they followed the teachings
of the elders gave them an air of great piety. Not content with performing those services which God had
specified to them through Moses, they were continually reaching for more rigid and difficult duties.

332

DANIEL 9
with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also
my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will
remember the land.
“43 The land also shall be left of them, and shall
enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without
them: and they shall accept of the punishment of their
iniquity: because, even because they despised my
judgments, and because their soul abhorred my
statutes. 44 And yet for all that, when they be in the
land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither
will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break
my covenant with them: for I am the LORD their
God.” Lev 26:27-35, 40-44.

and thy fury be turned away from thy city
Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for
our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us.
Our God, That Brought Thy People Out of Egypt.—
“I am the LORD thy God, which have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.” Exodus 20:2
“And remember that thou wast a servant in the
land of Egypt, and that the LORD thy God brought
thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a
stretched out arm: therefore the LORD thy God
commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.” Deuteronomy 5:15.

Yet Made We Not our Prayer Before the Lord.—
“[Daniel 9:11-13 quoted]. There had been a kind
of prayer offered—commonplace, self-justifying prayer—but not the prayer that comes from a broken
heart and contrite spirit.” R&H, 2/09/1897.

Our Sins, and for the Iniquities of our Fathers.—
“Daniel confesses the sins of his people both public and private, national and individual. Every form of
sin that he could enumerate of which the Jews were
guilty, Daniel confessed with genuine sorrow of heart.
His was a godly sorrow. Laying the ax at the root of
pride, he completely emptied himself and regarded as
his own the sins of kings, judges, priests and people.”
Bunch, BOD, 129.

DANIEL 9:14
Therefore hath the LORD watched
upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for
the LORD our God is righteous in all his
works which he doeth: for we obeyed not
his voice.
For We Obeyed Not His Voice.—
“To this point Daniel’s prayer is employed in
making a full and heartbroken confession of sin. He
vindicates fully the course of the Lord, acknowledging the sins of his people to be the cause of all their
calamites, as God had threatened them by the prophet
Moses. He does not discriminate in favor of himself.
No self-righteousness appears in his petition. Although
he had suffered long for others’ sins, enduring seventy
years of captivity for the wrongs of his people, he lived
a godly life, and received signal honors and blessings
from the Lord. He brings no accusations against anyone, pleads no sympathy for himself as a victim of others’ wrongs, but classes himself with the rest, saying
We have sinned, and unto us belongs confusion of face.
He acknowledges that they had not heeded the lessons God designed to teach them by their afflictions.” Smith, DR, 195.

We Have Sinned, We Have Done Wickedly.—
“The man of God was praying for the blessing of
Heaven upon his people and for a clearer knowledge of
the divine will. The burden of his heart was for Israel,
who were not, in the strictest sense, keeping the law of
God. He acknowledges that all their misfortunes have
come upon them in consequence of their transgressions
of that holy law. He says, [vs.15,16 quoted.] The Jews
had lost their peculiar, holy character as God’s chosen
people.” Sanctified Life, 47,48.

DANIEL 9:15,16
And now, O Lord our God, that hast
brought thy people forth out of the land of
Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten
thee renown, as at this day; we have
sinned, we have done wickedly.
O LORD, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger

Cause Thy Face to Shine.—
“3 Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to
shine; and we shall be saved.
“7 Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause
thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.
“19 Turn us again, O LORD God of hosts,
cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.”
Psalm 80: 3,7,19.

DANIEL 9:17
Now therefore, O our God, hear the
prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy
sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord’s
sake.

“For God, who commanded the light to shine

333

GEMS FROM DANIEL
out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ.” 2 Corinthians 4:6.

sire makes him earnest and fervent. He continues:
‘O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, harken and do;
defer not, for thine own sake, O my God; for thy city
and thy people are called by thy name.’ R&H,
2/09/1897.

“God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and
cause his face to shine upon us; Selah. 2 That thy
way may be known upon earth, thy saving health
among all nations. 3 Let the people praise thee, O
God; let all the people praise thee.” Psalm 67:1-3.

“Spurious sanctification carries with it a boastful, self-righteous spirit which is foreign to the religion of the Bible. Meekness and humility are the
fruits of the Spirit. The prophet Daniel was an example
of true sanctification. His long life was filled up with
noble service for his Master. He was a man ‘greatly
beloved’ [Daniel 10:11.] of Heaven, and was granted
such honors as have rarely been vouchsafed to mortals.
Yet his purity of character and unwavering fidelity
were equaled only by his humility and contrition.
Instead of claiming to be pure and holy, this honored prophet identified himself with the really sinful
of Israel, as he pleaded before God in behalf of his
people: ‘We do not present our supplications before
thee for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies.’
‘We have sinned, we have done wickedly.’ And ‘for
our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem
and thy people are become a reproach.’ He declares, ‘I
was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and
the sin of my people.’ [Daniel 9:18,15,16,20.] And
when at a later time the Son of God appeared in answer
to his prayers to give him instruction, he declares, ‘My
comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I
retained no strength.’ [Daniel 10:8.]” Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 4, 301,302.

Upon Thy Sanctuary That is Desolate.—
“[Verse 17 quoted]. Daniel’s heart turns with intense longing to the desolate sanctuary of God. He
knows that its prosperity can be restored only as Israel
shall repent of their transgressions of God’s law, and
become humble, faithful, and obedient.” Sanctified
Life, 48.
“From a study of the prayer of Daniel, found in
the ninth chapter of his book, it is evident that the
prophet carried upon his soul the burden for the restoration of the sanctuary with its services.” Gilbert,
MIHS, 129.

DANIEL 9:18,19
O my God, incline thine ear, and hear;
open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy
name: for we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses,
but for thy great mercies.
O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O
Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for thine
own sake, O my God: for thy city and thy
people are called by thy name.

“The prophet now pleads the honor of the Lord’s
name as a reason why he desires his petition to be
granted. He refers to the fact of the deliverance of Israel from Egypt, and the great renown that had accrued
to the Lord’s name for all His wonderful works manifested among them. All this would be lost, should He
now abandon them to perish. Moses used the same
argument in pleading for Israel. (Numbers 14.) Not
that God is moved with motives of ambition and vainglory; but when His people are jealous for the honor
of His name, when they evince their love for Him by
pleading with Him to work, not for their own personal benefit, but for His own glory, that His name
may not be reproached and blasphemed among the
heathen, this is acceptable with Him. Daniel then
intercedes for the city of Jerusalem, called by God’s
name, and His holy mountain, for which He has had
such love, and beseeches Him, for His mercies’ sake,
to let His anger be turned away. Finally, his mind centers upon the holy sanctuary, God’s own dwelling place
upon this earth, and he pleads that its desolations may
be repaired.
“Daniel understood the seventy years of captivity
to be near their termination. From his allusion to the
sanctuary, it is evident that he so far misunderstood the
important vision given him in Daniel 8 as to suppose
that the 2300 days expired at the same time. This mis-

Oh My God, Incline Thine Ear.—
“What earnestness and fervor characterize his
supplications! The hand of faith is reached upward to
grasp the never-failing promises of the Most High.
His soul is wrestling in agony. And he has the evidence that his prayer is heard. He knows that victory is
his. If we as a people would pray as Daniel prayed,
and wrestle as he wrestled, humbling our souls before God, we should realize as marked answers to
our petitions as were granted to Daniel. Hear how
he presses his case at the court of heaven: [vs.18,19
quoted.]” Sanctified Life, 47.
Not For Our Righteousness, But For Thy Mercies.—
“Daniel makes no plea on the ground of his own
goodness; but he says: ‘O my God, incline thine ear,
and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations,
and the city which is called by thy name: for we do not
present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies.’ His intensity of de-

334

DANIEL 9
“defer” at the climax of his prayer has profound significance (verse 19). The Hebrew achar is variously
translated in the Old Testament. It can mean ‘to loiter,
to delay, to procrastinate, to hinder, to tarry, to slacken.’ In Exodus 22:29 it is translated ‘delay.’ In Genesis 24:56 it is rendered ‘hinder.’ In Deuteronomy
23:21 uses ‘slack.’ Judges 5:28 translates ‘tarry’ as
does Habakkuk 2:3 and Proverbs 23:30. Daniel feared
that God would delay the release of Israel beyond the
seventy years and so he poured out his heart in prayer
appealing to God’s covenant loyalty and faithfulness.”
Bohr, ND9, 2.

apprehension was at once corrected when the angel
came to give him further instruction in answer to
his prayer.” Smith, DR, 196.
O Lord, Hear. O Lord, Forgive. O Lord, Harken.—
“There is need of prayer—most earnest, fervent,
agonizing prayer—such prayer as David offered when
he exclaimed: ‘As the hart panteth after the water
brooks, so panteth my soul after Thee, O God.’ ‘I have
longed after Thy precepts;’ ‘I have longed for Thy
salvation.’ ‘My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the
courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh crieth out for
the living God.’ ‘My soul breaketh for the longing that
it hath unto Thy judgments.’ This is the spirit of wrestling prayer, such as was possessed by the royal psalmist.”
“Daniel prayed to God, not exalting himself or
claiming any goodness: ‘O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive;
O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for Thine own sake,
O my God.’ This is what James calls the effectual,
fervent prayer. Of Christ it is said: ‘And being in an
agony He prayed more earnestly.’ In what contrast to
this intercession by the Majesty of heaven are the feeble, heartless prayers that are offered to God. Many
are content with lip service, and but few have a sincere,
earnest, affectionate longing after God.
“Communion with God imparts to the soul an
intimate knowledge of His will. But many who profess the faith know not what true conversion is. They
have no experience in communion with the Father
through Jesus Christ, and have never felt the power of
divine grace to sanctify the heart. Praying and sinning,
sinning and praying, their lives are full of malice, deceit, envy, jealousy, and self-love. The prayers of this
class are an abomination to God. True prayer engages
the energies of the soul and affects the life. He who
thus pours out his wants before God feels the emptiness
of everything else under heaven. ‘All my desire is before Thee,’ said David, ‘and my groaning is not hid
from Thee.’ ‘My soul thirsteth for God, for the living
God: when shall I come and appear before God?’
‘When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in
me.’” 4 Testimonies, 534,535.

Nehemiah’s Prayer Much Like Daniel’s.—
“And they said unto me, The remnant that are left
of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and reproach: the wall of Jerusalem also is broken
down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire. 4
And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I
sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and
fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven,
“5 And said, “I beseech thee, O LORD God of
heaven, the great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that love him and observe his
commandments: 6 Let thine ear now be attentive, and
thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of thy
servant, which I pray before thee now, day and night,
for the children of Israel thy servants, and confess the
sins of the children of Israel, which we have sinned
against thee: both I and my father’s house have
sinned. 7 We have dealt very corruptly against
thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the
statutes, nor the judgments, which thou commandedst thy servant Moses. 8 Remember, I beseech
thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad
among the nations:
“9 But if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; though there were of you
cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I
gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the
place that I have chosen to set my name there.
“10 Now these are thy servants and thy people,
whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, and by
thy strong hand.
“11 O LORD, I beseech thee, let now thine ear
be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the
prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name: and
prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and grant him
mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king’s
cupbearer.” Nehemiah 1:3-11.

Defer Not, for Thy Own Sake.—
“When the events of Daniel 9 transpired in 538
BC, Babylon had just fallen and Medo-Persia had taken
over the kingdom (see, Daniel 5). Daniel knew that the
fall of Babylon was the harbinger that Israel would
soon be released from bondage. And yet nothing could
be seen on the horizon to indicate that such a release
was imminent. Daniel knew that Jeremiah’s seventy
years had begun in 605 BC, when he and his three
friends had been taken to Babylon. Therefore he also
understood that the release of Israel must take place
around the year 536 BC.
“…Daniel’s prayer, which immediately follows
his study of Jeremiah’s prophecy, includes a confession
of Israel’s sin and an appeal to God’s mercy. The word

DANIEL 9:20,21
And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of
my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the LORD my God for the
335

GEMS FROM DANIEL
courts was sent to him. He says, [Dan. 9:21,22,…
23,25]. Daniel pleaded for the honor of God to be preserved. His prayer was heard and once more the Lord
had mercy upon His rebellious people.” Manuscript
138,139, 9/27/1899.

holy mountain of my God;
Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer,
even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in
the vision at the beginning, being caused to
fly swiftly, touched me about the time of
the evening oblation.

“What a prayer was that which came forth from
the lips of Daniel! What humbling of soul it reveals!
The warmth of heavenly fire was recognized in the
words that were going upward to God. Heaven responded to that prayer by sending its messenger to
Daniel. In this our day, prayers offered in like manner
will prevail with God. ‘The effectual fervent prayer of
a righteous man availeth much.’ As in ancient times,
when prayer was offered, fire descended from heaven,
and consumed the sacrifice upon the altar, so in answer to our prayers, the heavenly fire will come into
our souls. The light and power of the Holy Spirit
will be ours.” R&H, 2/9/1897.

Whiles I Was Speaking and Praying.—
“Heaven was bending low to hear the earnest
supplication of the prophet. Even before he had finished his plea for pardon and restoration, the
mighty Gabriel again appeared to him, and called
his attention to the vision he had seen prior to the
fall of Babylon and the death of Belshazzar. And
then the angel outlined before him in detail the period
of the seventy weeks, which was to begin at the time of
‘the going forth of the commandment to restore and to
build Jerusalem.’ Verse 25.” Prophets & Kings, 556.

“Daniel’s heart was burdened for the people of
God, for the city and temple that were laid waste. His
deepest interest was for the honor of God and the prosperity of Israel. It was this that moved him to seek God
with prayer and fasting and deep humiliation. Brethren
in responsible positions in the Lord’s work for this
time, have not we as great need to call upon God as had
Daniel? I address those who believe that we are living
in the very last period of this earth’s history. I entreat
you to take upon your own souls a burden for our
churches, our schools, and our institutions. That God
who heard Daniel’s prayer will hear ours when we
come to him in contrition. Our necessities are as urgent, our difficulties are as great, and we need to have
the same intensity of purpose, and in faith roll our burden upon the great Burden-bearer. There is need for
hearts to be as deeply moved in our time as in the
time when Daniel prayed.” R&H, 2/9/1897.

“As Daniel's prayer is going forth, the angel
Gabriel comes sweeping down from the heavenly
courts to tell him that his petitions are heard and
answered. This mighty angel has been commissioned
to give him skill and understanding—to open before
him the mysteries of future ages. Thus, while earnestly
seeking to know and understand the truth, Daniel was
brought into communion with Heaven’s delegated
messenger.
“In answer to his petition, Daniel received not only the light and truth which he and his people most
needed, but a view of the great events of the future,
even to the advent of the world’s Redeemer. Those
who claim to be sanctified, while they have no desire to
search the Scriptures or to wrestle with God in prayer
for a clearer understanding of Bible truth, know not
what true sanctification is.
“Daniel talked with God. Heaven was opened before him. But the high honors granted him were the
result of humiliation and earnest seeking. All who believe with the heart the word of God will hunger and
thirst for a knowledge of His will. God is the author of
truth. He enlightens the darkened understanding
and gives to the human mind power to grasp and
comprehend the truths which He has revealed.
“Upon the occasion just described, the angel Gabriel imparted to Daniel all the instruction which he
was then able to receive.” Sanctified Life, 48,49.

“Daniel’s prayer had an almost immediate answer, and the Lord must even then have been working on the heart of Cyrus to cause him to issue the
decree for the rebuilding of the sanctuary at Jerusalem,
because it was only a short time after this that the decree of 2 Chron. 36:21-23 and Ezra 1:1-4 was issued.”
Thiele, OSID, 112.
Whom I Had Seen In the Vision at the Beginning.—
“We here have the result of Daniel’s supplication.
He is suddenly interrupted by a heavenly messenger.
The angel Gabriel, appearing again as he had before in
the form of a man, whom Daniel had seen in the vision
at the beginning, touched him. An important question
is at this point to be determined, namely, Has the vision
of Daniel 8 ever been explained, and can it ever be
understood? To what vision does Daniel refer by the
expression, ‘the vision at the beginning’? It will be
conceded by all that it is a vision of which we have
some previous record, and that in that vision we shall

“This prayer was the work of the Holy Spirit. It
was heard in heaven. [Verse 20-23 quoted.]” R&H,
2/9/1897.
“The spirit of intercession was upon Daniel, and
he laid hold of the throne of infinite power, praying
earnestly for the restoration of Jerusalem. All heaven
was interested in his supplication and before his
prayer was finished, a messenger from the heavenly

336

DANIEL 9
find some mention of Gabriel. We must go back beyond this ninth chapter, for all that we have in this
chapter previous to this appearance of Gabriel, is simply a record of Daniel’s prayer. Looking back, then,
through previous chapters, we find mention of only
three visions given to Daniel. The interpretation of the
dream of Nebuchadnezzar was given in a night vision.
(Daniel 2: 19.) But there is no record of any angelic
agency in the matter. The vision of Daniel 7 was explained to Daniel by ‘one of them that stood by,’ probably an angel, nor is there anything in that vision which
needed further explanation. The vision of Daniel 8
gives some particulars which show this to be the
vision referred to. Gabriel is there introduced by
name. Daniel had said that he did not understand it,
showing that Gabriel, at the conclusion of Daniel 8,
had not completed his mission. There is no place in
all the Bible where this instruction is continued, if it is
not in Daniel 9. If therefore the vision of Daniel 8 is
not the one referred to, we have no record that Gabriel ever complied fully with the instructions given
him, or that the vision has ever been explained. The
instruction which the angel now gives to Daniel, as we
shall see from the following verses, does exactly complete what was lacking in Daniel 8. These considerations prove beyond a doubt the connection between
Daniel 8 and 9, and this conclusion will be still further
strengthened by a consideration of the angel’s instructions.” Smith, DR, 197,198.

me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come
forth to give thee skill and understanding.
At the beginning of thy supplications
the commandment came forth, and I am
come to shew thee; for thou art greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter,
and consider the vision.
I am Come to Give Thee Skill & Understanding.—
“The very thing for which Daniel had asked, was
first mentioned as Gabriel laid his hands upon the
prophet. ‘O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee
skill and understanding. At the beginning of thy supplications the word (margin) came forth, and I am come
to show thee.’ Heaven was more interested than man
could be in the very thing for which Daniel prayed, and
as soon as the channel was open, the Spirit flowed in.
In the spiritual as in the natural world a vacuum is abhorred. As the air rushes into a vessel when a liquid
is poured out, so the Holy Spirit fills the heart when
it is emptied of self. If there were but more room
made for Christ in hearts, the Pentecostal experience
would often be repeated.” Haskell, SDP,122.
Gabriel’s Mission.—
“The manner in which Gabriel introduces himself
on this occasion shows that he has come to complete
some unfinished mission. This can be nothing less
than to carry out the instruction to make this man ‘understand the vision,’ as recorded in Daniel 8. He says,
‘I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.’ As the charge still rested upon him to make Daniel understand, and as he had explained to Daniel in
chapter 8 all that he could then bear, and yet he did not
understand the vision, he now comes to resume his
work and complete his mission. As soon as Daniel
began his fervent supplication, the commandment came
forth; for Gabriel received instruction to visit Daniel,
and impart to him the requisite information.
“From the time it takes to read Daniel’s prayer
down to the point at which Gabriel made his appearance upon the scene, the reader can judge of the speed
with which this messenger was dispatched from the
court of heaven to this servant of God. No wonder
that Daniel says he was caused to fly swiftly, or that
Ezekiel compares the movements of these celestial
beings to a flash of lightning. (Ezekiel 1:14.)
“‘Understand the matter,’ he says to Daniel. What
matter? Evidently that which he did not before understand, as stated in the last verse of Daniel 8. ‘Consider
the vision.’ What vision? Not the interpretation of
Nebuchadnezzar’s image, nor the vision of Daniel 7,
for there was no difficulty with either of these; but the
vision of Daniel 8, in reference to which his mind was
filled with astonishment and lack of understanding. ‘I
am come to show thee,’ also said the angel.

“The Hebrew word for ‘vision’ is chazon, which
refers to the entire vision of ch. 8:1-14. See ch. 8:26a
and ch. 9:23 for more information.” PJ
Gabriel, Whom I Had Seen at the Beginning.—
“Had Christ come in his former glory, humanity
could not have endured the sight. When the angel Gabriel came to Daniel to give him skill and understanding, Daniel could not look upon him. The angel had
to reveal himself as a man before he could speak
with the prophet. Thus we see the wisdom of God in
planning that Christ should come as a man.” Youth
Instructor, 2/22/1900.
About the Time of the Evening Oblation.—
“ ‘Gabriel arrived about the time of the evening
sacrifice.’—Moffatt. Because Jerusalem was in ruins
and the sanctuary service discontinued, the morning
and evening sacrifices were not then being offered, but
Daniel kept the time in memory as the season of
prayer. Three times a day he opened his lattice windows toward Jerusalem and it was during his evening
devotion that his prayer reached its eloquent climax
that brought Gabriel to his side.” Bunch, BOD, 131.

DANIEL 9:22,23
And he informed me, and talked with
337

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Daniel had no difficulty in understanding what
the angel told him about the ram, the he-goat, and the
little horn, symbolizing the kingdoms of Medo-Persia,
Greece, and Rome. Nor was he mistaken in regard to
the ending of the seventy years’ captivity. But the burden of his petition was in respect to the repairing of the
desolations of the sanctuary, which lay in ruins. He
had undoubtedly drawn the conclusion that the time
when the end of the seventy years’ captivity came was
the time for the fulfillment of what the angel had said
in regard to the cleansing of the sanctuary at the end of
the 2300 days. Now he must be set right. This explains why at this particular time, so soon after the previous vision, instruction was sent to him.
“The seventy years of captivity were drawing to
their close. Daniel was acting upon a misunderstanding. He must not be suffered longer to remain ignorant
of the true import of the former vision. ‘I am now
come forth to give thee skill and understanding,’ said
the angel. How could the connection between the former visit of the angel and this one be more distinctly
shown than by such words at such a time from such a
person?” Smith, DR, 198,199.

“God has many favorites among the sons of men.
Indeed, every man is a special favorite, and highly
honored by the King of heaven, but there are very few
to whom angels have spoken the word, ‘Thou are
greatly beloved.’ The marginal reading of the twentythird verse gives the Hebrew rendering as ‘a man of
desires.’ That man whose desire is heavenward, who
longs for spiritual food as the heart panteth after the
water brook, is greatly beloved of God, for God is in
search of such to fulfill his will on earth. To such Gabriel can speak.” Haskell, SDP, 122.
Therefore Understand.—
“In this sentence, the angel Gabriel helps Daniel
‘understand’ the prophecy of the seventy weeks. It
echoes the words spoken by the same angel in Daniel
8:16 to offer ‘understanding’ regarding the prophecy of
the 2300 evenings and mornings.
“Make understand (haben) …the vision (8:16)
“Understand (haben) …the vision (9:23)
“Actually, Daniel 8:16 contains the first occurrence of the form haben (to understand) and Daniel
9:23 has the last one, as if the thought of the key
word haben, started in Daniel 8:16, had finally
reached it goal in Daniel 9:23. It is evident here
that the prophecy of the 70 weeks was intended to
be part of the preceding prophecy of 2300 evenings
and mornings which had been left incomplete. Underlying this connection between the 70 weeks and the
2300 evenings and mornings is the word which introduces the prophecy of the 70 weeks, ‘cut off’ (htk).
The fact that the 70 weeks of Daniel 9 are said to be
‘cut off’ implies that they must belong to a longer and
already known period of time, i.e. the 2300 evenings
and mornings of Daniel 8.
“The first revelation provides the information
about the duration of the period, 2300 evenings and
mornings, which leads to the ‘time of the end’ (8:17).
The second revelation provides the complementary
data, the starting point of this period.” Douhkan, DVE,
32.

Daniel Greatly Beloved.—
“One expression seems worthy of notice before
we leave verse 23. It is the declaration of the angel to
Daniel, ‘For thou art greatly beloved.’ The angel
brought this declaration direct from the courts of heaven. It expressed the state of feeling that existed there in
regard to Daniel.
“Think of celestial beings, the highest in the universe, …having such esteem for a mortal man here
upon earth as to authorize an angel to bear the message
to him that he is greatly beloved! This is one of the
highest pinnacles of glory to which mortals can attain.
Abraham reached another, when it could be said of him
that he was the ‘friend of God;’ and Enoch another,
when it could be said of him that he ‘walked with
God.’ Can we arrive at any such attainments? God is
no respecter of persons; but He is a respecter of character. If in virtue and godliness we could equal these
eminent men, we could move the divine love to equal
depths. We, too, could be greatly beloved—could be
friends of God, and could walk with Him. We must be
in our generation what they were in theirs.
“There is a figure used in reference to the last
church which denotes the closest union with God: ‘If
any man hear My voice, and open the door, I will come
into him, and will sup with him, and he with Me.’ Revelation 3: 20. To sup with the Lord denotes an intimacy equal to being greatly beloved by Him, walking
with Him, or being His friend. How desirable a position! Alas for the evils of our nature, which cut us
from this communion! O for grace to overcome these,
that we may enjoy this spiritual union here, and finally
enter the glories of His presence at the marriage supper
of the Lamb!” Smith, DR, 199,201.

Consider the Vision.—
“At this point a quick look at the Hebrew is immensely helpful. In the Hebrew of Daniel 8 and 9, two
different words are used for the word translated as vision.
“ ‘In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar
a vision [chazon] appeared unto me.’ Daniel 8:1. The
next verse says, ‘I saw in a vision [chazon].’ The word
chazon refers to the entire vision of Daniel 8.
“Yet when Daniel referred specifically to the part
dealing with the 2300 days and the cleansing of the
sanctuary, another word for vision is used.
“ ‘And the vision [mareh] of the evening and the
morning which was told is true. …And I was astonished at the vision [mareh], but none understood it.’
Verses 26,27. The word mareh comes from the Hebrew root, ra’ah, which means ‘to see.’ Sometimes it

338

DANIEL 9
has been translated as appearance.
“Anyway, two different words for ‘vision’ are
used in Daniel 8—chazon, referring to the entire vision
of the chapter; and mareh, referring specifically to
the 2300 days. These two words appear also in Daniel
9.
“ ‘Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the
man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision [chazon] at
the beginning …informed me, and talked with me, and
said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill
and understanding.’ Verses 21,22.
“Here, Daniel refers back to Gabriel, the angel he
had seen in the chazon, or the whole vision, of the previous chapter. Remember, too, that nowhere in Daniel’s prayer did he seek for ‘skill and understanding.’
The last time he needed understanding was regarding
the 2300 days of Daniel 8, and in Daniel 9 now Gabriel
promises to give him ‘skill and understanding.’
“Now, notice the specific part of the vision of
Daniel 8 that Gabriel points him to in this verse. “At
the beginning of thy supplications, the commandment
came forth, and I am come to shew thee, for thou art
greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, and
consider the vision [mareh].’ Verse 23.
“What mareh? Obviously, the mareh of the
2300 days that he didn’t understand in the previous
chapter. It could be nothing else but a reference to
the mareh of the 2300 days!
“We have the same angel interpreter as in the vision of Daniel 8, which Daniel himself refers back to
when Gabriel appears. Gabriel then promises to give
Daniel understanding and the only point on which Daniel didn’t have understanding concerned the mareh of
the 2300 days. And then the angel specifically points
him back to the mareh and tells Daniel to ‘understand …and consider’ it.
“Clearly, Gabriel has come to give the explanation of the 2300 days not given in the previous chapter.” Goldstein, 1844MS, 44,45.

words of the angel are: ‘Seventy weeks are determined
upon thy people and upon thy Holy City.’” Great Controversy, 325
“The angel-interpreter Gabriel is first introduced
in 8:16 and charged to interpret the vision to Daniel
(vss. 17, 19). In 9:21-23 the same angel returns to
complete his commission. ‘Gabriel, whom I had seen
in vision at the first, came to me... and he said to me...
understand the vision [mareh]’ (RSV).
“It should not be overlooked that the time element
of the auditory revelation in chapter 8 remained unclear
to Daniel—‘and [I] did not understand it’ (vs. 27,
RSV). Daniel 9:24-27 contains no vision, but there is
an auditory revelation in which the time element figures most prominently. Both 8:13-14 and 9:24-27 are
auditory revelations, and both deal with a time element.
The latter provides the beginning point for the time
span announced in the former revelation.” BRI,
2SOD, 438.

DANIEL 9:24
Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish
the transgression, and to make an end of
sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.
Outline of Gabriel’s Explanation.—
“The prophecy of the 70 weeks appears to be, in a
literary sense, a disorganized mumbo jumbo. Yet a
careful study of the literary structure reveals a beautiful
symmetry. Notice in the following chart that the description alternates between the city and people on the
one hand and Messiah the Prince on the other:
Introduction: “Going Forth of the Word”
City and People
Messiah the Prince

“God had bidden His messenger: ‘Make this man
to understand the vision.’ That commission must be
fulfilled. In obedience to it, the angel, sometime afterward, returned to Daniel, saying: ‘I am now come
forth to give thee skill and understanding;’ ‘therefore
understand the matter, and consider the vision.’ Daniel 8:27,16; 9:22,23,25-27. There was one important
point in the vision of chapter 8 which had been left
unexplained, namely, that relating to time—the period of the 2300 days; therefore the angel, in resuming
his explanation, dwells chiefly upon the subject of
time: [Verses 24-27 quoted.]
“The angel had been sent to Daniel for the express purpose of explaining to him the point which
he had failed to understand in the vision of the
eighth chapter, the statement relative to time—‘unto
two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed.’ After bidding Daniel ‘understand the matter, and consider the vision,’ the very first

* ‘Restore and build Jerusalem”
* ‘Seven weeks”

‘Messiah the Prince’
‘Threescore and
two Weeks’
* “The street shall be built
‘After threescore
again, and the wall,
and two weeks shall
even in troublous times’
Messiah be cut off’
* ‘The people of the Prince
‘He [the Prince] shall
that shall come shall destroy
confirm the covenant
the city and the sanctuary
with many for one week:
and the end thereof
and in the midst of the
shall be with a flood’
week he shall cause the
sacrifice and the
oblation to cease’
Conclusion: ‘And for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation,
and that determined shall be poured out upon the desolate.’”

Bohr, ND9, 6.
Week.—

339

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“18 And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will
serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter. 20 And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and
they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he
had to her. 21 And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my
wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto
her. [Laban tricked Jacob and gave Leah the eldest to
him.] 26 And Laban said, It must not be so done in our
country, to give the younger before the firstborn. 27
Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this [Rachel]
also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet
seven other years.” Gen 29:18-27.

are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy
city.’ Smith, DR, 201,202.
“The vital point in connection with this time
prophecy is to have a particular starting point from
which to count these years. The prophecy would be of
little value if the time to begin reckoning the periods
were not given prominence by the angel. But Gabriel,
who was commissioned to ‘make this man to understand the vision,’ does not leave the prophet in uncertainty. He clearly defines when to begin the reckoning.
The angel says, ‘Know therefore and understand.’ The
language is simple and definite. A close relationship
exists between the seventy times seven and the 2300;
for the 490 are cut off from the 2300. The time to
begin counting the two periods, the 490 and the
2300, must be the same. The shorter is cut off from
the longer one. Both of these periods begin at the same
time.” Gilbert, MIHS, 133.

“Immediately following chapter 9, in the initial
verses of chapter 10, Daniel suggest the meaning of
‘weeks.’ Referring to his three weeks of fasting, Daniel specifies in Hebrew ‘weeks of days’ (vs. 2). This is
the only passage in the whole Bible to use such an expression in order to distinguish the two kinds of weeks.
As an author puts it, ‘The expression “three full weeks”
means literally “three weeks of days” and is probably
used to differentiate from the phrase “weeks of years”
that is clearly implied in Daniel 9.’ The three weeks
of fasting are made up of days, whereas the 70
weeks are made up of years.” Doukhan, DVE, 34.

Day for a Year in Prophecy.—
“As we enter upon the study of the seventy
weeks, or 490 days, it will be well to remind ourselves
of the fact that in Scripture prophecy a day represents a
year.
“…The year-day principle numbers among its
supporters such names as Augustine, Tichonius, Primasius, Andreas, the Venerable Bede, Ambrosius,
Ansbertus, Berengaud, and Bruno Astensis, besides the
leading modern expositors. [See Edward B. Elliott,
Horae Apocalypticae, Vol. III, p.234, notes 2-6.] But
what is more conclusive than all else is the fact that
the prophecies have been fulfilled on this principle—a demonstration of its correctness from which
there is no appeal. This will be found in the prophecy
of the seventy weeks throughout, and all the prophetic
periods of Daniel 7 and 12, and Revelation 9, 12, and
13.
“Thus the events of the seventy weeks, calculated
in this rational way, furnish a key to the whole vision.”
Smith, DR, 204,205.

Seventy Weeks.—
“These are the first words the angel uttered to
Daniel in imparting to him that instruction which he
came to give. Why did he thus abruptly introduce a
period of time? We must again refer to the vision of
Daniel 8. We have seen that Daniel, at the close of that
chapter, says that he did not understand the vision.
Some parts of that vision were at the time clearly explained. It could not have been these parts which he
did not understand. We therefore inquire what it was
that Daniel did not understand, or what part of the vision was left unexplained.
“In that vision four prominent things are brought
to view: the ram, the he-goat, the little horn, and the
period of 2300 days. The symbols of the ram, the hegoat, and the little horn were explained, but nothing
was said respecting the period of time. This must
therefore have been the point that he did not understand. The other parts of the vision were of no avail
while the application of this period of 2300 days was
left in obscurity.
“Says the learned Dr. Hales, in commenting upon
the seventy weeks, ‘This chronological prophecy... was
evidently designed to explain the foregoing vision,
especially in its chronological part of the 2300 days.’
[A New Analysis of Chronology, Vol. II, p.517.]
“…We should naturally expect the angel to
begin with the point which had been omitted, namely, the time. This we find to be true in fact. After citing Daniel’s attention to the former vision in the most
direct and emphatic manner, and assuring him that he
had now come forth to give him understanding, he begins with the very point there omitted: ‘Seventy weeks

“Weeks” Were Sabbatical Weeks of Years.—
“And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of
years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the
space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto
thee forty and nine years.” Leviticus 25:8.
“[Ben Zion] Wacholder demonstrates how the
Hebrew word for ‘week’ in Daniel 9 is used in Jewish
writings to refer to sabbatical cycles. He also provides
references to ancient Jewish commentators who felt
that the 70 weeks of Daniel 9 were 70 sabbatical cycles (‘Chronomessianism, The Timing of Messianic
Movements and the Calendar of Sabbatical Cycles,’ Hebrew Union College Annual 46 (1975), pp.
202-204).
“Since Daniel 9 begins with a reference to the 70
years of Babylonian captivity, this conclusion seems

340

DANIEL 9
certain. The reason the Jews were sentenced to a
captivity of 70 years is because they had not kept
that many sabbatical years and had to catch up
(Lev. 26:34-35, 43; 2 Chr. 36:21-23). So Daniel 9 begins with a reference to the missed sabbatical years of
70 sabbatical cycles, and ends with a discussion of
another 70 sabbatical cycles.” Pickle, WWSY, 2.

izes that Jesus read this Sabbatical-year type text in
a Sabbatical year—AD 27—and applied it to Himself
at the beginning of His ministry. In so doing he announced Himself as the Great Liberator of the Jews
and all mankind. It was no accident that He made
such an announcement at this time. Given its connections with Leviticus, Isaiah, and Daniel this appears to
have been done at this time by divine design.” BRI,
2SOD, 225-227, (252,253).

“In the exegetical study of chapter 9 it is shown
that several different lines of linguistic evidence converge to indicate that the word sabua (used for the time
units in this prophecy) should be translated ‘weeks’
instead of ‘sevens.’ Working from that conclusion one
can still ask the question, What kind of weeks are intended here? The word “week” can be used two different ways. (1) It can measure off a unit of seven successive days regardless of the day upon which they begin
(for example, from Tuesday to Monday). Or (2) the
word can be used to refer specifically to Sabbatical
weeks which begin on Sunday and end on Saturday as
the Sabbath. These may be referred to as nonSabbatical and Sabbatical weeks respectively.
“The question is, Should Daniel’s 70 symbolic
weeks of prophetic time be interpreted along the lines
of the model of Sabbatical or non-Sabbatical weeks? If
non-Sabbatical weeks are intended, these time units
simply refer collectively to an overall period of 490
years. On the other hand, if Sabbatical weeks are
intended, this period of 490 successive years should
be divisible by Sabbatical year periods or cycles of
seven years each (see Lev 25:1-7).
“The text itself gives no explicit indication on
which type of week was intended. In this instance the
best way to answer our question is to apply a pragmatic
test and examine the prophecy’s dates to see if their
fulfillments fit with known Sabbatical years.
“In recent years extra-biblical sources have supplied us with the information that now makes it possible to date the Sabbatical years of the post-Exilic period—the seventh year in a unit of seven (Lev 25:1-7).
It can now be demonstrated that the dates 457 BC,
AD 27, and AD 34 (dates for basic events in the
chapter 9 prophecy) were Sabbatical years. Thus
the answer to our initial question is that the ‘weeks’
in the prophecy of chapter 9 refer to Sabbatical
weeks which in turn involves Sabbatical years.
“The theology behind Sabbatical years may,
therefore, add some significance to the events prophesied in chapter 9. In Sabbatical years the slaves were to
be released and land was to revert to original owners.
Such a connection can be seen with the events of 457
BC at the beginning of the 70 weeks. At that time
more of the exiles returned from their Babylonian captivity, and they returned to the land to which they and
their families originally belonged.
“Another example of this may be found in connection with the occasion on which Jesus read Isaiah
61 in the synagogue in Nazareth (Luke 4:16, 21). This
event acquires all the more significance when one real-

“The seventy-weeks prophecy contains another
important—though less direct—connection to the Day
of Atonement. Daniel’s seventy weeks following the
Babylonian captivity are obviously related to Jeremiah’s earlier prophecy of seventy years of exile. Jeremiah's seventy years, in turn, are related to sabbatical years, when agricultural land was supposed to rest
(Leviticus 25:1-7). Leviticus 26 cites covenant disobedience by the Israelites as a reason that 'the land shall
be abandoned by them, and shall make up for its sabbaths while it is made desolate without them.' (verse
43). Describing the catastrophe of conquest, destruction, and exile by the Babylonians, 2 Chronicles 36:21
links Leviticus 25 and 26 with Jeremiah when it observes that these events were 'to fulfill the word of the
Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had
enjoyed its sabbaths. All the days of its desolation it
kept sabbath until seventy years were complete.' So the
seventy years of national exile included punishment for
the failure of Israelite farmers to keep a sabbatical year
every seven years.
“Having found a clear link between Daniel's seventy weeks and the sabbatical years of Leviticus 25, we
can recognize a connection between the seventy weeks
and the jubilee year, which begins on the Day of
Atonement after seven sabbatical year periods. The
jubilee is prescribed in Leviticus 25:8-10: 'And thou
shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven
times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths
of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years. Then
shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubilee to sound on
the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of
atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout
all your land. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and
proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the
inhabitants thereof: it shall be a jubilee unto you; and
ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye
shall return every man unto his family.'
“In this law, time is counted in multiples of seven,
based on the concept of the seventh-day Sabbath (Sabbath means ‘rest’/’cessation’), when there was to be
rest from work (Exodus 20:8-11). But in Leviticus
25:8-10, ‘sabbaths’ are explicitly ‘of years’ rather than
days. Compare the sabbatical year in Exodus 23:10,11,
paralleling the Sabbath day in verse 12. So these ‘sabbaths of years’ divide time into weeks of years, that is,
sabbatical year cycles. After seven times seven
years—in other words, forty-nine years—there would
be a proclamation of freedom, when each impoverished

341

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Israelite who had lost his ability to support himself and
his family on his own agricultural land would regain
his ancestral property and be released from debt servitude. This freedom would be proclaimed by the jubilee
trumpet on the Day of Atonement!
“Daniel 9:24 speaks of a period of seventy
weeks—that is, seventy times seven, or 490 ‘days.’ If
that were literal days, it would total less than a year and
a half—not nearly long enough for the restoration of
Jerusalem (verse 25). So the ‘weeks’ must be weeks of
years, adding up to 490 years. At the end of this time,
was to be a release, not simply from loss of farmland
and freedom by individual Israelites ('each of you,'
Leviticus 25:10) who needed this help, but freedom
from sin for the entire nation, which would provide for
eternal freedom and security. This, then, would be a
greater kind of jubilee. The idea is reinforced by the
fact that 490 years can be divided into ten ordinary
jubilee periods of forty-nine years each, as confirmed by the inclusion of seven weeks (forty-nine
years) at the beginning of the 490 years (Daniel
9:25).
“We have found that numbers are associated with
themes. Comparing Daniel 9 With Leviticus 25, we
find that the greater number of years until the release corresponds to the greater scope of the release:
Reference

Scope of Release

Years

Leviticus 25

Each individual

49

Daniel 9

Entire nation

490

end-time Day of Atonement (8:14).” Gane, WAJ, 5255.
“Similarly, the ‘seventy weeks’ of Daniel 9 are a
large-scale jubilee period. Freedom could come after
seventy weeks of years (forty-nine years) at the beginning of the seventy weeks, reinforces this interpretation that the seventy weeks represent a period
leading up to a kind of jubilee.” Gane, WAJ, 64
The Seventy Years, Then Seventy Weeks of Years.—
“The ten sevens or seventy years of God’s judgments in the Babylonian captivity and the desolation of
Jerusalem were to be followed by seventy sevens or
490 years in which the Jews were to be given a new
probation.” Bunch, BOD, 138.
“This was the second probationary period for the
Jews to fulfill the will of God in the following six
points.” Robin Jones, 70 Week Timeline.
Time Periods in Daniel 8 and 9 Connected.—
“A. The customary location for time elements in
Daniel’s prophecies is near the end. Thus, the 2300
days in 8:14 occur at the end of that vision. The 3 ½
times of 7:25 occur toward the end of the interpretation
given there. The three fold statements on time in 12:7,
11-12 occur at the end of that prophecy.
“The prophecy in chapter 9 is unique in this regard. In this instance the prophecy begins with a time
period, and time elements are distributed all the way
through it. In terms of literary structure, this arrangement juxtaposes the 70 weeks (at the beginning of the
prophecy in chapter 9) against the 2300 days (at the
end of the prophecy in the vision of chapter 8). This
literary juxtaposition suggests that these time elements
should be viewed as directly related to each other.
“B. The 70 weeks began in the Persian period. It
was a Persian king who gave the decree to rebuild Jerusalem, the starting point of this time prophecy.
...The time period in chapter 8 began at an undefined point in the Persian period, whereas the time
period in chapter 9 began at a specific point in the
same Persian era. Given these relationships, the specific date of that latter can readily be seen as supplying
the specificity required by the more general date of the
former.
“C. When Gabriel came to Daniel he instructed
him to ‘understand the word [which I bring you now]
and understand the vision [which you saw previously]’ (9:23, my tr.). Here Gabriel referred Daniel back to
the previous prophecy (chap. 8), but he did it in a very
specific way. The Hebrew word translated ‘vision’ in
this instance is mareh. This term contrasts with the
Hebrew chazon, the more commonly used word in
Daniel for symbolic visions....
“The distinction between these two words is
maintained back in 8:26 where Gabriel assured Daniel
that the mareh of the evenings and the mornings which

“The allusions to the Day of Atonement in Daniel
8 and 9 contribute to the integral connection between
these chapters. In Daniel 8:14, justifying/vindicating
God’s sanctuary in heaven makes sense in the context
of an end-time Day of Atonement judgment. It does so
because the Day of Atonement of the ancient Israelites
was the time when the purity of the sanctuary, which
represented God’s character and reputation, was restored and His people were judged according to their
loyalty or lack thereof (Leviticus 16; 23:26-32). And
what is the function of the connections to the Day of
Atonement that we find in Daniel 9:24? This verse
contains nothing about justifying or cleansing the sanctuary/temple. Further, we find the words ‘to anoint a
holy of holies,’ which have to do with an initial consecration of a sanctuary and its priesthood (see, for example, Exodus 29; Leviticus 8).
“This consecration and the Day of Atonement are
closely related because the Day of Atonement restores
the sanctuary to the state of purity established at its
initial consecration. In fact, Leviticus 16:19 says that
when the sanctuary is cleansed on the Day of Atonement, its altar is (re)consecrated. So it appears that
Daniel 9:24 speaks of the anointing/consecration of the
sanctuary that later needs to be ‘justified’ through an

342

DANIEL 9
has been told is true, but he was instructed to ‘seal up
the vision (chazon).’ The first reference is to the appearance of the two angelic personages who discussed
the time period of the evening-mornings in verses 1314. The second reference is to that which Daniel had
seen up to that point—the symbolic vision of verses 212.
“Gabriel, therefore, did not refer Daniel back to
the vision in general. Rather, he referred him back
specifically to the mareh of the two angelic beings
and their conversation on cleansing/restoration of
the sanctuary at the end of the 2300 days (8:13-14).
Since the next statement that Gabriel makes is about
the 70 weeks, it is evident that these weeks have been
connected directly to those previously mentioned 2300
days in this way.
“D. The verb used by Gabriel in his first statement about the 70 weeks is a passive form (Hebrew,
Niphal) from the root hatak. This root clearly means
‘cut off’ or ‘determine, decree.’ Because this is the
only passage where the term occurs in biblical Hebrew,
the precise shade of meaning intended for it in this passage has been disputed. The meanings of ‘decree,’ or
‘determine’ have been derived from Mishnaic Hebrew
that dates to a millennium after Daniel’s time (sixth
century BC). However, even in Mishnaic Hebrew the
word was more commonly used with the meaning of
‘cut off.’
“In summary. The time periods of these two
prophecies can be related directly (1) in terms of their
loci in the literary structure of Daniel, (2) from the historical period in which they both start, (3) by way of
prophetic terminology which connects them, and (4)
through the meaning of the opening verb of the second
prophecy. From these lines of evidence it is safe to
conclude that the 70 weeks were directly connected to
and then cut off from the 2300 days. Furthermore, the
specific starting date for the former should be employed also to refine the starting date for the latter.”
BRI, 2SOD, 227-230.

The 2300 days are indeed symbolic and stand for 2300
actual years.
“Daniel of course still wanted to know when the
2300 years were to begin, in order to calculate when
they would end. Certainly we want to have this information too. Gabriel would provide it in a moment.”
Maxwell, 1GC, 199,200.

Determined = “Cut Off” From the 2300 Days.—
“The underlying Hebrew term is chathak (kahthak). It is another once-in-the-Bible word, like
nitsdaq. But even though chathak is used only this
once in the Bible, it is well known to scholars from its
usage outside the Bible. The well-known HebrewEnglish dictionary by Gesenius says that properly it
means to ‘cut’ or to ‘divide.’ Ancient rabbis used it as
meaning to ‘amputate.’
“…It is best to let the word be itself. Gabriel had
come to explain the 2300 days. He began his explanation by announcing that 490 years were to be ‘cut’ or
‘amputated’ from the longer period. The matter is as
simple as that.
“Here is the answer to Daniel’s lingering question
about the length of the 2300 days. Inasmuch as 490
years cannot be ‘cut’ away from the 2300 literal days,
which add up to less than 7 years, the solution is clear.

“The word here rendered ‘determined’ signifies
‘cut off,’ and no other period is given in the vision here
referred to from which the seventy weeks could be cut
off, except the 2300 days. How direct and natural,
then, is the connection. ‘Seventy weeks are cut off.’
Cut off from what?—The 2300 days, most assuredly.
“…Why, then, it may be asked, did our translators
render the word ‘determined,’ when it so obviously
means ‘cut off’? The answer is, They doubtless overlooked the connection between the eighth and ninth
chapters, and considering it improper to render it ‘cut
off,’ when nothing was given from which the seventy
weeks could be cut off, they gave the word its figurative instead of its literal meaning. But, as we have
seen, the definition and context require the literal
meaning, and render any other inadmissible.” Smith,
DR, 202.

“Unfortunately, the word chatak is not used anywhere else in the Bible, so we can’t compare usage.
However, other more common words for decree or
determined exist, yet for some reason Daniel used none
of them, instead picking this more obscure word.
“Though chatak doesn’t appear elsewhere in the
Bible. The word appears numerous time in the Mishnah, a Jewish Bible commentary compiled in the first
few centuries AD. Though not identical to biblical
Hebrew, Mishnaic Hebrew is similar, and of the twelve
times the verb chatak is used—ten times it refers to the
cutting off of parts of the animals according to dietary
laws. Of the nineteen times it is used in the noun form,
only once is it used with the idea of a decree. The other eighteen times it means ‘that which is cut off.’
“Strong’s Concordance gives its primary root as
‘to cut off.’ Whiting’s translation has it as ‘cut off.’
Gesenius, the standard Hebrew lexicographer, defines
it as ‘to cut off.’ The Chalddeo-Rabbinic dictionary of
Stocius defines it as ‘to cut, to cut away, to cut in pieces, to cut or engrave, to cut off.’ The earliest version of
the Vulgate and the Septuagint define the very as ‘cutting off.’ Theodotian’s Greek version of Daniel renders it ‘cut off.’ Even more versions use ‘cut off,’ but
you should get the point: ‘cut off’ is the accurate translation.
“The time prophecy of the seventy weeks, then, is
cut off. Now it must be cut off from something, and
the only thing possible must be the larger time
prophecy of the 2300 days of the previous vision,
which Gabriel pointed Daniel back to.” Goldstein,
1844MS, 46,47.

343

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“The word here translated ‘determined’ literally
signifies ‘cut off.’ Seventy weeks, representing 490
years, are declared by the angel to be cut off, as specially pertaining to the Jews. But from what were they
cut off? As the 2300 days was the only period of time
mentioned in chapter 8, it must be the period from
which the seventy weeks were cut off; the seventy
weeks must therefore be a part of the 2300 days, and
the two periods must begin together. The seventy
weeks were declared by the angel to date from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem. If the date of this commandment could be
found, then the starting point for the great period of
the 2300 days would be ascertained.” Great Controversy, 326.

enty Weeks would bring an end to the revolt of the
Jewish nation. As we shall see in our detailed study
of the Seventy Weeks which follows, their rebellion
against God could come to an end in one of two ways:
1) They could receive the Messiah and thus bring their
constant rebellion to an end, or, 2) they could irrevocably revolt against the Messiah and thus bring the theocracy to an end. This prophecy clearly indicates that
they would choose the second option.” Bohr, DN9, 6.
“ ‘When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar,
he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and
gave up the ghost.’ John 19:30.
“ ‘And sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth
death.’ James 1:15.
“The great transgression is the corporate sin of
the Jews in the rejection of Christ as Messiah.
“ ‘But they cried out, Away with [him], away
with [him], crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I
crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We
have no king but Caesar.’ John 19:15.” Unknown
Source.

“If the first auditory revelation (8:13-14)
points to the end of the long time period of 2,300
evenings-mornings, it would seem that the second
auditory revelation of the 70 weeks in 9:24-27 would
give its starting point. Its termination point could then
be determined on the basis of such information.” BRI,
2SOD, 438.

“When was transgression finished? I answer, At
the death of Christ. See Heb. 9:15, ‘And for this cause
he is the Mediator of the new testament, that by means
of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that
were under the first testament, they which are called
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.’ Isaiah 53:8, ‘For he was cut off out of the land of the living; for the transgression of My people was he
stricken.’” Miller, Evidence, 61.

“When Gabriel told Daniel, ‘seventy weeks
are determined,’ as rendered in our version, the prophet
understood that the Hebrew words shabuim shibim
nechtak meant ‘seventy times seven years were cut
off.’ Two points were at once established in the mind
of the prophet. One was that the 2300 days were
symbolic or prophetic, the other was that the seventy times seven were cut off from the 2300.” Gilbert,
MIHS, 132.

“Not till the last week ended would their [the
Jew’s] cup of iniquity be filled. Then they would finish and climax their guilt and transgression in the sin of
all sins. Christ warned the Jews of the result of their
rejection of their Messiah and His message. Matt. 23:
32-38. They would commit a still greater transgression
which would result in a still more terrible desolation.”
Bunch, BOD, 145.

Upon Thy People.—
“This text [Daniel 9:24] furnished Simeon, Anna, Nathaniel, and others that they should see the
consolation of Israel. By this text the high priest convinced the council of the necessity of putting to death
Jesus. [John 11:47-53 quoted]. He prophesied from
Daniel’s seventy weeks; for there is not another prophecy in the Old Testament which show what year Christ
should suffer.
“…Where was the exact time of Christ’s sufferings prophesied of but in Daniel’s seventy weeks?
Again, to this Christ alludes when he says, ‘My time
is not yet fully come;’ and, ‘Then they sought to take
him but no man laid hands on him, because his hour
was not yet come’ that is, the seventy weeks were
not yet fulfilled, John 7:8, 30. Mark tells us, 14:41,
‘The hour is come; behold, the Son of Man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners.’ ” Miller, Evidence, 59,60.

“Israel had been sent into captivity and Jerusalem
destroyed because of ‘transgression.’ Daniel 9:11,12.
Now another period of probation—a special seventy
weeks of years is granted them. In the final week, they
would fill up their cup of transgression. This the Jews
did in their rejection of the Messiah. Matt. 23:32-38.
This final great transgression resulted in a greater
desolation of Jerusalem. 1 Thess. 2:15,16.” Burnside,
DPUF, 193.
To Make an End of Sins.—
“This was also performed at his death. See Heb.
9:26: ‘But now once in the end of the world hath he
appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.’
And 1 John 3:5: ‘Ye know that he (Christ) was manifested to take away our sins.’” Miller, Evidence, 61.

To Finish the Transgression.—
“The word ‘transgression’ here is the strongest
word for sin in the Old Testament. It literally means
‘rebellion’ or ‘revolt.’ This was not rebellion in general terms. The use of the definite article indicates that
this was a specific rebellion. In other words, the Sev-

344

DANIEL 9
“Notice that we are not told that the seventy
weeks would bring sinning to an end but rather sins to
an end! Jesus made an end of sins by bearing them
on the cross. Jesus, legally, took away the sin of the
world (John 1:29). Hebrews 1:3 tells us that when
Jesus ‘had by Himself purged our sins, sat down on the
right hand of the Majesty on high.” In Hebrews 9:28
we are told that “Christ was once offered to bear the
sins of many….’ In Hebrews 9:26 we are unequivocally told that Jesus, ‘once in the end of the world hath
‘appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself.’
And in Hebrews 10:12 we are told that ‘this man, [Jesus] after he had offered one sacrifice for sins forever,
sat down on the right hand of God.’” Bohr, ND9, 6,7.

be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.” II Corinthians 5:1821.
“Men will learn of the reconciliation from iniquity which the Messiah has brought in through his
sacrifice. The last message of warning and salvation
will be given with mighty power. The earth will be
lightened with the glory of God, and it will be ours to
witness the soon coming, in power and glory, of our
Lord and Saviour.” R&H, 4/28/1903.
“Fifty times in Leviticus the offerings are referred
to as an atonement for sin. Iniquity makes man an enemy of God. It brings a separation. Man must be reconciled.
“ ‘Atonement’ = ‘Reconciliation’ (Margin, Romans 5:11). As a sinner man needs to be justified. As
an enemy he needs to be reconciled. Both were accomplished at Calvary. Reconciled at Calvary. Saved
by the risen life of Jesus. Saved by the merit of atoning-reconciling-death of Jesus. Rom. 5:10,11. ‘Saved
by his life.’
“ ‘Jesus began’ on earth what he completes in
Heaven. Acts 1:1. Jesus can save to the uttermost.
From the uttermost to the uttermost because He ‘ever
liveth’ to intercede. This was the ‘daily’ the little
horn took away.” Burnside, DPUF, 194,195.

“ ‘Make an end of sins.’ This would be accomplished by Christ’s death on the cross as an offering
for sin and His ministry in the sanctuary to make an
atonement or a blotting out of sin, thus ‘making reconciliation for iniquity’ and bringing in ‘everlasting
righteousness.’ Teach, D&R, 65.
“Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away
the sin of the world.” John 1:29.
“Calvary’s victory would result in the end of the
reign of sin in the Messiah’s people and in the Universe. Col. 1:20. On man’s part Calvary was man’s
greatest crime. On God’s part Calvary was the greatest
victory. The greatest sin of man, was overruled by
God to provide a complete remedy for the sins of man.
“Christ’s death was also the end of sin offerings.
Daniel 9:27.” Burnside, DPUF, 194.

To Bring In Everlasting Righteousness.—
“Of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.” 1 Corinthians 1:30.
“By reason of the sacrifice made by Christ for
fallen men, God can justly pardon the transgressor who
accepts the merits of Christ. Christ was the channel
through which the mercy, love, and righteousness
might flow from the heart of God to the heart of the
sinner. ‘He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness’ (1 Jn. 1:9).
“In the prophecy of Daniel it was recorded of
Christ that He shall ‘make reconciliation for iniquity,
and... bring in everlasting righteousness’ (Daniel
9:24). Every soul may say: ‘By His perfect obedience
He has satisfied the claims of the law, and my only
hope is found in looking to Him as my substitute and
surety, who obeyed the law perfectly for me. By faith
in His merits I am free from the condemnation of the
law. He clothes me with His righteousness, which answers all the demands of the law. I am complete in
Him who brings in everlasting righteousness. He
presents me to God in the spotless garment of which no
thread was woven by any human agent. All is of
Christ, and all the glory, honor, and majesty are to be
given to the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins
of the world.’
“Many think that they must wait for a special impulse in order that they may come to Christ; but it is
necessary only to come in sincerity of purpose, decid-

To Make Reconciliation For Iniquity.—
“Was this also performed at this death? Yes. See
Col. 1:20, ‘And having made peace through the
blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things to
himself.’ Heb. 1:17, ‘Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren; that he
might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people.’” Miller, Evidence, 62.
“Jesus reconciled man to God by His sacrifice. In
the Messianic prophecy of Isaiah 53 we are told that
the Messiah would bring peace through His work: ‘He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon
him: and with his stripes we are healed.’ Bohr, DN9, 7.
“For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more,
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.” Romans 5:10.
“To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them.... For he [the Father] hath made him [Jesus] to

345

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ing to accept the offers of mercy and grace that have
been extended to us. We are to say: ‘Christ died to
save me. The Lord’s desire is that I should be saved,
and I will come to Jesus just as I am without delay. I
will venture upon the promise. As Christ draws me, I
will respond.’ The apostle says, ‘With the heart man
believeth unto righteousness’ (Romans 10:10). No one
can believe with the heart unto righteousness, and
obtain justification by faith, while continuing the
practice of those things which the Word of God forbids, or while neglecting any known duty.” 1 Selected Messages, 396, 397.

“ ‘My salvation shall be forever.’ ‘my righteousness shall not be abolished.’ ‘Ye that know righteousness …in whose heart is my law.’ Is. 51:6-8.
‘Thy righteousness is like the great mountains.’
Ps. 36:6.” Burnside, DPUF, 195.
“Through His chosen agencies God will graciously make known His purposes. Then the grand work of
redemption will go forward. Men will learn of the
reconciliation for iniquity and of the everlasting
righteousness which the Messiah has brought in
through His sacrifice. The cross of Calvary is the
great center. This truth acted upon will make Christ’s
sacrifice effectual. This is that which Gabriel revealed
to Daniel in answer to fervent prayer. It was of this
that Moses and Elijah and Christ talked at His transfiguration. By the humiliation of the cross He was to
bring everlasting deliverance to all who would walk
after Him, giving positive evidence that they are separated from the world (Letter 201, 1899). 4BC,
1172,1173.

“By living a sinless life, Jesus wove a perfect
robe of His righteousness which He is willing to impute to all who believe. This righteousness is available right now in Jesus. When we receive Jesus we
have His life now (I John 5:11-12), we are citizens of
heaven (Philippians 3:20), we are accepted in the beloved and seated in heaven with Him (Ephesians 1:6;
2:6). Of course, there is an already and a not yet. We
can have his imputed and imparted righteousness even
now but to live in a world where only righteousness
dwells empirically is still future: ‘Nevertheless we,
according to his promise, look for new heavens and a
new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.’ (II Peter
3:13).” Bohr, DN9, 7.

To Seal Up the Vision and the Prophecy.—
“The prophecy of the seventy weeks and the
2300 days was sealed up and certified when the Saviour died at the ninth hour, ‘between the two evenings,’ the true Paschal Lamb. Ex. 12:6, margin;
Matt. 26:1, 2; 27:46, 50; 1 Cor. 5:7. At His death the
veil of the temple was rent in twain, indicating that
sacrifices and offerings were of no more value.” Gilbert, MIHS, 141.

“ ‘By the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous.’ Again, see Philippians 2:8, ‘And being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.’ Paul says, ‘I do not frustrate the grace of God;
for if righteousness came by the law, then Christ is
dead in vain,’ evidently showing, that by Christ’s obedience unto death, he brought in everlasting righteousness.” Miller, Evidence, 62,

“To guarantee fulfillment of the 2300 day prophecy (a) by fulfilling time elements so accurately that
we can depend also on the date 1844 and (b) by
providing at the cross the essential basis for Christ’s
heavenly ministry, which culminates in the pre-advent
(pre-second-coming) Day of Atonement/Day of Judgment.” Maxwell, 1GC, 239.

“Christ’s righteousness must be both imputed and
imparted by faith in order for it to be permanent in its
results. …Righteousness is everlasting only when
the law that defines righteousness is written in the
heart so that its principles are established in the life
as the rule of conduct. See Isa. 51:6-8. This will be
fully experienced by God’s remnant people under the
latter rain when they are clothed in the ‘armour of
righteousness’ which protects them from ‘all the fiery
darts of the wicked.’ The robe of Christ’s righteousness constitutes the wedding garment that prepares the
church to meet the Bridegroom.” Bunch, BOD, 146

“In delaying to come to Lazarus, Christ had a
purpose of mercy toward those who had not received
Him. He tarried, that by raising Lazarus from the dead
He might give to His stubborn, unbelieving people
another evidence that He was indeed "the resurrection,
and the life." …In His mercy He purposed to give them
one more evidence that He was the Restorer, the One
who alone could bring life and immortality to light.
This was to be an evidence that the priests could not
misinterpret. This was the reason of His delay in going
to Bethany. This crowning miracle, the raising of
Lazarus, was to set the seal of God on His work and
on His claim to divinity.” Desire of Ages, 529.

“All who accept the provisions provided at Calvary and [benefit] by His intercession in the Heavenly
Sanctuary can receive ‘everlasting righteousness.’
Restoration of righteousness is the whole purpose of
Christ’s salvation.
“Gospel = power = Righteousness. Romans
1:16,17. It is the ‘everlasting righteousness,’ for like
the Bible and its Author, it ‘endures forever.’

“Anytime Jesus fulfilled OT prophecy, He was
sealing up the vision and the prophecy.” Robin Jones.
To Anoint the Most Holy.—
“And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the

346

DANIEL 9
congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony,
And the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick
and his vessels, and the altar of incense, And the altar
of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and
his foot. And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may
be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.
“And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and
consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the
priest's office.” Exodus 30:26-30.

real, service as our High Priest enters upon His gracious work of ministering in behalf of sinners.
“In the examination of the sanctuary in comments
on Daniel 8:14, we saw that a time came when the
earthly sanctuary gave place to the heavenly, and the
priestly ministration was transferred from the one to
the other. Before the ministration in the earthly
sanctuary began, the tabernacle and all the holy
vessels were to be anointed. (Exodus 40: 9,10.) The
last event of the seventy weeks here brought to view,
therefore, is the anointing of the heavenly tabernacle
for the opening of the ministration there.” Smith,
DR, 205,207.

“When the Old Testament tabernacle services
were inaugurated, the high priest as well as the sanctuary in its totality (including the most holy place)
were anointed. In harmony with the type, when Jesus
ascended to heaven to begin His heavenly ministry, the
whole heavenly sanctuary was to be anointed as well
(including the most holy place).
“But not only was the sanctuary anointed. Jesus was also anointed as priest/king to begin His
work in the holy place (See Acts 2:32-36 in the light
of the background given in Leviticus 8:1-1.)
We must conclude, therefore, that the anointing of
the most Holy must refer to Jesus as a person as well
as to the most holy place of the sanctuary.” Bohr,
ND9, 7,8

“What sanctuary was to be anointed within the
time frame of the seventy-week prophecy, 457 BC to
AD 34? Not the sanctuary in the wilderness, which
was anointed over one thousand years earlier. The
‘most Holy’ can’t be Solomon’s temple, which was
anointed in the tenth century BC. The second temple
was anointed in 516 BC, almost sixty years before the
beginning of the seventy-week period. The only other
‘most Holy’ of significance, then, is the ‘most Holy’
in heaven, the ‘true tabernacle’ where Jesus is now
ministering. In Daniel 9, Jesus sheds His blood, and
the blood is then used to anoint the ‘most Holy’—the
sanctuary in heaven.” Goldstein, 1844MS, 63.

“Christ’s ascension to heaven was the signal that
His followers were to receive the promised blessing.
For this they were to wait before they entered upon
their work. When Christ passed within the heavenly
gates, He was enthroned amidst the adoration of the
angels. As soon as this ceremony was completed,
the Holy Spirit descended upon the disciples in rich
currents, and Christ was indeed glorified, even with
the glory which He had with the Father from all
eternity. The Pentecostal outpouring was Heaven’s
communication that the Redeemer's inauguration
was accomplished. According to His promise He had
sent the Holy Spirit from heaven to His followers as a
token that He had, as priest and king, received all authority in heaven and on earth, and was the Anointed
One over His people.” Acts of the Apostles, 38.

“What does this anointing of the heavenly sanctuary mean? In the OT temples were anointed to inaugurate the services that were taken up within
them. See the extensive description of the anointing of
the tabernacle in the wilderness in Ex. 40:9-15. By
analogy the anointing of the heavenly sanctuary should
refer to a time and service when it was put into operation in a special way like this.
“Daniel 9:24 lists this act as one of the major
events to be accomplished by the end of the 70 weeks.
Those 70 weeks terminated in AD 34. Thus the heavenly sanctuary was to be anointed for service in a
special way by that time. A new and special work
was taken up there when Jesus became our great High
Priest in the heavenly sanctuary upon His return from
earth. Having offered Himself as the great and final
atoning sacrifice, He ascended to heaven to minister its
benefits in our behalf. The Pentecostal descent of the
Holy Spirit signaled the beginning of His ministry
(Acts 2:16, 33; 5:31-32). Since this is the only anointing of the heavenly sanctuary known to have happened,
and since it fulfills the requirements specified, the
opening of Christ’s priestly ministry may be taken as
the event which fulfilled verses 24-25.” BRI, 2SOD,
233,234.

“In the Bible many things associated with the
sanctuary are called ‘most holy,’ including the altar of
burnt offering (Exodus 29:37), the golden altar (Exodus 30:10), sin offerings (Leviticus 6:29), and incense
(Exodus 30:36).” Maxwell, 1GC, 208.
“In the case of anointing for service, the term is
applied to the tabernacle itself, as well as to all its
vessels. (Exodus 30: 26-29.) In Daniel 9:24, a case of
anointing is specified in the prophecy. Consistent with
the uses of ‘most holy’ pointed out above, there is every reason to believe that in this verse the anointing of
the heavenly tabernacle is predicted. The tabernacle was anointed for the typical service; and true to
pattern, it is most appropriate that the heavenly
tabernacle should be anointed for the antitypical, or

“In the Old Testament, the dedicatory service of
the priests is described in Leviticus 8:1-36 and Exodus
30:30. The dedication (anointing) of the sanctuary is
described in Leviticus 8:10-11 and Exodus 30:25-30.
When it is completed, the building and all its parts are

347

GEMS FROM DANIEL
declared ‘Most Holy’ (Ex 30:29).
“In the book of Hebrews, the dedication of the
earthly sanctuary is mentioned in Hebrews 9:21, and
the dedication of the heavenly Sanctuary in Hebrews
10:20. The dedication of Christ as our High Priest is
mentioned in Hebrews 1:3-9, climaxing in verse 9.
The dedication of the people to the work is found in
Hebrews 9:19-20 (in the typical) and Hebrews 10:1022 (in the antitypical).
“The book, Acts of the Apostles, pp. 38,39,
speaks about the dedication of the heavenly Sanctuary as something that was actually done before
Christ began mediating in it. The earthly types reveal that both the first and second apartments are
dedicated before the ministry in either begins. The
dedication of the priests took seven days (Lev 8:33). In
the earthly, it was followed by fire coming down from
heaven. In the dedication of the heavenly, it was
followed by the Holy Spirit descending, in the form
of ‘tongues of fire,’ on the waiting, praying Apostles.” Ferrell, BD, 151-153.

covenant.” Andrews, JEO, 85,86.
Two Temples.—
“Daniel 9:24 outlines permanent, overall goals
that God will accomplish by the end of the seventy
weeks of years along with bringing in 'eternal righteousness.' This seems to contradict Daniel 9:26: The
people of the coming leader will destroy the city and
the temple' (my translation). If the temple were to be
rebuilt during the seventy weeks and subsequently destroyed, how could its consecration have a lasting effect associated with abolishing sin and establishing
eternal righteousness?
“The answer must be that Daniel 9 speaks of
two different temples. One is a temple that takes the
place of Solomon’s temple, which the Babylonians had
destroyed. This second temple would be built in a restored Jerusalem following the exile (verse 25), but
later it too would be destroyed (verse 26). Therefore, it
wouldn't make a lasting contribution to the eradication
of sin and the bringing in of eternal righteousness. These benefits would be accomplished through anointing
another temple and priesthood (verse 24) and through
confirmation of a divine covenant 'with the many' by
the Anointed One—that is, the Messiah (verse 27)!”
Gane, WAJ, 55.

“Daniel 9 climaxes in the anointing of the sanctuary (qodes qodasim, vs. 24), and Daniel 8 in the cleansing of the sanctuary (qodes).” BRI, 2SOD, 438.
“The statement ‘to anoint the Most Holy’ must refer to the same anointing mentioned in the next verse,
‘to the Anointed, the Prince.’ In all ages persons rather
than places have been anointed and that for a specific
mission or work, such as kings to reign, and priests to
minister. The high priest was called ‘the Lord’s
anointed’ and he was a type of Christ, the High Priest
of the heavenly ministration. …Of course, the disciples of Christ who constituted His spiritual temple
were anointed by the out-pouring of the Holy Spirit on
the day of Pentecost. Acts 2:1-4.” Bunch, BOD, 147.

“The vision which Gabriel asked Daniel to understand was that of the previous chapter. There he
thought that the sanctuary of v. 14 was that of Jerusalem, which had been destroyed; now he was to see
that it was the sanctuary in heaven. There he
thought that the oppressor of God’s people was Babylon. Now he was to see that another desolating power was to arise which again would ‘destroy the city
and the sanctuary.’” Thiele, OSID, 112.
Christ Could Not Be a Priest Until After He Died.—
“No person can carefully read the 8th and 9th chapters of Hebrews without knowing that Christ’s ministration in the heavenly sanctuary could not begin
until He had shed His own blood which He ministers in behalf of repentant sinners. To teach that
Christ was a priest in the holy place before He came to
earth and therefore entered the most holy place on His
ascension is not only contrary to the typical order, but
is wholly unscriptural and impossible.
“The order of the typical services in the three
apartments was a divine arrangement, and the same
order must obtain in the antitypical. Jesus must begin
His service in the court with His death, for He cannot minister without His blood, because ‘without
shedding of blood is there no remission’ of sin. It is
a false theory that makes Christ a priest in the holy
place before He came to earth to die as the Lamb of
God. It was impossible for Him to begin His priestly
ministration till after His death in the court.
“The beginning of the three services in the three
apartments of the earthly sanctuary came on definite

“It is remarkable that the very verse which tells us
how much of the vision pertained to the earthly sanctuary does present to our view the sanctuary of the new
covenant in close connection with the introduction of
the new covenant. Dan.9:24,27. For one of the last
events in the period of 70 weeks is the anointing of the
Most Holy. This is not the anointing of the Saviour,
for the term is literally, in Hebrew, the Holy of Holies,
a plain reference to the sanctuary itself. This anointing was performed in the earthly sanctuary when
the ministration therein began. Lev.8:10,11. The
anointing of the Holy of Holies at the end of the 70
weeks cannot relate to the earthly sanctuary, which was
no longer the sanctuary of prophecy, but must relate
to the heavenly tabernacle, which then became the
sanctuary of prophecy. Its anointing was an event
preparatory to Christ’s ministering therein, just as
the earthly sanctuary was anointed in both its holy
places before the Levitical ministration commenced in
it. We cannot, therefore, doubt that the last 1,810 years
of Daniel’s 2,300 relate to the sanctuary of the new

348

DANIEL 9
dates known to all Israel. Three great feasts marked
the beginning of the three phases of the typical ministry; namely, the Passover, Pentecost, and the Day
of Atonement.” Bunch, BOD, 125,151, 152.

oblation to cease. At the expiration of that period
which was allotted to the Jews as the time during
which they were to be the special people of God, we
naturally look for the going forth of the blessing and
work of God to other people.” Smith, DR, 207,208.

DANIEL 9:25
Know therefore and understand, that
from the going forth of the commandment
to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the
Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks,
and threescore and two weeks: the street
shall be built again, and the wall, even in
troublous times.

The Going Forth of the Commandment.—
“Who would give the command? …I answer, It
must be a king who had power over the Jews to release
and restore them. It must of necessity be a king over
the Medes and Persians, or it would not be in
agreement with the vision in the 8th chapter of Daniel; for he is expressly told by Gabriel that the ram
he saw, and which was the first thing he did see in
the vision, were the kings of Media and Persia. And
now this same angel Gabriel has come the second time,
and tells Daniel, plainly and distinctly, that he has
come to make him ‘understand the vision.’ What vision? The one Daniel had in the beginning, in the 8 th
chapter. See Daniel 9:21-23.” Miller, Evidence, 65,66.

The 70 Weeks Divided in Time.—
“The period of seventy weeks of Jewish history is thus divided by the angel: Seven weeks for building the walls and streets of Jerusalem; threescore and
two (62) weeks till the work of Messiah; and one week,
which would cover the period of his ministry, and the
time following, until the gospel should go forth to the
Gentiles. This last week is devoted to the confirmation
of the covenant.” Haskell, SDP, 123.

“Somewhere in the Scriptures we must find a commandment ‘to restore and to build Jerusalem.’ When
this commandment is discovered, we must in that connection be told the particular date to begin to reckon
the three periods mentioned. Sixty-nine times seven,
or 483 years, from the going forth of that commandment, must reach to Messiah the Prince. There are six
books in the Old Testament which were written after the book of Daniel. These books are Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. In
one or more of these six books we must find a decree ‘to restore and to build Jerusalem.’ In the book
of Ezra we find such a decree, but the decree is thrice
repeated. It is written: ‘They builded, and finished it,
according to the commandment of the God of Israel,
and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia’ Ezra 6:14.” Gilbert, MIHS, 133.

“The angel now relates to Daniel the event which
is to mark the beginning of the seventy weeks. They
were to date from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem. Not only is the
event given which determines the time of the commencement of this period, but also those events which
take place at its close. Thus a double test is provided
by which to try the application of this prophecy. But
more than this, the period of seventy weeks is divided
into three grand divisions. One of these is again divided, and the intermediate events are given which were to
mark the termination of each one of these divisions. If
we can find a date which will harmonize with all these
events, we have beyond a doubt the true application,
for none but that which is correct could meet and fulfill
so many conditions.
“Let the reader now take in at one view the points
of harmony to be made, that he may be the better prepared to guard against a false application. We are to
find at the beginning of the period a commandment
going forth to restore and build Jerusalem. To this
work of restoration seven weeks are allotted. As we
reach the end of this first division, seven weeks from
the beginning, we are to find Jerusalem restored in its
material aspect, the work of building the street and the
wall fully accomplished. From this point sixty-two
weeks are measured off. As we reach the termination
of this division, sixty-nine weeks from the beginning,
we are to see the manifestation of Messiah the
Prince before the world. One week more is given us,
completing the seventy. In the midst of this week the
Messiah is to be cut off, and to cause the sacrifice and

“It is, then, a decree, the order to rebuild Jerusalem, which is used as a springboard for the prophecy.
We learn from the book of Ezra that the city of Jerusalem and its temple were indeed rebuilt upon publication of three successive decrees by Cyrus, Darius, and
Artaxerxes respectively (Ezra 6:14). ‘They builded,
and finished it, according to the commandment of
the God of Israel, and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of
Persia.’ Ezra 6:14.
“Several clues point to the decree of Artaxerxes:
This is the last one and consequently the only one to be
effective. This is also the only complete one; it concerns the building of the temple as well as restoring the
administrative and political role of the city of Jerusalem. It is, moreover, the only one which is followed by
a blessing and praise to God, and indeed the only one
which refers to God’s intervention.

349

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, who has
put such a thing as this in the king’s heart to beautify
the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. (Ezra 7:
27) It is also significant that from this blessing and
praise—Ezra’s reaction to the action of God—the text
passes from the Aramaic language to the Hebrew language. The decree of Artaxerxes generated this shift,
suggesting that the national restoration commenced
here.
“Artaxerxes issued this decree in the seventh year
of his reign, that is in the autumn of 457 BC. The
year 457 BC is, then, the starting point of the 2300
evenings and morning as well as of the 70 weeks.”
Doukhan, DVE, 33.

“These two decrees made a beginning of the
work. They were preliminary to what was afterward
accomplished. But of themselves they were altogether
insufficient to meet the requirements of the prophecy,
both in their dates and in their nature. Thus falling
short, they cannot be brought into the discussion as
marking the point from which the seventy weeks are to
begin. The only question now lies between the decrees
which were granted to Ezra and to Nehemiah respectively.
“The facts between which we are to decide here
are briefly these: In 457 BC, a decree was granted to
Ezra by the Persian emperor Artaxerxes Longimanus to
go up to Jerusalem with as many of his people as were
minded to go with him. The commission granted him
an unlimited amount of treasure, to beautify the
house of God, to procure offerings for its service,
and to whatever else might seem good to him. It
empowered him to ordain laws, set magistrates and
judges, and execute punishment even unto death; in
other words, to restore the Jewish state, civil, and
ecclesiastical, according to the law of God and the
ancient customs of that people. Inspiration has seen
fit to preserve this decree; and a full and accurate copy
of it is given in Ezra 7. This decree is recorded not in
Hebrew, like the rest of the book of Ezra, but in the
official Chaldaic, or Eastern Aramaic. Thus we are
referred to the original document by virtue of which
Ezra was authorized to restore and build Jerusalem.
“Thirteen years after this, in the twentieth year of
the same king, 444 BC, Nehemiah sought and obtained
permission to go up to Jerusalem. (Nehemiah 2.) Permission was granted him, but we have no evidence that
it was anything more than oral. It pertained to him
individually, since nothing was said about others going
up with him. The king asked him how long a journey
he wished to make, and when he would return. He
received letters to the governors beyond the river to
help him on his way to Judea, and an order to the keeper of the king’s forest for timber.
“When he arrived at Jerusalem, he found rulers
and priests, nobles, and people, already engaged in the
work of building Jerusalem. (Nehemiah 2:16.) They
were, of course, acting under the decree given to Ezra
thirteen years before. Finally, after arriving at Jerusalem, Nehemiah finished in fifty-two days the work he
came to accomplish. (Nehemiah 6:15.)
“Now which of these commissions, Ezra’s or Nehemiah’s, constitutes the decree for the restoration of
Jerusalem, from which the seventy weeks are to be
dated? It hardly seems that there can be any question
on this point.
“Reckoning from the commission to Nehemiah,
444 BC, the dates throughout are entirely disarranged;
for from that point the troublesome times which were
to attend the building of the street and wall did not last
seven weeks, or forty-nine years. If we reckon from
that date, the sixty-nine weeks, or 483 years, which

Not the Decree of Cyrus, Darius, or to Nehemiah.—
“We now inquire for the initial date which will
harmonize with all these particulars. The command
respecting Jerusalem was to include more than mere
building. There was to be restoration. By this we must
understand all the forms and regulations of civil, political, and judicial society. When did such a command
go forth? At the time these words were spoken to Daniel, Jerusalem lay in utter desolation, and had thus been
lying for many years. The restoration pointed to in the
future must be its restoration from this desolation. We
then inquire, When and how was Jerusalem restored
after the seventy years’ captivity?
“There are four events which can be taken as answering to the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem. These are:
“1. The decree of Cyrus for the rebuilding of
the house of God, 536 BC (Ezra 1: 1-4.)
“2. The decree of Darius for the prosecution of
that work which had been hindered, 519 BC (Ezra 6: 112.)
“3. The decree of Artaxerxes to Ezra, 457 BC.
[The years of Artaxerxes’ reign are among the most
easily established dates of history. The Canon of Ptolemy, with its list of kings and astronomical observations, the Greek Olympiads, and allusions in Greek
history to Persian affairs all combine to place the seventh year of Artaxerxes at 457 BC beyond successful
controversion. See Sir Isaac Newton, Observations
Upon the Prophecies of Daniel, pp. 154-157.—
Editors.] (Ezra 7.)
“4. The commission to Nehemiah from the
same king in his twentieth year, 444 BC (Nehemiah
2.)
“Dating from the first two of these decrees, the
seventy weeks, or 490 literal years, would fall many
years short of reaching even to the Christian Era. Besides this, these decrees had reference principally to the
restoration of the temple and the temple worship of the
Jews, not to the restoration of their civil state and polity, all of which must be included in the expression, ‘To
restore and to build Jerusalem.’

350

DANIEL 9
were to extend to the Messiah the Prince would bring
us to AD 40; but Jesus was baptized of John in Jordan,
and the voice of the Father was heard from heaven declaring Him His Son, AD 27, thirteen years before. [See
S. Bliss, Analysis of Sacred Chronology, pp. 180, 182;
Karl Wieseler, A Chronological Synopsis of the Four
Gospels, pp. 164-247.] According to this calculation,
the midst of the last or seventieth week, which is
marked by the crucifixion, is placed in AD 44, but the
crucifixion took place in AD 31, thirteen years previous. And lastly, the seventy weeks, or 490 years dating
from the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, would extend to
AD 47, with absolutely nothing to mark their termination. Hence if that be the year, and the grant to Nehemiah the event, from which to reckon, the prophecy has
proved a failure. As it is, it only proves that the theory
to be a failure which dates the seventy weeks from Nehemiah’s commission in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes.” Smith, DR, 208-210.

their inactivity.
“…But God wanted them to go forward, exercising faith, and when, in response to the word of the Lord
by the prophet Haggai, they did go to work, the Lord
stirred up the heart of the Persian king to help them.
Men of the world, enemies of the Jews, openly complained to the king, but this, instead of hindering the
work, occasioned a searching of the royal records,
which revealed the decree of Cyrus. Then Darius, instead of rebuking the Jews, issued a decree that the
work should go forward, and further commanded that
the work of building be helped forward by money from
the royal treasury.
“Jerusalem was subject to the Persian government
until the days of Ezra in the reign of Artaxerxes. In
the seventh year of the reign of that king, 457 BC,
was issued the third decree concerning the rebuilding of Jerusalem. This decree (I) permitted all Jews
who so desired to return to Jerusalem; (2) it allowed
the taking of a free-will offering from all Babylon for
the cause at Jerusalem; (3) it proclaimed perfect freedom to follow the commands of God in all the territory
west of the Jordan; (4) it relieved all Levites and ministers from paying toll or tribute; (5) the walls of Jerusalem were to be rebuilt; (6) it arranged for the appointment of magistrates and judges in Palestine from
among the Jews themselves, thus organizing a government of the people, a thing wholly foreign to the policy
of an Oriental monarchy.
“This was in the year 457 BC, and is the time
from which the period of seventy weeks should be
reckoned, according to the words of Gabriel to Daniel.
That it required the three decrees to constitute the
commandment of Dan. 9:25, is evident from the words
of inspiration in Ezra 6:14: ‘They builded and furnished it, according to the commandment of Cyrus,
and Darius, and Artaxerxes, king of Persia.’ The
three decrees are thus connected.” Haskell, SDP, 124127.

It is The Decree of Artaxerxes to Ezra, 457 BC.—
“In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia ...the
Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, the king of Persia,
that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus
king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven...hath charged
me to build him a house at Jerusalem.’
“Then it was that every Jew in Babylon was at
liberty to return to Palestine. If necessary, the expense
of going would be borne by the government of Cyrus.
There was ample provision for all the poor and the
sick. Such a decree had never before been issued. Israel should have arisen en masse, taking with them all
those of other nationalities, who, having heard the gospel, were willing to cast their lot with the people of
God. The land should have rung with shouts of praise
and with the songs of the ransomed. The exodus from
Babylon should have been a mighty witness to the nations of the earth of the power of the God of the Jews.
“…What was the result of the decree? …At the
end of the first year scarcely fifty thousand had journeyed from Babylon to Jerusalem. Cyrus was discouraged and disgusted because of the feeble response,
and relapsed into indifference. Later the angel of God
with Michael’s help pleaded with him for three weeks
in order to touch his heart again.
“The vessels taken from the temple to Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar were returned to the leaders of the
Jews, who carried them back to Jerusalem. In the second year of their coming into Palestine, the work of
restoring the temple was begun. The site of Solomon’s
temple, which had been burned by Nebuchadnezzar,
was hidden by rubbish, the accumulation of nearly seventy years. The work of restoration was soon stopped
by Samaritans living in the country, and further progress was impossible until the issuing of a second decree by Darius, king of Persia, in 520 BC. Work on the
house of God stopped for fifteen years. Then the
prophets Haggai and Zechariah rebuked the people for

“There can be no question as to the accuracy of
the date 457 BC as the beginning of the seventy weeks,
for it is established by four events: The decree of Artaxerxes; the baptism of Christ; the crucifixion; and the
spread of the gospel among the Gentiles. History established the date 457 BC as the seventh of Artaxerxes
by more than twenty eclipses. The four hundred and
ninety years can be reckoned backward from the New
Testament history, or forward from the decree to restore and build Jerusalem.” Haskell, SDP, 131.
“The seventy weeks were declared by the angel to
date from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem. If the date of this commandment could be found, then the starting point for
the great period of the 2300 days would be ascertained.
“In the seventh chapter of Ezra the decree is
found. Verses 12-26. In its completest form it was
issued by Artaxerxes, king of Persia, 457 BC. But in

351

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Ezra 6:14 the house of the Lord at Jerusalem is said to
have been built ‘according to the commandment [‘decree,’ margin] of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes
king of Persia.’ These three kings, in originating,
reaffirming, and completing the decree, brought it
to the perfection required by the prophecy to mark
the beginning of the 2300 years. Taking 457 BC, the
time when the decree was completed, as the date of the
commandment, every specification of the prophecy
concerning the seventy weeks was seen to have been
fulfilled.” Great Controversy, 326,327.

of the people of the land. And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon....”
“Obviously, Nebuchadnezzar did not carry away
the physical city of Jerusalem. ‘Jerusalem’ here refers
to a socio/political entity composed of king, officers,
military men and craftsmen (in actual fact, Daniel himself attributes the loss of self-governance and the destruction of the city to the apostasy of the kings, princes, fathers and judges [Daniel 9:6, 8, 12]).
“Now, in order for Jerusalem to be reestablished
in her previous position after the captivity, two things
must happen: Her political/religious self-determination
must be restored and the physical city must be built.
These two tasks, though related, are not identical. The
word ‘build’ refers to the reconstruction of the physical city. But what does the word ‘restore’ mean? The
word ‘restore’ means ‘to give back to’ or ‘to return to a
condition which existed before.’
“In Judges 11:13 the king of the children of Ammon complains to Jephthah: ‘Israel took away my land,
when they came out of Egypt.’ He then makes the appeal: ‘now therefore restore those lands again peaceably.’ In II Samuel 9:7, David promised Mephibosheth:
‘I will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father.” In
both of these texts the emphasis falls on legally giving
back land to an original owner.
“In II Kings 14:22 we have the same two words
which appear in Daniel 9:25. There we are told that
Azariah ‘built Elath and restored it to Judah.’ This text
makes it clear that ‘build’ and ‘restore,’ though related,
are not identical. What the text means is that the
physical city of Elath was built and then governance
over it was given to Judah.
“In I Kings 12:21 we are told that Rehoboam
came to Jerusalem and laid plans to ‘fight against the
house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again [literally, to
restore the kingdom] to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.’ In II Samuel 8:3 we are informed that David
went on a military campaign to ‘recover [restore] his
border at the river Euphrates.’
“None of the examples presented above have to
do with the physical rebuilding of a city. The central
idea is to legally restore land, to legally restore political
governance or to restore the legitimate borders of the
kingdom. We therefore must conclude that ‘restore’
in Daniel 9:25 does not have to do so much with the
physical rebuilding of the city of Jerusalem as such,
but rather with the legal restoration of the land to
its original owner and a giving back of the right to
political self-governance according to the laws of
God. The actual building of the city then follows. As
we have previously seen, only the decree of Artaxerxes
meets the criteria necessary to fulfill Daniel 9:25. Only the decree of Artaxerxes officially authorized the
restoration of the Hebrew civil order and the right of
Israel to govern herself according to the law of God
(see, Ezra 7:25-26; also Nehemiah 8-13). And only
the decree of Artaxerxes authorized the physical rebuilding of the city.” Bohr, ND9, 13,14.

To Restore and Build Jerusalem.—
“Many have overlooked the fact that in order for
Daniel 9:25 to be fulfilled, a decree must be given to
both restore and build Jerusalem, in that order. Some
commentators have simply assumed that both of these
words mean basically the same thing. But is this the
case?
“In order to understand what it means to restore
and build Jerusalem we must first comprehend what
‘Jerusalem’ means. Frequently, when the Bible speaks
of ‘Jerusalem’ it is not merely referring to the physical
city but rather to the city as a polis, that is, as a living
social, religious and political entity composed of
people, commerce, rulers, magistrates, judges and
civil and religious laws. In order for the city to function as a polis it must have self-governance as well as
legal sovereignty over the land.
The captivity of Jerusalem involved far more than
the destruction of the physical city. In fact, Jerusalem
lost its governance before the city was destroyed. In
Daniel 1:1-3 we are told that Nebuchadnezzar came to
Jerusalem in 605 and besieged it. He took king Jehoiakim captive as well as the royal seed and the princes.
Thus Jerusalem lost her political autonomy or right to
self-governance. She became subservient to Babylon.
Even though the physical city of Jerusalem was not
destroyed at this time, the seventy year captivity of
Jerusalem did begin. It cannot be emphasized too
strongly that the captivity of Jerusalem began 19
years before the physical city was actually destroyed! Of course we know that in 586, the city itself
was finally destroyed (II Chronicles 36:17-20). At that
time the land was laid waste, the religious cultus came
to an end, and the remaining political and military
leaders were removed. Now Jerusalem had a double
whammy: She had lost her political/religious autonomy
and the physical city was in ruins. This two-fold idea is
expressed clearly in Jeremiah 25:11 where we are told
that the whole land was to be a desolation and astonishment and the nations [including Israel] would serve
the king of Babylon for 70 years. II Kings 24 describes the actual destruction of the city and the temple.
We are told in II Kings 24:14-15:
“And he [Nebuchadnezzar] carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of
valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort

352

DANIEL 9
dreadful and terrible beast which Daniel has before
described. The desire of every Jewish woman who was
true to her God was to be the mother of the Saviour.
At the family gatherings this was often talked; whenever a babe was presented to the Lord, it was with the
hope that he might be the accepted One. The place of
the birth of the Messiah had been foretold. Malachi had
prophesied concerning John, the forerunner of the Saviour, and for six months the voice of this witness had
been heard throughout the land of Israel. The time of
the preaching of John is established by six historical
facts. Israel and Judah flocked to the banks of Jordan,
and among them came Jesus of Nazareth. John recognized him by a sign from heaven, and as he came out of
the water the heavens opened; and he saw the heavenly
dove resting on his head, and heard the voice proclaiming him the Son of God.” Haskell, SDP, 128,129.

Seven Weeks.—
“For an understanding of the first division, the
seven weeks or forty-nine years, we have the history
as recorded in Ezra, Nehemiah, Haggai, and Zechariah.” Haskell, SDP,124.
“[Seven weeks, or] forty-nine years are allotted
to the building of the city and the wall. On this point,
Prideaux says: ‘In the fifteenth year of Darius
Nothus ended the first seven weeks of the seventy
weeks of Daniel’s prophecy. For then the restoration of the church and state of the Jews in Jerusalem and Judea was fully finished, in that last act of
reformation, which is recorded in the thirteenth chapter
of Nehemiah, from the twenty-third verse to the end of
the chapter, just forty-nine years after it had been first
begun by Ezra in the seventh year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus.’ [Humphrey Prideaux, The Old and New
Testament Connect in the History of the Jews, Vol. I, p.
322] This was 408 BC. So far we find harmony.”
Smith, DR, 212.

“Let us apply the measuring rod of the prophecy
still further. Sixty-nine weeks, [seven weeks and
threescore and two weeks] or 483 years, were to extend to Messiah the Prince. Dating from 457 BC,
they end in AD 27. What event then occurred? [There
is abundance of authority for AD 27 as the date of
Christ’s baptism. See S. Bliss, Analysis of Sacred
Chronology, p. 180; New International Encyclopedia,
art. ‘Jesus Christ;’ Karl Wieseler, A Chronological
Synopsis of the Four Gospels, pp. 164-247.] Luke thus
informs us: ‘Now when all the people were baptized, it
came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon Him, and
a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art My
beloved Son; in Thee I am well pleased.’ Luke 3:21,22.
After this, Jesus came ‘preaching the gospel of the
kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled.’
Mark 1:14,15. The time here mentioned must have
been some specific, definite, and predicted period; but
no prophetic period can be found terminating then except the sixty-nine weeks of the prophecy of Daniel,
which were to extend to Messiah the Prince. The Messiah had now come, and with His own lips He announced the termination of that period which was to be
marked by His manifestation.
“Luke declared that Jesus ‘began to be about
thirty years of age’ at the time of His baptism (Luke
3: 23); and almost immediately after this He entered
upon His ministry. How, then, could His ministry
begin in AD 27, and He still be the same age named by
Luke? The answer to this question is found in the fact
that Christ was born between three and four years before the beginning of the Christian Era, that is, before
the year called AD 1. The mistake of dating the Christian Era somewhat over three years this side of the
birth of Christ, instead of dating it from the year of His
birth, as it was designed to be, arose on this wise. One
of the most important of ancient eras was reckoned
from the building of the city of Rome—ab urbe condita—expressed by the abbreviation A.U.C., or more

Seven Weeks and Threescore and Two Weeks.—
“ ‘From the going forth of the commandment to
restore and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the prince
shall be seven weeks and threescore and two weeks’ (7
+ 62 = 69 weeks, or 483 prophetic days, or literal
years). Messiah, in the Hebrew, and Christ, in the
Greek, are the same as ‘anointed’ in English. God
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost.
This anointing took place at the time of his baptism.
The sixty-nine weeks, or four hundred and eighty-three
years, reached to the baptism of Christ by John in the
River Jordan.
“From the decree of Artaxerxes, four hundred and
fifty-seven years reach into the year 1 AD, in the present dispensation. But twenty-six years remained of
the sixty nine weeks (483 – 457 = 26), which terminated with the baptism of Christ. Twenty-six years added
to the year 1 AD bring us to 27 AD, in the fall of
which year Christ was baptized. See Mark 1:10,
margin; Luke 3:21, margin.
“For years the Jewish nation had had the promise
of a deliverer. The close of sixty-nine weeks found the
Jews under the control of the fourth kingdom, the

353

GEMS FROM DANIEL
therefore and understand, that from the going forth of
the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem
unto the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and
threescore and two weeks,’ sixty-nine weeks, or four
hundred and eighty-three years. Daniel 9:25. The
commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, as completed by the decree of Artaxerxes Longimanus (see
Ezra 6:14; 7:1, 9, margin), went into effect in the autumn of BC 457. From this time four hundred and
eighty-three years extend to the autumn of AD 27.
According to the prophecy, this period was to reach
to the Messiah, the Anointed One. In AD 27, Jesus
at His baptism received the anointing of the Holy
Spirit, and soon afterward began His ministry.
Then the message was proclaimed. ‘The time is fulfilled.’” Desire of Ages, 233.

briefly, U.C. In the year which is now numbered AD
532, Dionysius Exiguus, a Scythian by birth, and a
Roman abbot, who flourished in the reign of Justinian,
invented the Christian Era. According to the best evidence at his command, he placed the birth of Christ
U.C. 753. But Christ was born before the death of
Herod; and it was afterward ascertained on the clearest
evidence that the death of Herod occurred in April,
U.C. 750. Allowing a few months for the events recorded in Christ’s life before the time of Herod’s death,
his birth is carried back to the latter part of U.C. 749,
a little more than three years before AD 1. Christ was
therefore thirty years of age in AD 27.—Editors.]
Here, again, is indisputable harmony.” Smith, DR, 213,
“This period of 62 sevens [434 years] represents
the long and silent stretch of years between Malachi
and John the Baptist, the last prophet of the old and the
first of the new dispensation; between ‘the word of
the Lord to Israel by Malachi’ and the day when
‘the word of God came to John the son of Zacharias
in the wilderness.’ See Malachi 1:1; Luke 3:2. During this period there was no prophetic voice from God
to His people and no understanding events in which the
hand of the Lord could be especially recognized.”
Bunch, BOD, 138.

“The word ‘Messiah’ signifies ‘the Anointed
One.’ In the autumn of AD 27 Christ was baptized by
John and received the anointing of the Spirit. The
apostle Peter testifies that ‘God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power.’
Acts 10:38. And the Saviour Himself declared:
‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath
anointed Me to preach the gospel to the poor.’ Luke
4:18. After His baptism He went into Galilee, ‘preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying, The
time is fulfilled.’ Mark 1:14, 15.” Great Controversy,
327.

Messiah the Prince.—
“Notice that the Messiah is also called the Prince.
No serious Bible scholar questions the fact that the
Prince of verse 25 is the same person as the Messiah.
This same person is called ‘the Prince of the Host’ in
Daniel 8:11 (see Joshua 5:13-15 for the only other occurrence of this title in the Old Testament), the ‘Prince
of the Covenant’ in Daniel 11:22, and ‘Michael that
Great Prince’ in Daniel 12:1. There can be no doubt
that this title belongs to Jesus. In the great messianic
prophecy of Isaiah 9:6 Jesus is called “the Prince of
Peace.” And Peter calls Jesus “Prince” twice in the
book of Acts (Acts 3:15; 5:31).” Bohr, ND9, 16.

“Theologically the prophecy relates to Jesus of
Nazareth in several ways. One of these lies in connection with certain of its year dates. It can be determined now from primary sources that 457 BC, AD
27, and AD 34 were Sabbatical years (see Lev. 25:17). The Sabbatical year (the last year in a span of seven) not only permitted the land to have ‘rest’ by lying
fallow, but it also provided release from slavery for the
Hebrew slave (Ex. 21:2). Consequently AD 27 takes
on increased significance as it marked the appearance of the Messiah, the Great Liberator, who came
to proclaim liberty to sin-enslaved humanity.” BRI,
2SOD, 220.

Unto Messiah the Prince Shall Be 69 Weeks.—
“The burden of Christ’s preaching was, ‘The time
is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent
ye, and believe the gospel.’ Thus the gospel message,
as given by the Saviour Himself, was based on the
prophecies. The ‘time’ which He declared to be fulfilled was the period made known by the angel Gabriel to Daniel. ‘Seventy weeks,’ said the angel, ‘are
determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to
finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins,
and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and
prophecy, and to anoint the most holy.’ Daniel 9:24. A
day in prophecy stands for a year. See Numbers 14:34;
Ezekiel 4:6. The seventy weeks, or four hundred
and ninety days, represent four hundred and ninety
years. A starting point for this period is given: ‘Know

“The 69 weeks were to reach to ‘the Messiah the
Prince,’ and not ‘the King.’ The prophecies of Daniel
2 and 7 picture the setting up on the kingdom of Christ
at the end of the reign of sin when He will be the King
of kings and Lord of lords. His first advent made Him
‘the Prince of this world’ in the place of Satan. He left
the earth ‘to receive a kingdom and return.’ He becomes King at His second advent. Matt. 25:31-34.”
Bunch, BOD, 139.
The Street & Wall.—
“There are several issues we must address under
this heading, among them, What is the meaning of
‘street’ and ‘wall’?
“…Let’s examine the meaning of the word

354

DANIEL 9
‘street’. The question suggests itself, What would be
so significant about the rebuilding of one street (in
singular)in Jerusalem after the captivity? No doubt
there were many streets in Jerusalem after the rebuilding was finished. Why does Gabriel refer to just one
street being rebuilt in troublous times?
The simple fact is that the Hebrew word rachab
literally means ‘broaden, make room, broad expanse,
broad roomy place.’ The word simply means ‘a broad,
open space in a town or village.’ The evidence from
the Old Testament seems to indicate that it could just
as well have been translated ‘town square’ or ‘plaza.’
The first time this word is used in the Bible is
Genesis 19:2. In this text, Lot invited two angels to
lodge in his house for the night but one of the angels
replied: ‘Nay, but we will abide in the street all night.’
In Deuteronomy 13:16 Moses told the Israelites that
when they conquered a city, they were to ‘gather all the
spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof’ and to
‘burn with fire the city, and all the spoil thereof every
whit....’ Here the town plaza would seem to fit far
better than a particular street.
“In Esther 4:6 we are informed that the street of
the city was in front of the king’s gate and in Esther
6:9, 11 we are told that Mordeccai was paraded
through the street of the city on the king’s horse and in
royal apparel. Once again, the town square seems to
be a more likely place for this to occur than on a singular street.
“There are two references in II Chronicles which
bear a direct relationship to our study. In II Chronicles
29:4 we are told that Hezekiah gathered the priests and
Levites in the east street to give them special instructions. II Chronicles 32:6 explains that Hezekiah ‘set
captains of war over the people, and gathered them
together to him in the street of the gate of the city.’ We
see here military leaders gathering in the town square
for a pep talk. Once again, in both of these texts from
Chronicles, the town square is a more likely meeting
place than the street. But the two references which are
of signal interest are found in Ezra and Nehemiah, the
very books which describe the restoring and building
of Jerusalem after the captivity. Ezra 10:9-10 describes
a general assembly of the people of Jerusalem at the
street to receive instructions on the danger of mixed
marriages. It is inconceivable that everyone in the city
was able to gather in one particular street. It is more
likely that they gathered at the town square. In Nehemiah 8:1-3 we are told that as soon as the wall of the
city was finished, the whole city gathered “as one man
into the street that was before the water gate; and they
spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law
of Moses, which the Lord had commanded to Israel.”
Here in the street, the covenant between God and Israel was renewed. The theocracy was officially restored
by the reading of the Book of the Covenant.
“Having lived in Latin America, I can understand
the critical importance of the town square or plaza.
Even though modernization has diluted many tradi-

tions, small towns can still be found where official
proclamations are made at the plaza or town square. It
is there that city hall is found. The town cathedral is
there. It is there that parades begin and end. It is there
that people gather for social events and to hear civic
announcements. In the past, even judicial decisions
were reached there. In short, the city square is the center of public civil, social and religious life.
“What Daniel 9:25 is telling us, then, is that the
town square was rebuilt in order to facilitate the establishment of social, political and religious life. This is
precisely what is contemplated in the command to ‘restore’ Jerusalem. By rebuilding the town square,
God’s people were able to use it once again for civil
and religious governance.
What about the word ‘wall’? The Hebrew word
harus literally means ‘to cut,’ ‘to sharpen,’ or ‘to decide.’ Except for Daniel 9:25 it is never translated
‘wall.’ Why, then, is the word translated ‘wall’ in this
solitary instance? It seems there are two reasons. First
of all, the building of the wall by Nehemiah after the
captivity seems to have influenced the translators.
Secondly, the LXX translates the Hebrew harus with
teichos which clearly means ‘wall’ in Greek. And Jerome’s Latin Vulgate picked up on the Greek translation by rendering the word muri (‘walls’). Notice that
Jerome changed the Hebrew singular to a plural to better fit the work of Nehemiah.
Let’s take a closer look at the meaning of the
word in the Old Testament. In I Kings 20:40 king
Ahab tells a certain prophet: ‘So shall thy judgment
be; thyself hast decided (harus) it.’ Here the word
harus is properly translated ‘decided’. Significant is
the fact that the concept of decision is coupled with the
idea of judgment. In Job 14:5, the patriarch tells us
how man’s existence is under God’s control: ‘his days
are determined (harus), the number of his months are
with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass.’ The idea here is that God decides how long
man shall live. In Isaiah 10:22, 23 God promises that a
remnant of Israel would return after the captivity. This
had been ‘decreed’ (harus) or ‘determined’ (harus)
beforehand. In Isaiah 28:22 we are told that God had
‘determined’ (harus) a consumption upon the whole
earth. Again, God makes a decision before it is implemented. In Joel 3:14 we are told that the nations are
gathered in the Valley of Jehoshaphat and there God
will make His decision regarding them. The decision
is clearly linked with the idea of judgment (Joel 3:913).
“Significantly, the word harus is used in two other
places in Daniel 9, and in both the basic idea is that of
an execution of a judgment which had previously been
decreed or decided by God. In verse 26 we are told
that the desolations of Jerusalem had previously been
determined, a thought which is repeated in verse 27.
The key question is, Why is harus translated ‘wall’ in
verse 25 while it is translated ‘determined’ in verses 26
and 27? Would it not be more consistent to translate it

355

GEMS FROM DANIEL
‘decision’ in all three instances? In short, Why is the
word harus translated ‘wall’ only in this one instance?
The simple answer to this question is that the
word ‘decision’ does not seem to fit in verse 25. What
sense can be made out of a translation which reads:
‘the decision shall be built again?’ How can a decision
be built again? In order to answer this question, we
must ask another: What does the town square have to
do with the making of decisions? That is to say, if the
expression ‘the street shall be built again, and the wall’
should be translated ‘the square shall be built again and
the decision,’ How does the building of the square relate to the ability to make decisions? The answer to this
question is found in the fact that the city gate which led
to the square was the place where judicial, military,
civic and religious decisions were made. In order for
decisions to be made at the gate of the square, the
square had to be rebuilt. Let’s notice several texts on
the importance of the gate of the square.
“The book of Lamentations describes the aftermath of Jerusalem’s destruction by Nebuchadnezzar.
One of the results was that the elders had ‘ceased from
the gate,’ where they were accustomed to meet to
counsel the people and to render judicial decisions
(Lamentations 5:14). We know that in antiquity every
city had a council of elders whose task was to hear
cases which were brought before them at the gate of
the town square. We find an example of this in Jeremiah 26:8-24 where we are told that the trial of Jeremiah took place ‘in the entry of the new gate of the
Lord’s house’ where the princes of Judah had gathered to render their decision (verse 10).
In II Samuel 15:1-3 we are told the fascinating
story of how Absalom, David’s son, ‘rose up early, and
stood beside the way of the gate; and it was so, that
when any man that had a controversy came to the king
for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said:
“Of what city art thou,” and he said: “Thy servant is of
one of the tribes of Israel.” And Absalom said unto
him: “See, thy matters are good and right; but there is
no man deputed of the king to hear thee.’ (Verses 2-3).
Significant here is the fact that Absalom usurped the
king’s position at the gate to render judicial decisions.
In the days of Amos, we are told that the judges
had become so corrupt that they had turned ‘judgment
to wormwood’ and left ‘off righteousness in the earth.’
(Amos 5:7). This total lack of justice was reflected in
the fact that the judges afflicted the just and took bribes
and turned ‘aside the poor in the gate from their right’
(Amos 5:12). Once again we find that justice was to be
dispensed at the gate.
As we have already noted, immediately after the
wall was finished in the days of Nehemiah, the people
‘gathered themselves together as one man into the
street [city square?] that was before the water gate”
(Nehemiah 8:13). There Nehemiah renewed the Covenant and the theocracy was restored. Among other
things, the Book of the Law was read, the benevolent
acts of God were recited, the Feast of Tabernacles was

kept, the Levitical priesthood was reorganized, and the
laws of marriage, tithing and Sabbath observance were
renewed. Even a cursory reading of Nehemiah 8-13
reveals that Israel was reestablishing self-governance
according to the laws of God at the water gate in the
street [city square].
Let us summarize, then, the meaning of Daniel
9:25:
1. The decree in this verse must meet two specifications: It must be a decree to restore and build Jerusalem. While the restoration refers primarily to the
reestablishment of self-governance in harmony with
the laws of the theocracy, the building has to do with
the actual reconstruction of the physical city: Its walls,
its gates, its city square, etc.
2. The physical rebuilding of the city square
(rachab) is of prime importance because there judicial,
religious, civic and military decisions will be made in
the reestablished theocracy.
This is the reason why the square (rachab) and
decision making (harus) are paired together in Daniel
9:25.
3. Because the KJV translators mistranslated the
word rachab (as “street”), they also mistranslated the
word harus (as “wall”). Once we realize that rachab
means the ‘city square’ and harus means ‘the ability to make decisions,’ the sense of Daniel 9:25 becomes crystal clear!
4. Especially significant is the fact that Artaxerxes’ decree of 457 B. C. gave Israel the right to appoint judges and magistrates and to decide cases
which were brought to them in harmony with the
laws of God (see, Ezra 7:25-26).
5. The ‘troublous times’ were due to the fact that
the Samaritans and other people of the land did not
want Israel to rebuild the city and reestablish selfgovernance. They did all in their power to prevent the
rebuilding and restoration, even to the point of accusing Israel of sedition against the Persian government.
The period between 457 and 408 BC can certainly be
described as ‘troublous times.’” Bohr, ND9, 17-21.
The Street & Wall Built in Troublous Times.—
“When Ezra returned, he started rebuilding the
city, but the western Persian governors soon intervened
and got the work stopped (see Ezra 4:7-12). When
Nehemiah took up the project anew, his opponents
wanted to assassinate him. He resisted their efforts and
refused to interrupt his work on the city (see Nehemiah
4). Thus the rebuilding of Jerusalem certainly took
place in a troubled time.” Shea, DARG, 162,
“From the time of the decree of Artaxerxes in his
seventh year, 457 BC, the work of restoring Jerusalem
moved slowly forward. Because of the completeness
of the destruction by the Babylonians, there was much
work to do on the temple, the homes of the people, the
restoration of streets, conduits, moats, ramparts, and
walls. In the 20th year of Artaxerxes, 444 BC, Nehemi-

356

DANIEL 9
ah found the walls and gates still very largely in ruins,
but under his energetic leadership the work was
pressed rapidly forward, but against much opposition
(Neh. 1:2—12:27). Twelve years later, in the 32 nd year
of Artaxerxes, he returned to the king’s court for a
short period (Neh. 13:6), 432 BC. The completion of
the work of restoration in 408 marked the end of
the first section of seven weeks or 49 years of the
seventy-week period.” Thiele, OSID, 115.

many” (verses 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12). Isaiah 53 makes it
crystal clear that the Messiah would be killed and
that his death would be vicarious.” Bohr, ND9, 21.
But Not For Himself.—
“The next phrase is best translated literally: ‘there
shall not be to/for Him.’ An additional subject has to be
understood with the verb. That additional subject can
be either “things, possessions,” or ‘people.’
“…Since the word for “people” occurs in the next
phrase of the prophecy, it makes a better-understood
subject here. In that case the phrase can be translated
as ‘no one shall be for Him.’ Inasmuch as this statement occurs in connection with His death, it would
mean that He was to be rejected in a special sense
when He died. That certainly was the experience of
Jesus on the cross.” BRI, 2SOD, 231.

“It is evident that Gabriel has divided the seventy
weeks into three parts, and I think clearly explains the
use of this division. ‘Shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks.’ Then, as if you should inquire, What is seven weeks for? He explains, ‘The
street shall be built again, and the wall, even in
troublous times.’ Ezra and Nehemiah were 49 years,
or seven weeks or years, performing these very things,
which ended before Christ 408.” Miller, Evidence, 68.

“That the Messiah would be innocent of all guilt
and therefore condemned unjustly is indicated by the
statement: ‘but not for Himself.’ …Three times Pilate, the Roman judge, declared Him to be innocent of
the charges against Him. He said, ‘I find no fault in
Him.’” Bunch, BOD, 139,140.

DANIEL 9:26
And after threescore and two weeks
shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the prince that shall
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a
flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined.

Identity of Jerusalem Changes When the Messiah
Was Cut Off.—
“Prophecy applies references to Jerusalem or Zion
to Israel, God’s chosen people as long as they remain
in the Theocracy. But when her leaders and the mob at
the trial of Christ declared, ‘We have no king but Caesar,’ John 19:17, the nation formally withdrew from
the Theocracy. [Isaiah 53:8 and Daniel 9:24 show
that at the crucifixion of Christ the Jews finished the
‘transgression’—the national sin of the rejection of the
Messiah. ‘For the transgression of My people was He
stricken.’ Isaiah 53:8.] Then the Christian Church
became Jerusalem, Zion, His people, 1 Peter 2:5,9,10
and Heb. 12:22,23, and prophecies from that time on
relating to Jerusalem or Zion are applied to the true
church.” Teach, D&R, 63.

After Three Score and Two Weeks.—
“That is, at some point after His baptism in AD
27.” Maxwell, 1GC, 240.
Shall Messiah Be Cut Off.—
“But He was wounded for our transgressions,
He was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are
healed.”
“He was cut off out of the land of the living; for
the transgression of My people was He stricken.”
Isaiah 53:5,8.

The Prince That Shall Come.—
“Who is this “prince who is to come” and who
are his people? There seem to be three main views: 1)
The people are the Romans and the prince is Titus; 2)
The prince is the future Antichrist and the people will
be his wicked followers; 3) The people are the Jews
and the prince is Jesus Christ. Which of these views is
correct?
“We will concern ourselves here only with options one and three because, as we shall see, when we
understand these, the second option takes care of itself.
Historicists …have traditionally taught that the prince
was Titus and the people of the prince were the Romans who attacked and destroyed Jerusalem in the year
70 AD. Though this view is tempting, it does not really fit the literary structure of Daniel 9:24-27. Notice
the following structural consideration:

“Notice that in Daniel and Isaiah the verb is passive. This means that someone else cut him off ‘out of
the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.’ It is clear here that the expression ‘cut off’ means killed. And the prophecy makes
it clear that he did this for his people and not for
himself. This second fact is underlined in several other
verses of Isaiah 53 as well: ‘he hath borne our griefs
and carried our sorrows,’ ‘he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed,’ ‘the LORD hath laid on him the
iniquity of us all,’ ‘he shall bear their iniquities,’ ‘he
was numbered with transgressors and he bare the sin of

357

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Messiah (verse 25) Prince
+
+
Messiah (verse 26) Prince
“There is no reason to believe that the Messiah
the Prince of verse 25 is not the same Messiah and
Prince of verse 26. In fact, the reference to Messiah
and Prince in verse 26 provides a literary balance with
the reference to Messiah the Prince in verse 25.
“Another problem with the view that the prince is
Titus and the people are the Romans is the fact that it is
incongruous with the three personal pronouns in verse
27. In verse 27 we are told: “And he shall confirm the
covenant with many for one week; and in the midst of
the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to
cease; and for the overspreading of abominations he
shall make it desolate....” The context clearly indicates
that the three “he’s” of verse 27 are the same as the
“he” of verse 26. In other words the prince of the
people of verse 26 is the same person who confirms the
covenant for one week, causes the sacrifice and oblation to cease and makes the city and sanctuary desolate.
“It is true that Titus literally caused the sacrificial
system to come to an end when he and his armies destroyed the Jerusalem temple. But it is not true that
Titus made a strong covenant with Israel for one week.
..It was Jesus who brought the sacrificial system to an
end when he died on the cross (as we shall see later,
this view is corroborated by Matthew 27:51 as well as
the book of Hebrews). …Jesus confirmed the covenant
with Israel for one week, that is, during the last of the
seventy weeks. It is clear that the antecedent to all
three ‘he’s’ in verse 27 is the prince of verse 26. Let us
put it this way: ‘the people of the prince that shall
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary. . . . and
he [the prince] shall confirm the covenant with many
for one week; and in the midst of the week he [the
prince] shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to
cease; and for the overspreading of abominations he
[the prince] shall make desolate....’” Bohr, ND9, 2122.

Israel’s sins brought about the destruction of the city
and the temple. In fact, the prophet Jeremiah told Israel: If you do not submit to the king of Babylon ‘thou
shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.’ (Jeremiah 38:23; notice also verses 17-18). We can put it this
way: Because of Israel’s sins, God employed His
servant Nebuchadnezzar to destroy the city and the
temple. But God would not have used Nebuchadnezzar to destroy had it not been for the sins of the people.
In other words, Israel, because of her own sinful
choices, brought destruction upon herself. Now let’s
take a look at the second destruction of Jerusalem.
“One thing becomes absolutely clear in Daniel 9
and it is this: The destiny of Jerusalem is inseparably
linked with what happened to Messiah the Prince.
Twice in the literary structure what happened to the
Messiah is followed by the destruction of Jerusalem.
In verse 26, after Messiah was cut off, Jerusalem
was destroyed. And in verse 27, Jerusalem was destroyed after the Prince caused the sacrifice and
oblation to cease! The critical question at this juncture
is, does the New Testament shed any light on how the
destiny of the Messiah is linked to the fate of the second city and temple? The answer is a resounding yes!
“On the Sunday before the crucifixion, Jesus entered Jerusalem triumphantly on a donkey. At the conclusion of this majestic event, Jesus entered the temple
and cast out the money changers. At this point the
temple was referred to by Matthew as the ‘temple of
God’ and Jesus called it ‘My house’ (Matthew 21:1213). Jesus then told a series of parables in which He
underlined that the Jewish nation was about to make
the terrible mistake of rejecting him (see, for example,
Matthew 21:33-45; 22:1-14; 23:29-39).
“Of particular significance is the parable of Matthew 21:33-44 where Jesus reviewed the history of
Israel in five stages:
“Stage # 1: God sent servants to Israel to gather
fruit in harvest season but Israel rejected God’s messengers (verses 34-35).
“Stage # 2: God then sent more servants and Israel did the same with them (verse 36).
“Stage # 3: God then sent them His own Son and
they killed Him (verses 37-39).
“Stage # 4: The wicked men who killed the Son
were destroyed (verse 41)
“Stage # 5: The kingdom was taken from Israel
and given to the Gentiles (verse 43; Acts 13:46-47).
“These five stages of Israel’s history as described
in Matthew 21:33-44 parallel very closely the same
stages of Israel’s history as described in Daniel 9: 24
“Stage # 1: After God released Israel from Egypt,
he sent them messengers but they mocked and rejected
them (Daniel 9:6; II Chronicles 36:15, 16).
“Stage # 2: After the Babylonian captivity God
gave Israel another chance. The city and temple were
rebuilt and God gave Israel another opportunity to bear
fruit (Daniel 9:24). In order to help, God sent Israel
many messengers: Haggai, Zechariah, Zerubbabel,

The People of the Prince
“Of course, if the prince of verse 26 is Jesus, then
the people of the prince must be the Jews (remember
that the word ‘people’ throughout Daniel 9 always denotes Israel–see verses 15, 16, 19, 20, 24). The million
dollar question then becomes: Did the Jews destroy
their own city and sanctuary? At first sight this possibility would seem absurd. The Jews did not destroy
their own city and sanctuary (Titus and the Romans
did!!), or did they? In order to answer this question we
must take a look at the reason for the first destruction
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar.
“Who destroyed Jerusalem the first time? Was it
God or Nebuchadnezzar or Israel? Daniel 9:14 explicitly states that God destroyed Jerusalem. II Chronicles 36:17-20 states that Nebuchadnezzar (whom God
calls ‘my servant’–Jeremiah 27:6) destroyed the city
and the temple. But Daniel 9:11, 14, 15 explains that

358

DANIEL 9
Joshua, Ezra, Nehemiah, Malachi, John the Baptist, etc.
But they rejected these messengers as well.
“Stage # 3: At the very end of the seventy weeks,
God even sent Messiah the Prince; but instead of receiving Him, they cut Him off (Daniel 9:26).
“Stage # 4: As a result Jerusalem was destroyed
by the Roman armies (Daniel 9:26-27).
“Stage # 5: The Gentiles now became God’s new
nation (this is implicit in the fact that probation was to
last only 70 weeks for the Jewish nation. We shall also
find that when Stephen was stoned, the theocracy came
to an end and the gospel went to the Gentiles).
“The striking parallel between Daniel 9:26-27
and Matthew 21:33-44 clearly reveals that the rejection of the Son by Israel resulted in the destruction
of Jerusalem and the ingrafting of the Gentiles as
God’s chosen nation. When Jesus left the temple He
pronounced the ominous words: ‘Behold, your house
is left unto you desolate’ (Matthew 23:38). Two
words immediately arrest our attention. First of all, the
temple was no longer the ‘temple of God.’ Jesus now
referred to it as ‘your house.’ Secondly, notice the key
word, ‘desolate.’
“This is the very word which is used in Daniel 9
to describe the fate of Jerusalem. Three times we are
told there that Jerusalem would be left desolate (verses
26, 27). Significantly, as soon as Jesus pronounced
these chilling words, He left the temple and spoke
about the destruction of the city and the temple (Matthew 24:1-3). Certainly no one can miss the connection between the rejection of the Messiah and the
destruction of Jerusalem! Only a willful and unexplainable blindness could fail to see how the rejection
of Messiah the Prince led to the destruction of the city
and temple!!
“This link can also be discerned in Luke 19:4144: ‘And when he was come near, he beheld the city
and wept over it, saying: If thou hadst known, even
thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong
unto thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes.
For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies
shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round,
and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even
with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they
shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because
thou knowest not the time of thy visitation.’ Can there
be any doubt in this passage that the fate of Jerusalem
is linked with the rejection of the Messiah? (For further information on the role the Jews played in the
death of the Messiah, see, Acts 3:14, 15; 7:52; Acts
2:22, 23).
“To end this section, I would like to make a few
remarks about the parable of Matthew 22 because it
explains why Jerusalem was destroyed the second time.
Like in the parable of Matthew 21:33-46 God sent
servants to Israel in order to prepare them for the marriage of his son (verses 2-3). This stage represents the
Old Testament period when God sent prophets to prepare Israel for the coming of the Messiah. These mes-

sages were rejected.
“Then, after Christ was sacrificed (verse 4), further servants (Peter, Stephen, Paul, etc.) were sent to
the same people (Israel) but these messages were also
rejected (verses 5-6).
“In verse 7 we are told the king’s reaction: ‘But
when the king heard thereof, he was wroth; and he sent
forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and
burned up their city.’
“Notice how three ideas coalesce in this verse.
God used the Roman armies (spoken of as his armies)
to destroy those murderers and to burn their city. Once
again we clearly see that the people, by rejecting the
Messiah, brought destruction upon their own city
(see also, Hosea 13:9). Though the destruction was
carried out by God through the instrumentality of
Titus and the Roman armies, it was the choice of the
Jewish nation which really determined its fate.”
Bohr, ND9, 22-25.
“The Jews had forged their own fetters; they
had filled for themselves the cup of vengeance. In the
utter destruction that befell them as a nation, and in all
the woes that followed them in their dispersion, they
were but reaping the harvest which their own hands
had sown. Says the prophet: ‘O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself;’ ‘for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.’ Hosea 13:9; 14:1. Their sufferings are often represented as a punishment visited upon them by the direct
decree of God. It is thus that the great deceiver seeks
to conceal his own work. By stubborn rejection of divine love and mercy, the Jews had caused the protection of God to be withdrawn from them, and Satan
was permitted to rule them according to his will.”
Great Controversy, 35-36.

The Destruction of Jerusalem and Temple, 70 AD.
(Depiction From Arch of Titus in Rome.)
“The cause of Jerusalem’s destruction was the
Jewish rebellion; the event which resulted from that
rebellion was the destruction of the city and its temple.
In that sense, it can be said that the people of the Jewish Messiah Prince caused or brought about the destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70.” Shea, DARG, 167.
The Prince that Shall Come—When?—
“When, in the chronology of the 70 weeks, was

359

GEMS FROM DANIEL
this prince to come? The context clearly indicates
that he was to come at the conclusion of the first 69
weeks. Both futurists and historicists agree on this
point. But while historicists believe, as we have seen,
that the prince that shall come was fulfilled in Jesus or
Titus, futurists teach that the prince will be a future
world dictator. Which view is correct?
“Once again, as in the case of the vicarious death
of the Messiah, the key which unlocks the true meaning of this phrase is found in a messianic prophecy,
Psalm 118. Psalm 118:26 reads: “Blessed is he that
cometh in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you
out of the house of the Lord.”
“In Luke 13:35 Jesus applied to Himself (at His
second coming) the phrase, ‘Blessed is he that cometh
in the name of the Lord.’ But this messianic prophecy was also fulfilled at triumphal entry into Jerusalem. Notice how Luke 19:37-44 presents three events
in chronological sequence:
“1) Jesus entered Jerusalem on a colt, and the
multitudes sang: “ Blessed be the King that cometh in
the name of the Lord. . . .” (Verses 37-38).
“2) Jesus then spoke about his rejection by the
Jewish nation (verses 39-42; see also Matthew 23:2939).
“3) Finally Jesus spoke about the destruction of
Jerusalem (verses 43-44; see also Matthew 24:1-3)
“One cannot help but notice how this same threefold sequence is found in Daniel 9:26:
“1) The prince comes.
“2) He is cut off.
“3) The city and temple are destroyed.
“Psalm 118:22 makes it abundantly clear that the
one who comes in the name of the Lord is also ‘the
stone which the builders refused [and] is become the
head of the corner.’ Jesus identified Himself as this
Stone (see Matthew 21:42 and the context in which it
appears).
“Thus, after announcing that not one stone
would be left upon another in the literal Jerusalem
temple, Jesus affirmed that He was about to become
the head cornerstone of a new spiritual temple, the
church (see also, Ephesians 2:19-22). It is worthy of
note that the word ‘head’ in the Old Testament is used
interchangeably with the word ‘prince’. (Isaiah 19:13;
Judges 20:2; I Samuel 14:38 where the word pinnah
(head) is used in the sense of ‘chief, ruler or leader.’)
Bohr, ND9, 25,26.

the ‘abomination of desolation’ or the ‘abomination
that maketh desolate.’ Dan. 9:27 is surely a description of the Papal abomination with its false mediatorial system that supplants and destroys the services of Christ in the heavenly sanctuary. See Daniel 7:25; 8:13; 11:31; 12:11. This is a fuller explanation of Daniel 8:10-13.” Bunch, BOD, 142.
Shall Destroy the City and the Sanctuary.—
“The temple, which had been rebuilt as a result
of the decrees of Cyrus the Great and Darius the Persian, and the city, which had been restored and rebuilt
as a result of the decrees or Artaxerxes, were to be destroyed once again due to the unfaithfulness of the
people in rejecting the Messiah.” Bohr, ND9, 26.
“The prophecy which He uttered was twofold in
its meaning; while foreshadowing the destruction of
Jerusalem, it prefigured also the terrors of the last great
day.
“Jesus declared to the listening disciples the
judgments that were to fall upon apostate Israel, and
especially the retributive vengeance that would come
upon them for their rejection and crucifixion of the
Messiah. Unmistakable signs would precede the awful
climax. The dreaded hour would come suddenly and
swiftly. And the Saviour warned His followers:
‘When ye therefore shall see the abomination of
desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand
in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:) then let them which be in Judea flee into the
mountains.’ Matt. 24:15, 16; Luke 21:20, 21. When
the idolatrous standards of the Romans should be set up
in the holy ground, which extended some furlongs outside the city walls, then the followers of Christ were to
find safety in flight. When the warning sign should be
seen, those who would escape must make no delay.
Throughout the land of Judea, as well as in Jerusalem
itself, the signal for flight must be immediately
obeyed.” Great Controversy, 25,26.
“Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of
Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the people of
Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Zion
shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the
high places of a forest.” Jer. 26:18.
“In less than forty years the city was captured
by the army of Titus, the temple was burned, and the
Jews were scattered to the ends of the earth, there to
remain until the consummation of all things at the time
determined.” Haskell, SDP. 131

Because of the Sins of His People, God uses Little
Horn (Pagan & Papal) for Judgment .—
“The ‘little horn’ of Daniel’s vision included both Pagan and Papal Rome, and both must be
included in the interpretation. Pagan Rome under
Titus destroyed and made desolate the city of Jerusalem and its temple or sanctuary. Papal Rome was to
destroy the ‘holy people’ and trample underfoot ‘the
holy city’ and the heavenly sanctuary and its Priest and
services. Both Pagan and Papal Rome constituted

“These exploits included the obliteration of the
Jewish temple. The candlestick was [taken and] later
deposited in Vespasian’s Temple of Peace in Rome.
To show their anger ‘against the Holy Covenant’
(NEB) the Romans erected a temple to Jupiter, ‘the

360

DANIEL 9
father of the gods,’ on the site of the Jewish temple,
sacred since Solomon’s great dedication a thousand
years before.” Anderson, UDP, 145.

“When Gabriel gave the prophecy of chapter 9 to
Daniel, he focused the prophet’s attention upon ‘your
people and your holy city,’ that is, the Jews in Judah
and the city of Jerusalem. As far as these two elements are concerned, the prophecy ends with the
city in ruins and the Messiah rejected by the Jews.”
BRI, 2SOD, 236.

“The NT has a direct reference to the book of
Daniel from the mouth of Jesus. In Matthew 24:15
Jesus speaks, ‘Therefore when you see the ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION which was spoken of
through Daniel the prophet, standing IN THE HOLY
PLACE…” (NASB; cf. Mark 13:14; Luke 21:20).
This word refers to the prophecy of the ‘abomination of
desolation’ as an event to take place [almost 40 years]
in the future. It had not yet taken place. Is there not
a contradiction between the consensus of historicalcritical scholarship which claims that this event
took place in the second century BC, and the words
of Jesus that placed the event still future to His
time?” BRI, 2SOD, 91.

Not Antiochus Epiphanes.—
“In summary we must say that the Antiochus interpretation of chapter 9 falls short of adequate exegetical and historical explanations in order to make that
interpretation plausible. The time periods extend beyond times of Antiochus. He did not destroy Jerusalem and its temple. And finally, the personal titles
given in the prophecy do not fit him either.” BRI,
2SOD, 225.

End Thereof Shall Be With a Flood.—
“The word ‘thereof’ has the city and the sanctuary
as antecedents. That is, the end of the city and the
sanctuary would be with a flood. In the Bible, a military invasion is occasionally compared to an overwhelming flood (see Isaiah 8:7-8; Jeremiah 46:6-7;
Revelation 12:15-16; Daniel 11:22, 40; Revelation
16:12 compared with Revelation 17:1-5, 15). We
have here a vivid description of the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple by Titus and the Roman armies.
Anyone who has read Josephus’ description of the destruction of Jerusalem in Wars of the Jews (notice that
this event is called ‘the war’ in Daniel 9:26) will concur that the invasion of Jerusalem by the Roman
armies was as an overwhelming and devastating
flood. A vivid description of the destruction of Jerusalem is given by Ellen G. White in the first chapter of
The Great Controversy.” Bohr, ND9, 26,27.

DANIEL 9:27
And he shall confirm the covenant with
many for one week: and in the midst of the
week he shall cause the sacrifice and the
oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that
determined shall be poured upon the desolate.
He.—
“The entire meaning of verse 27 revolves around
the identity of the person who confirms the covenant
for one week. The all important question therefore becomes, Who is this person? Futurists believe this
person is a future Roman Antichrist who will make a
seven year pact of peace with the literal Jews only to
break it in the middle of the week. According to this
view, this vile person will halt the sacrificial system in
a rebuilt Jerusalem temple and impose a reign of terror
for three and a half literal years.
“There are ample reasons, however, to believe
that this person is the same as the Messiah who was
cut off in verse 26. There is no contextual or syntactical reason to insert the Antichrist into this verse. As
we have seen in our discussion above, Jesus Christ
fits this prophecy perfectly. This will become even
clearer….” Bohr, ND9, 27.

“In the Jewish War, 66-73, half a million Jews are
said to have died, almost depopulating Palestine.”
Maxwell, 1GC, 240.
Desolations Determined.—
“It is of the utmost importance to realize that even
though the destruction of Jerusalem falls outside the
chronological time period of the seventy weeks (because the seventy weeks ended in the year 34 AD, but
Jerusalem was not destroyed until the year 70 AD) yet
it is inseparably linked with events which occurred
within that time period. This is reflected in the last
phrase of Daniel 9:26 (as well as in the last phrase of
Daniel 9:27): ‘desolations are determined.’ As we
have previously noted, the word ‘determined’ refers
to an event which has been decreed or decided before it actually occurs…. That is to say, the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple had already been determined by events which took place during the time
frame of the seventy weeks—particularly the last
week!” Bohr, ND9, 27.

The Covenant.—
“What does the expression ‘he shall confirm the
covenant with many for one week’ mean? It is a matter
of record that every single time the word ‘covenant’ is
used in the book of Daniel, it refers to God’s covenant with His people. In other words, the word ‘covenant’ in Daniel is never employed to describe a secular political covenant. For instance, Daniel 9:4 speaks

361

GEMS FROM DANIEL
of God who keeps ‘the covenant and mercy to them
that love him’; Daniel 11:22 refers to Jesus as ‘the
prince of the covenant’ [notice how prince and covenant are linked in this verse just like in Daniel 9:27];
Daniel 11:28, 30 speaks of the ‘holy covenant;’ and
Daniel 11:32 describes those who ‘do wickedly against
the covenant.’ It should be noted that the word covenant in Daniel 9:27 has the definite article. In other
words, it is not a covenant but the covenant which is
confirmed. Significant also is the fact that Daniel 9 is
the only chapter where the covenant name “Yahweh”
appears. This name is God’s covenant name throughout the Old Testament.” Bohr, ND9, 27,28.

they could obey God’s law.” Patriarchs & Prophets,
370,371.
“Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I
will make a new covenant with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah:
“Not according to the covenant that I made with
their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to
bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them,
saith the LORD:
“But this shall be the covenant that I will make
with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the
LORD, I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and
they shall be my people.” Jeremiah 31:31-33.

“What covenant is this to be confirmed? I answer, it cannot be the Jewish covenant, for that was
confirmed by Moses many hundred years before Daniel
lived. There being but two covenants, it must of necessity be the new covenant of which Christ is the Mediator; Moses having been the mediator of the old,
and Christ afterwards of the new.” Miller, Evidence,
64.

“The covenant here mentioned is the ‘new’ or
‘everlasting covenant’ mentioned in Jer. 31:31-34
and Heb. 8:6-13. It is the only covenant that brings
salvation from sin. This covenant was confirmed and
ratified by the death of Christ. Heb. 9:15-17. The
new covenant is applied to the individual heart through
the Holy Spirit and is claimed by Him as recorded in
Heb. 10:15-17. He speaks here as the personal Representative and Vicegerent of the Son of God.” Bunch,
BOD, 147.

“The covenant of grace was first made with
man in Eden, when after the Fall there was given a
divine promise that the seed of the woman should
bruise the serpent’s head. To all men this covenant
offered pardon and the assisting grace of God for
future obedience through faith in Christ. It also
promised them eternal life on condition of fidelity to
God’s law. Thus the patriarchs received the hope of
salvation.
“This same covenant was renewed to Abraham in the promise, ‘In thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed.’ Gen. 22:18. This promise
pointed to Christ. So Abraham understood it (see
Gal. 3:8, 16), and he trusted in Christ for the forgiveness of sins. It was this faith that was accounted
unto him for righteousness. The covenant with Abraham also maintained the authority of God’s law. The
Lord appeared unto Abraham, and said, ‘I am the Almighty God; walk before Me, and be thou perfect.’
Gen. 17:1. The testimony of God concerning His faithful servant was, ‘Abraham obeyed My voice, and kept
My charge, My commandments, My statutes, and My
laws.’ Gen. 26:5. And the Lord declared to him, ‘I will
establish My covenant between Me and thee and thy
seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee and to thy seed
after thee.’ Gen. 17:7.
“Though this covenant was made with Adam
and renewed to Abraham, it could not be ratified
until the death of Christ. It had existed by the promise of God since the first intimation of redemption had
been given; it had been accepted by faith; yet when
ratified by Christ, it is called a new covenant. The law
of God was the basis of this covenant, which was
simply an arrangement for bringing men again into
harmony with the divine will, placing them where

“And the LORD spake unto you out of the midst
of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no
similitude; only ye heard a voice. And he declared
unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to
perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote
them upon two tables of stone.” Deut. 4:12,13.
He Shall Confirm the Covenant.—
“The expression ‘he shall confirm the covenant’
is better translated ‘he shall make strong the covenant.’
The Hebrew word gabar is used some 328 times in the
Old Testament and the basic meaning is ‘strong,’
‘mighty’ (for example, in Isaiah 9:6 gabar is translated
‘mighty’) The sense here seems to be the act of putting
the covenant on a firm footing or ratifying it. The
question is, Why did the covenant need to be made
strong? Was it weak in the first place?
“The answer to these queries lies in the fact that
the old covenant was ratified with the blood of animals
which could not take away sin. On the other hand,
the new covenant is better and stronger because it is
based on better blood, a better priesthood, a better
covenant, better promises and a better sanctuary.
The old covenant could not truly remove sin but the
new covenant does. (see, John 1:29; Hebrews 7:22; 8:6,
13; 9:12-27; 10:1-4). That is to say, the old covenant
was weak because it could not save; it could only reveal the Savior who was to come.” Bohr, ND9, 28.
“This is My blood of the new testament (covenant), which is shed for many for the remission of

362

DANIEL 9
sins. Matt. 26:28.

ring when he states: ‘And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week? The context makes it
very clear that this is the last week of the seventy. No
scholar I know of has questioned this. Yet an important fact has escaped many commentators and that
is that the chronological progression of Messiah’s career is repeated in chiastic fashion twice in Daniel
9:25-27 ending each time with the destruction of Jerusalem. Notice the progression in verses 25-26:
A. Anointing of the Messiah begins 70th week.
B. Messiah “cut off” (at some unspecified point
during the 70th week).
C. Messiah’s death leads to Jerusalem’s destruction in 70 AD.
“A similar sequence of events is repeated in verse
27:
A. Messiah makes the covenant strong for 70th week.
B. Messiah causes the sacrifice to cease in the
middle of the 70th week.
C. Jerusalem destroyed because Messiah
was killed in the middle of the week.
“A comparison of the structure of verses 25-26
with verse 27 reveals that verses 25-27 cannot be read
in a linear fashion as if one event followed the other in
a neat chronological sequence. The fact is that the
same material is repeated twice in chiastic fashion.
The ‘A’ in verse 25 pinpoints the date for the initiation
of Messiah’s ministry during the 70th week while the
‘A’ in verse 27 emphasizes that Messiah made strong
the covenant during the 70th week. The ‘B’ in verse 26
describes the death of the Messiah at some point during
the 70th week but does not specify the exact time. The
corresponding ‘B’ in verse 27 pinpoints the precise
time of Messiah’s death–it was in the middle of the
70th week. The ‘C’ of verse 26 describes the destruction of Jerusalem as does the ‘C’ of verse 27. This
beautiful literary symmetry is further evidence that the
Messiah the Prince of verse 25 is the same person as
the Messiah and the Prince of verse 26.” Bohr, ND9,
29.

With Many.—
“And who are the ‘many’ with whom this covenant is made strong? In our analysis of verse 26 we
saw that the ‘cutting off’ of the Messiah was a vicarious sacrifice. This fact is underlined also in the meaning of the word ‘many.’ In the parallel messianic passage of Isaiah 53 we find the following declaration:
‘by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many; for he shall bear their iniquities.’ This prophecy
is picked up in the New Testament as well.
In Mark 10:45 we are told that Jesus came ‘not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life
a ransom for many.’ Once again the word ‘many’ is
linked with the idea of a vicarious sacrifice. In Hebrews 9:28 we find the same idea: ‘So Christ was
once offered to bear the sins of many....” But by far
the most important verse for our understanding of the
word “many” is found in Matthew 26:28 (see also, I
Corinthians 11:25). When Jesus instituted the Lord’s
Supper in the Upper Room to commemorate His death
until He comes, He stated: ‘this is the blood of the new
testament [the word ‘testament’ here is the Greek word
which is also translated ‘covenant’ in the New Testament–diatheke], which is shed for many for the remission of sins.’
“All of the above texts are linked by a common
idea: A vicarious sacrifice for ‘many.’ It can hardly
be coincidental that the statement in Daniel 9:26 to
the effect that the Messiah was cut off but not for
himself was picked up by three New Testament
writers and applied to Jesus! And the fact that Jesus
Himself, in Matt. 26:28 not only connected His vicarious sacrifice with the word ‘many’ but also with the
word ‘covenant’ is compelling evidence that the New
Testament holds the key which unlocks the meaning of
the prophecy of the seventy weeks.” Bohr, ND9, 28.
“The prophet Simeon said to Mary regarding her
child: ‘Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising
again of many in Israel.” Luke 2:24, Jesus said: ‘For
the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give His life a ransom for many.’
Matt. 20:28. That many Jews did accept the gospel
during the seventieth week of years allotted to them is
evident from the book of Acts. See Acts 2;41; 4:4,32;
5:14-16; 6:7. Surely the prophecies were fulfilled
which centuries before had declared that the covenant
would be confirmed with ‘many’ during the one week
when ‘My righteous servant shall justify many.’ Isa.
53:11. Of the forerunner of the Messiah, the angel
Gabriel said: ‘And many of the children of Israel shall
he turn to the Lord their God.’ Luke 1:16.” Bunch,
BOD, 148.

Confirm the Covenant For One Week.—
“How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him.” Hebrews 2:3.
“Jesus would confirm the covenant for the first
half of the week. Then He confirmed it through His
disciples for the remaining 3 ½ years.” PJ.
“The burden of Christ’s preaching was, ‘The
time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand;
repent ye, and believe the gospel.’ Thus the gospel
message, as given by the Saviour Himself, was based
on the prophecies. The ‘time’ which He declared to be
fulfilled was the period made known by the angel Gabriel to Daniel. ‘Seventy weeks,’ said the angel, ‘are
determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to
finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins,

Confirm the Covenant For What Week?—
“We must now move on to one final consideration in this section: To which ‘week’ is Gabriel refer-

363

GEMS FROM DANIEL
clearly indicates that the cutting off of the Messiah
would lead to the cessation of the sacrifice and the
oblation. Synonyms for ‘cease’ are, ‘bring to an end,’
‘stop,’ and ‘discontinue.’ Thus Daniel 9 not only explains that the prince would cause the sacrifice and the
oblation to cease but it also tells us how this would
happen: The Messiah would be cut off from the land
of the living! The Gospels strikingly reveal how Daniel 9:25-27 was fulfilled in Jesus. Let’s see.
“In John 19:31we are told that the last words of
Jesus on the cross were: ‘It is finished.’ As soon as
these words were pronounced, Matthew explains that
‘the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks were
rent.’ (Matthew 27:51). Not only was the veil torn
from top to bottom, but something else happened
which has profound significance. Ellen White vividly
describes what happened at the very moment the priest
was about to offer the sacrifice and the oblation:
“ ‘When the loud cry, “It is finished,” came from
the lips of Christ, the priests were officiating in the
temple. It was the hour of the evening sacrifice. The
lamb representing Christ had been brought to be slain.
Clothed in his significant and beautiful dress, the priest
stood with lifted knife, as did Abraham when he was
about to slay his son. With intense interest the people
were looking on. But the earth trembles and quakes;
for the Lord Himself draws near. With a rending noise
the inner veil of the temple is torn from top to bottom
by an unseen hand, throwing open to the gaze of the
multitude a place once filled with the presence of God.
In this place the Shekinah had dwelt....
“ ‘All is terror and confusion. The priest is about
to slay the victim; but the knife drops from his nerveless hand, and the lamb escapes. Type has met antitype in the death of God’s Son. The great sacrifice has
been made. The way into the holiest is laid open. A
new and living way is prepared for all. No longer need
sinful, sorrowing humanity await the coming of the
high priest.
“ ‘Henceforth the Saviour was to officiate as
priest and advocate in the heaven of heavens.” (The
Desire of Ages, pp. 756-757).
“Notice that there was no sacrifice or oblation the
day Jesus died. Christ literally made these ceremonies
cease on the day of His crucifixion!! If the Jews had
understood what this meant, they would have shut
down the sacrifices and the oblations on that very day
once and for all! So, in three ways God indicated that
the sacrifice and the oblation had come to an end: 1)
By Jesus crying out: ‘It is finished,’ 2) By the rending
of the veil, 3) By the lamb’s escape from the hands of
the priest.
“Yes, someone might object, but the sacrifices
and oblations were resumed shortly thereafter and continued until the destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70.
True enough. But these ceremonies no longer had any
significance. The shadows had given way to the sub-

and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring
in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision
and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy.’ Dan. 9:24.
…The commandment to restore and build Jerusalem,
as completed by the decree of Artaxerxes Longimanus
(see Ezra 6:14; 7:1, 9, margin), went into effect in the
autumn of BC 457. From this time four hundred and
eighty-three years extend to the autumn of AD 27.
According to the prophecy, this period was to reach to
the Messiah, the Anointed One. In AD 27, Jesus at
His baptism received the anointing of the Holy Spirit, and soon afterward began His ministry. Then
the message was proclaimed. ‘The time is fulfilled.’
“Then, said the angel, ‘He shall confirm the
covenant with many for one week [seven years].’
For seven years after the Saviour entered on His
ministry, the gospel was to be preached especially to
the Jews; for three and a half years by Christ Himself; and afterward by the apostles.” Desire of Ages,
233.
“ ‘And He shall confirm the covenant with many
for one week.’ The ‘week’ here brought to view is
the last one of the seventy; it is the last seven years of
the period allotted especially to the Jews. During this
time, extending from AD 27 to AD 34, Christ, at
first in person and afterward by His disciples, extended the gospel invitation especially to the Jews.
As the apostles went forth with the good tidings of the
kingdom, the Saviour’s direction was: ‘Go not into the
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans
enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel.’ Matthew 10:5,6.” Great Controversy, 327.
“After the disciples had received the baptism of
the Holy Spirit, the priests and rulers marveled at the
words which they spake, for they knew them as unlearned and ignorant men. But they took knowledge of
them that they had been with Jesus
“Their teaching was a second edition of the
teachings of Christ, the utterance of simple, grand
truths that flashed light into darkened minds, and converted thousands in a day. The disciples began to understand that Christ was their Advocate in the heavenly
courts, and that He was glorified. They could speak
because the Holy Spirit gave them utterance.” 6BC,
1056.
He Shall Cause the Sacrifice & Oblation to Cease.—
“First of all, what is the sacrifice and the oblation? The word ‘sacrifice’ (zebach) is a common one
in the Old Testament and is used to describe the animal sacrifices performed in the sanctuary (Leviticus
7:11-20, etc.). The word ‘oblation’ (minchah) is used
to describe the drink and meal offerings which accompanied these sacrifices (Numbers 28:5, 7, etc.).
“Notice that it was the prince (who is the subject
of the sentence) who caused the sacrifice and the oblation to cease. The literary structure of Daniel 9:25-27

364

DANIEL 9
stance (see, Colossians 2:14-17; Hebrews 10:1-9, 1112, 18).” Bohr, ND9, 29-31.

the Jews sealed their rejection of Christ by delivering
Him to death, they rejected all that gave significance
to the temple and its services. Its sacredness had
departed. It was doomed to destruction. From that
day sacrificial offerings and the service connected
with them were meaningless. Like the offering of
Cain, they did not express faith in the Saviour. In putting Christ to death, the Jews virtually destroyed
their temple. When Christ was crucified, the inner
veil of the temple was rent in twain from top to bottom,
signifying that the great final sacrifice had been made,
and that the system of sacrificial offerings was forever at an end.” Desire of Ages, 165.

“ ‘In the midst of the week He shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.’ In AD 31, three and a
half years after His baptism, our Lord was crucified.
With the great sacrifice offered upon Calvary, ended that system of offerings which for four thousand
years had pointed forward to the Lamb of God.
Type had met antitype, and all the sacrifices and oblations of the ceremonial system were there to cease.”
Great Controversy, 327,328.
“‘In the midst of the week He shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.’ Dan. 9:27. In the
spring of AD 31, Christ, the true Sacrifice, was offered
on Calvary. Then the veil of the temple was rent in
twain, showing that the sacredness and significance
of the sacrificial service had departed. The time
had come for the earthly sacrifice and oblation to
cease.” Prophets & Kings, 699.

“Various non-Christian religions have continued
to offer animal sacrifices until the present day. By His
death Jesus did not make offering of animal sacrifices
impossible. God does not compel anyone to stop the
religious burning of animals. But in the sight of
heaven Christ’s cross was the Sacrifice to end all
sacrifices. With the death of Jesus no ritual sacrifice, Jewish or otherwise, has significance anymore
for salvation.
“A startling miracle should have taught this lesson to the Jewish priests even though the teachings of
the prophets failed to do so. At the moment when Jesus had ‘breathed his last,’ ‘the curtain of the temple
was torn in two, from top to bottom.’ Mark 15:38.
Until that precise instant, entrance into the most holy
place had been restricted to the high priest once a year.
Now, theoretically, it was open to everyone at any
time.
“With such dramatic symbolism as this, Heaven
said to all the world, ‘You do not need the Jewish
priesthood anymore. Helpful in countless ways as rabbis and Christian priests and ministers may be, you do
not need them either, in order to enter the presence of
God. There is only one Mediator between God and
men, the Man Christ Jesus’ (see Hebrews 9:15 and 1
Timothy 2:5).
“During the seventieth week of Daniel 9 Jesus
Christ amply fulfilled the prophecy, ‘He shall cause
sacrifice and offering to cease.’” Maxwell, 1GC, 214.
“When Jesus offered on the Cross ‘one sacrifice
for sins forever,’ He forever caused to cease the typical
offerings and sacrifices in which He said He had no
delight. Heb. 10:1-9. The very purpose of His advent was to take away ‘the first’ or typical, that He
might ‘establish the second’: the heavenly sanctuary
and its services.” Bunch, BOD, 141.

The Inner Veil of the Temple Was Rent in Twain.
“Christ was the foundation and life of the temple.
Its services were typical of the sacrifice of the Son of
God. The priesthood was established to represent the
mediatorial character and work of Christ. The entire
plan of sacrificial worship was a foreshadowing of the
Saviour’s death to redeem the world. There would be
no efficacy in these offerings when the great event
toward which they had pointed for ages was consummated.
“Since the whole ritual economy was symbolical of Christ, it had no value apart from Him. When

A New Temple in Old Jerusalem—Meaningless.—
“Many people are wondering whether it is likely
that during a short period just prior to Christ’s second
coming, God will ask the Jews, in memory of the cross,
to restore their animal sacrifices. The answer from our
study of Daniel 9:24-27 is that He most certainly will
not. Jesus has done away with animal sacrifices. He

365

GEMS FROM DANIEL
has annulled them. He has abolished them. He has
‘caused sacrifice and offering to cease.’” Maxwell,
1GC, 215.

This being in the middle of the last week, we have
simply to reckon backward three and a half years to
find where sixty-nine of the weeks ended, and forward
from that point three and a half years to find the termination of the whole seventy weeks. Thus going back
three and a half years from the crucifixion in the spring
of AD 31, we come to the autumn of AD 27, when, as
we have seen, the sixty-nine weeks ended, and Christ
began His public ministry. Going forward from the
crucifixion three and a half years, we are brought to the
autumn of AD 34, as the grand terminating point of the
whole period of the seventy weeks. This date is
marked by the martyrdom of Stephen, the formal rejection of the gospel of Christ by the Jewish Sanhedrin in
the persecution of His disciples, and the turning of the
apostles to the Gentiles. These are the events which
one would expect to take place when that specified
period cut off for the Jews and allotted to them as a
peculiar people, should fully expire.
“From the facts above set forth, we see that, reckoning the seventy weeks from the decree given to Ezra
in the seventh year of Artaxerxes, 457 BC, there is perfect harmony throughout. The important and definite
events of the manifestation of the Messiah at His baptism, the commencement of His public ministry, the
crucifixion, and the rejection of the Jews and the
preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles, with the proclamation of the new covenant—all come in their exact
place, sealing the prophecy and making it sure.”
Smith, DR, 214-217.

The Date of the Crucifixion—Messiah Cut Off.—
“It now becomes an important point to determine
in what year the crucifixion took place. It is not to be
questioned that our Saviour attended every Passover
that occurred during His public ministry, and we have
mention of only four such occasions previous to His
crucifixion. These are found in the passages: John
2:13; 5:1; 6:4; 13:1. At the last-mentioned Passover
He was crucified. From facts already established, let
us then see where this would locate the crucifixion. As
He began His ministry in the autumn of AD 27, His first
Passover would occur the following spring, AD 28; His
second, AD 29; His third, AD 30; and His fourth and
last, AD 31. This gives us three years and a half for
His public ministry, and corresponds exactly to the
prophecy that He would be cut off in the midst, or
middle of the seventieth week. As that week of years
began in the autumn of AD 27, the middle of the week
would occur three and one half years later, in the spring
of 31, when the crucifixion took place. Dr. Hales
quotes Eusebius, AD 300, as saying: ‘It is recorded in
history that the whole time of our Saviour’s teaching
and working miracles was three years and a half, which
is the half of a week [of years]. This, John the evangelist will represent to those who critically attend to his
Gospel.’ [William Hales, A New Analysis of Chronology, Vol. I, p. 94.]
“Of the unnatural darkness which occurred at the
crucifixion, Hales thus speaks: ‘Hence it appears that
the darkness which “overspread the whole land of Judea” at the time of our Lord’s crucifixion was preternatural, “from the sixth until the ninth hour,” or from
noon till three in the afternoon, in its duration, and also
in its time, about full moon, when the moon could not
possibly eclipse the sun. The time it happened, and the
fact itself are recorded in a curious and valuable passage of a respected Roman Consul, Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator, about AD 514. “In the consulate of Tiberius Caesar Aug. V and AElius Sejanus (U.C. 784, AD
31), our Lord Jesus Christ suffered, on the 8th of the
Calends of April (25th of March), when there happened
such an eclipse of the sun as was never before nor
since.”
“ ‘In this year, and in this day, agree also the
Council of Caesarea, AD 196 or 198, the Alexandrian
Chronicle, Maximus Monachus, Nicephorus Constantinus, Cedrenus; and in this year, but on different days,
concur Eusebius and Epiphanius, followed by Kepler,
Bucher, Patinus, and Petavius, some reckoning it the
10th of the Calends of April, others the 13th.’ (See
comments on Daniel 11:22.) [Ibid., pp. 69, 70.]
“Here, then, are thirteen creditable authorities
who locate the crucifixion of Christ in the spring of
AD 31. We may therefore set this down as a fixed date.

“Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist; and, according to Luke 3:1, John the Baptist commenced his
brilliant but very brief ministry in ‘the fifteenth year
of the reign of Tiberius Caesar.’
“Tiberius Caesar succeeded the famous Roman
emperor Augustus, who died on August 19, AD 14.
…People who specialize in historical chronology tell
us that there is good reason to conclude that the fifteenth year of Tiberius began in AD 27. …The
reigns of kings were usually counted differently in ancient times from the way they are in our own, and that
different countries used different seasons (either spring
or fall) for beginning each of the years of a reign. As
for the Jews, even though they began their religious
year from the first day of the month Nisan in the spring
(sometime in March or April), in the era we are talking
about they began the reigns of non-Jewish kings on the
Jewish civil New Year’s Day (Tishri1, Rosh Hashanah)
in the autumn, following the new moon of either September or October. They had also adopted the custom
of considering a king’s ‘first year’ as the interval between the day he began to reign and the arrival of the
following autumn New Year’s Day. Jewish clerks, like
the clerks in several other eastern Mediterranean lands,
began to date documents by a new emperor’s ‘first
year’ as soon as they heard the news that he had begun
to rule.

366

DANIEL 9
“Tiberius began to rule upon the death of Augustus, which occurred on August 19, AD 14. The next
Jewish New Year’s Day came somewhere between
mid-September and mid-October. There was plenty of
time for news about the installation of the new emperor
to reach Palestine and for the ‘first year’ of his rule to
commence there before Jewish New Year’s. So it was,
according to a custom recorded in the Jewish Mishnah,
that the ‘second year’ of Tiberius must have begun
in Palestine on New Year’s Day in September or
October, AD 14 even though by then Tiberius had
been in power for no more than about two months!
“Fantastic as such a phenomenon may appear to
be to Western minds, it is a custom in some Oriental
countries even today for children to be considered a
year old in the year of their birth and to be two years
old on the subsequent New Year’s Day. This custom is
followed, even if New Year’s comes only a day or two
after a child is born….
“On this basis, the ‘fifteenth year …of Tiberius’
(Luke 3:1) did not begin in August AD 28 as we might
suppose on the basis of modern Western calculations.
Reckoned ‘Jewish fashion,’ as the Interpreter’s Dictionary of the Bible describes the process we have followed here, Tiberius’s fifteenth year began in September or October AD 27.
“Inasmuch as Jesus was baptized shortly after
John began to preach and inasmuch as between His
baptism and His first Passover (in the following spring)
He spent six weeks in the wilderness of temptation,
gathered disciples here and there, and attended the Cana wedding feast, it is perfectly safe to conclude that
He was baptized within the year 17. Gabriel’s prediction about 69 weeks to the anointing of the Messiah at
His baptism in AD 27 was fulfilled with astonishing
precision.
“…We return now to the date of Christ’s crucifixion. Is there any evidence that Jesus’ death occurred in
the year that we calculated it would, that is, in AD 31?
…The Bible itself provides valuable evidence that
we certainly do not want to overlook, and AD 31 fits
this evidence. For instance, Daniel 9 indicates that the
interval between the Messiah’s anointing (at His baptism) and the time of His death would be ‘half of the
week,’ or three and a half years. The Gospel of John,
by recording the annual Passovers that Jesus attended,
provides evidence that three and a half years did indeed
elapse between Christ’s baptism and His death.
“John 2 and 3 tell about a Passover during which
Jesus talked at night with Nicodemus and told him that
he must be born again.
“John 5:1 tells of a feast, most probably a Passover, in connection with which Jesus healed a man who
had suffered thirty-eight years from paralysis.
“John 6:4 tells of a Passover season during which
Jesus fed a very large crown with a boy’s small lunch.
“John 12:1 introduces the Passover season during
which Jesus died.

“We have seen that Christ’s baptism occurred
near the end of AD 27. So His first (or ‘Nicodemus’)
Passover occurred in the spring of AD 28. Then His
second (or ‘paralytic’) Passover fell in the spring of
AD 29. His third (or ‘large-meal’) Passover came in
the spring of AD 30—and His final (or ‘crucifixion’)
Passover occurred three and a half years after His
baptism, that is to say, in the spring of AD 31, just as
Gabriel had indicated.” Maxwell, 1GC, 216-219.

Jesus Christ Crucified, Spring 31 AD.
Dating the Death of Christ to AD 31.—
“We don't need confirmation of Christ's death
in AD 30 or 31 because we have confirmation of His
baptism in AD 27, at the beginning of the last of Daniel's seventy weeks of years (seven plus sixty-two
‘weeks’—in other words, 483 years after 457 BC; see
Daniel 9:25,26). Jesus was baptized and began His
public ministry ‘in the fifteenth year of the reign of
Tiberius Caesar’ (Luke 3:1). It is well know from
secular historical sources that Tiberius became sole
emperor of Rome (after having been co-ruler in the
Roman provinces) when Augustus died on August 19,
AD 14. Luke probably followed the usual Jewish
method of dating at that time, which reckoned the first
year of a king's reign as the portion of the year that
came before the first New Year’s Day (in autumn,
about mid-October) of his reign. So the time between
August 19 and October of AD 14 would have been
counted as Tiberius’s first year. The emperor’s second
year would have been the Jewish civil year covering
October of AD 14 to October of AD 15. Continuing in
this way, Tiberius’s fifteenth year would have
reached from the autumn of AD 27 to the autumn of
AD 28. The end of Daniel's 483 years was AD 27, falling within the range of Tiberius’s fifteenth year. Jesus
kept His appointment with Daniel’s prophecy!”
Gane, WAJ, 76.
Jesus Understood the Time.—
“That Jesus understood the prophecy of the
seventy weeks and therefore knew the time of His
anointing, and ministry, and also of His death, is evi-

367

GEMS FROM DANIEL
dent. Mark 1:10,11,14,15. To His mother at the marriage of Cana, Jesus said: ‘Mine hour is not yet
come.’ John 2:4. Later Jesus said, ‘My time is not
yet come,’ and ‘My time is not yet full come.’ John
7:6,8. About a year before His death the enemies of
Jesus ‘sought to take Him: but no man laid hands on
Him, because His hour was not yet come.’ John 7:30.
But just before His death Jesus said: ‘The hour is
come, that the Son of man should be glorified.’ John
12:23. …Jesus began His memorable prayer with the
words: ‘Father, the hour is come.’” Bunch, BOD,
140.

“2. More than once during His ministry, Jesus
stated that He was only sent to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. That is to say, His mission was limited
to the Jewish nation. At first sight this appears to be a
rather calloused statement but upon closer scrutiny we
can understand what Jesus meant. His mission involved only the Jews at this point because the probationary period of the Jewish nation had not yet
come to an end. Though the Jews cried out at His
trial: ‘We have no king but Cesar,’ ‘His blood be upon
us and our children’ and ‘release unto us Barabbas,’
probation did not close for the Jewish nation at that
time. After the ascension, Peter explained that Jesus sat
down at the right hand of God in order ‘to give repentance unto Israel.’ (Acts 5:31). Furthermore, in the first
seven chapters of the book of Acts the gospel was
preached only to the Jews. It was not till chapter 10
that the gospel was preached to the Gentiles. This indicates that the door of mercy was still open to the
Jewish nation even after the ascension of Jesus.
“3. In Matthew 23:32-38 we find further evidence that probation did not close for the Jewish
nation when Jesus was crucified. In these verses
Jesus reached the climax of his indictment against the
Jewish leaders. In verses 34-36 Jesus stated:
“ ‘Therefore, indeed, I send you prophets, wise
men, and scribes: some of them you will kill and crucify, and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city, that on you
may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah, son of Berechiah, whom you murdered between
the temple and the altar. Assuredly, I say to you, all
these things will come upon this generation.”
“Don’t miss the point of this passage. Even
though these words were spoken by Jesus three days
before his crucifixion, He still promised to send (the
verbs are in the future tense) Israel prophets, wise
men, and scribes. And who were these prophets, wise
men and scribes? We can glean some clues from what
Jesus said would be done to them. According to Jesus,
some would be killed, others scourged in the synagogues and still others persecuted from city to city.
Acts 5:40-41 tells us that Peter and John were
scourged in the synagogue. Saul of Tarsus was guilty
of killing many, the most notable of which was Stephen (Acts 26:10-11; 7:58). Noteworthy also is the
fact that Saul of Tarsus later recounted that he persecuted many from city to city (Acts 8:3; 26:11). Acts
6:3 explains that the seven deacons were wise men.
Peter’s sermon on the Day of Pentecost was a prophetic
sermon and his ability to read the hearts of Ananias and
Saphira also reveals that he possessed the prophetic
gift. And we shall see shortly that Stephen was the last
prophet who ever spoke to literal Israel.
“Jesus also made it crystal clear in this passage
that the cup of Israel’s iniquity did not fill up until they
rejected the messengers which were sent by Jesus to
them after His crucifixion. Only then was the blood

The Remaining 3½ years of the 70th Week.—
“Then, said the angel, ‘He shall confirm the
covenant with many for one week [seven years].’
For seven years after the Saviour entered on His ministry, the gospel was to be preached especially to the
Jews; for three and a half years by Christ Himself;
and afterward by the apostles.” Desire of Ages, 233.
“Through the preaching of the apostles and
their associates, God would cause light to shine upon
them; they would be permitted to see how prophecy
had been fulfilled, not only in the birth and life of
Christ, but in His death and resurrection. The children
were not condemned for the sins of the parents; but
when, with a knowledge of all the light given to their
parents, the children rejected the additional light
granted to themselves, they became partakers of the
parents’ sins, and filled up the measure of their iniquity.” The Great Controversy, p. 28.
“Mercy still lingered over the Jewish people;
there was yet a little time in which to repent. What
was not accomplished in the person of Christ, God,
sending his Holy Spirit, sought to accomplish
through his disciples. Humble fishermen imbued with
the power of God taught the people concerning a crucified and risen Saviour. In one day three thousand accepted the message. But as many believed, the enmity
of Satan was again aroused. In 34 AD, Stephen was
stoned, and as the result of the severe persecution
which followed, the believers were driven from Jerusalem and ‘went everywhere preaching the word.’ Israel
had withdrawn from God, and his Spirit could no
longer protect them.” Haskell, SDP, 130,131.
Termination of the Seventy Weeks—34 AD.—
“Why do we choose 34 AD as the ending point of
the seventy week prophecy? Didn’t Jesus say that probation closed when He left the temple for the last time
in the middle of the last week? (Matthew 23:38). It
would seem so. However, several things must be taken
into consideration:
“1. In the prophecy of Daniel 9 God promised Israel seventy full weeks of probation. If their probation
ended in the year 31 AD, then they did not get the full
70 weeks as God had promised.

368

DANIEL 9
of all the martyrs demanded of that generation (verse
35).
Matthew 22:1-10 also provides evidence that probation did not close for the Jewish nation when Jesus
was crucified. In this parable, after the oxen and fatted cattle had been killed (symbolizing the death of
Jesus), God sent out messengers to invite the Jews
to His Son’s wedding supper (verse 4). But the messengers were ignored, seized, treated spitefully and
killed (verse 6). As a result, God sent out His armies to
destroy those murderers and their city (verse 7). The
gospel then went to those in the highways and byways,
that is to say, to the Gentiles (verses 8-10). Particularly
important here is the fact that the Father sent out
messengers to the Jewish nation even after the
death of Jesus. It was only after the Jews rejected the
calls of these messengers, that the Father decided to
destroy them and their city.
“4. In Ezekiel 11:22-23 we find a picture of
God’s lingering mercy for Old Testament Jerusalem.
Even though at this point, Jerusalem had been judged
and Nebuchadnezzar was on his way to destroy the
city, we are told that the Shekinah left the temple and
lingered on the Mount of Olives, as if loath to leave! In
the same way, when Jesus left the temple, and pronounced the awesome words: ‘Behold, your house is
left unto you desolate,’ he was loath to leave. We can
almost hear Him say: ‘How can I give you up, oh Israel?’ Mercy lingered on for three and a half years.
5. Ellen White concurs with our assessment of the
Biblical evidence:
“Through the preaching of the apostles and
their associates, God would cause light to shine upon
them; they would be permitted to see how prophecy
had been fulfilled, not only in the birth and life of
Christ, but in His death and resurrection. The children
were not condemned for the sins of the parents; but
when, with a knowledge of all the light given to their
parents, the children rejected the additional light
granted to themselves, they became partakers of the
parents’ sins, and filled up the measure of their iniquity.” The Great Controversy, p. 28.
“Many have been perplexed by the apparent absence of a clearly defined ending event for the prophecy of the seventy weeks. But, is an ending event really
missing in Daniel 9? …The stoning of Stephen marked
the conclusion of the seventy weeks.
“In our study of Daniel 9:24 we saw that six
things would be accomplished during the time period
of the seventy weeks. One of these was ‘to seal up
vision and prophecy.’ What does this expression
mean? The same expression, “to seal up” (hatam), is
used earlier in this verse and is translated, ‘to make an
end of sins.’ In other words, one of the accomplishments of the seventy weeks was to bring prophecy and
vision to an end for the Jewish nation. How and when
did this happen?

“A careful examination of Acts 6 and 7 reveals
that Stephen was the last prophet who was given a vision for Israel. Let’s take a look at the evidence.
“1. In order to comprehend the significance of the
events in Acts 6-7 we must first understand the covenant pattern in the Old Testament. Due principally to
the studies of George Mendenhall and Meredith Kline
scholars now know that God’s covenant with Israel in
the Old Testament follows the same basic pattern as the
secular suzerainty treaties of the Late Bronze Age
(1550-1200 BC). We will use Joshua 24 (which was
the covenant renewal before Israel entered the promised land) to exemplify the basic elements of the Old
Testament covenant between God and Israel:
“Preamble (24:a)
“Historical Prologue (24:2b-13)
“Covenant Stipulations (24:15b)
“Covenant Blessings and Curses (24:16-20)
“Oath of Obedience (24:21)
“Witnesses (24:22)
“Covenant Ratification (24:23-25)
“Arrangements for Covenant Perpetuation (24:26)
“Covenant Notarized (24:27)
“When Israel broke the covenant, God sent them
prophets to bring legal proceedings against them. It
is important to keep in mind that the prophets were
God’s lawyers bringing a lawsuit against Israel. The
proceeding has come to be known as a covenant lawsuit (rib). Though there are several examples of this in
the Old Testament, we will take Micah 6 as our example (the word rib is there translated ‘contend’ and ‘controversy’.
“Call to the Witnesses to Give Ear to the Proceedings
(6:1-2a)
“Introductory Statement of the Case at Issue (6:2b)
“Recital of God’s Benevolent Acts (6:3-5)
“The Indictment (6:6-7)
“The Sentence (6:8)
“As will be noticed above, the recital of God’s
benevolent acts toward Israel was fundamental both to
the establishment of the covenant and to the covenant
lawsuit. Something which has perplexed scholars is
the inordinately long historical discourse which Stephen gave before the Sanhedrin. The members of the
Sanhedrin were the intelligentsia of Israel. Why would
Stephen presumably waste his time and theirs with a
history they knew all too well? The answer lies in the
fact that Stephen was God’s prophet bringing God’s
covenant lawsuit against Israel. And as we shall see
below, this would be God’s final lawsuit.
“2. There is an amazing parallel between the trial
of Christ and the trial of Stephen. Let’s notice a few
similarities:
“Both were taken before the Sanhedrin (Matthew 26:59; Mark 14:55ff; Acts 6:12, 15).
“Both were accused by false witnesses (Mark
14:55ff; Acts 6:11, 13-14).
“Both reviewed the history of the Jewish nation.
Both spoke about God sending the prophets and final-

369

GEMS FROM DANIEL
erence to ‘your fathers’ in His indictment of the Jewish
leaders; Matthew 23:32). He could no longer in good
conscience be in solidarity with literal Israel. In other
words, he was distancing himself from the patrimony
of literal Israel because he knew that after they killed
him, they would no longer be God’s people–the theocracy would have come to an ignominious end!
“Also of great importance is the fact that Stephen,
unlike the prophets before him, did not make a call to
repentance. This would seem to indicate that the Jewish leaders were beyond the point of repentance, they
had made their final and irrevocable decision to reject
the Messiah. This is indicated by the expressions Stephen used in his indictment as well as by the reaction
of the Sanhedrin to his words. Notice that he called
them stiff-necked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears
and accused them of resisting the Holy Spirit. He also
accused them of betraying and murdering Jesus and
breaking the covenant. There is no mention of future
messengers or opportunities.
“The reaction of the leaders of the Sanhedrin is
important because it reveals their incurable rejection of
the Messiah. Instead of receiving the message of Stephen who spoke with the fullness of the power of the
Holy Spirit (Acts 7:55), with untempered hatred they
‘gnashed on him with their teeth.... and cried out with a
loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him
with one accord, and cast him out of the city and
stoned him....’ (Acts 7:54, 57-58). Notice that the verdict was unanimous–they were all of one accord. The
apostles were of one accord on the side of Christ and
the Sanhedrin was of one accord against Christ. Thus
the Jewish Sanhedrin made its choice. By stoning
Stephen, they silenced the last prophet who would
ever be sent to them. Truly, prophecy came to an
end for literal Israel at this time!!
“4. But the prophecy of the seventy weeks indicated that vision (chazon) would also come to an end at
the conclusion of the last week. Did this happen as
predicted?
“The answer is a resounding yes!! Acts chapter
seven not only indicates that Stephen was the last
prophet sent to Israel but it also leaves no doubt that he
received the last vision as well.
“It seems that what particularly incensed the
members of the Sanhedrin was the vision Stephen had
of Jesus in heaven standing on the right hand of God.
This was a vision for there is no evidence that anyone
other than Stephen saw it! The critical question is, Did
Stephen see Jesus as He was and where He was at that
very moment or was he transported in vision to the
future to see Jesus as He will appear when He comes
again? The evidence seems to indicate that this was a
prophetic vision where Stephen was carried to the future to see Jesus coming as the Son of Man.
“5. As we have previously studied, Jesus taught in
His parables (Matthew 21:33-45; Matthew 22:1-10;
Matthew 23:32-39) that when the kingdom should be
taken from the Jews, it would be given to the Gentiles.

ly sending His own son (Matthew 23:32ff; 21:33-44;
Acts 7).
“In both, money was paid as a bribe to the false
witnesses (Matthew 26:60; Acts 6:11).
“Both were accused of speaking against Moses
and the temple (Matthew 27:40; John 11:50-52; Acts
6:13-14).
“Both accused the Jewish leaders of shutting
their ears to the truth about the Messiah (Matthew
23:29- 36;Acts 7:51-54).
“Both prayed for God to forgive the sin of their
enemies (Luke 23:34; Acts 7:60)
“Both were killed outside the city (Hebrews
13:12; Acts 7:58).
“The innocence of both could be seen on their
face (John 19:4, 6; Acts 6:15).
“In both there was a ‘mob mentality’ (Matthew
27:24ff; Acts 7:57-58).
“These parallels suggest that Stephen was repeating the experience of Jesus. That is to say, what the
Jewish leaders had done with Jesus they were now doing to Stephen.
“3. Now we must examine more closely the trial
and condemnation of Stephen. As we have already
seen, God undertook many covenant lawsuits against
Israel in the Old Testament. A close examination of
these lawsuits reveals that they were not final and irrevocable. In fact, the prophets usually called Israel to
repentance so that God, in mercy, could “drop” his
lawsuit against them. But the case of Stephen is different.
“There is a sense of finality in the experience of
Stephen which is lacking in the previous lawsuits. Stephen was taken before the Sanhedrin, the highest earthly authority of the Jewish nation. It was the final court
of appeal, the Supreme Court, if you please. There, in
fine prophetic fashion, and in harmony with the covenant lawsuit pattern, Stephen presented his defense by
appealing to the history of Israel from the time of
Abraham till the coming of the Just One (Acts 7:2-53).
But at the end of his discourse, the accused became the
accuser. The Sanhedrin presumed to indict Stephen but
he ended up indicting them!! Notice the denunciation:
“ ‘Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and
ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets have not
your fathers persecuted? And they have slain them
which shewed before of the coming of the Just One; of
whom ye have been now become the betrayers and
murderers: Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.” (Acts 7:51-53).
“Significantly, up to this point in his discourse,
Stephen has spoken of the fathers in terms of ‘our fathers’ (Acts 7:11, 19, 38, 44, 45). In good prophetic
fashion, he includes himself as part of the historical
patrimony of Israel (as did Daniel when he repeatedly
said in Daniel 9, ‘we have sinned’). But at the conclusion of his speech he dissociates himself from them by
saying, ‘your fathers’ (notice that Jesus also made ref-

370

DANIEL 9
This being the case, we should find an event to mark
the end of the seventy weeks which not only closes the
door of probation for the Jewish theocracy but also
opens the door for the gospel to go to the Gentiles.
Does the stoning of Stephen fulfill this specification?
Once again, the answer is a resounding yes!
It can hardly be a coincidence that the ringleader
in the stoning of Stephen was a champion of orthodox
Judaism, Saul of Tarsus (see Philippians 3:3-9). At the
precise moment probation was closing for the Jewish
theocracy, God–irony of ironies–had already chosen
His champion to the Gentiles and he was present at the
stoning of Stephen! Paul later reminisced about this
experience with the following words:
“And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was
shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his
death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. And
he said unto me, Depart; for I will send thee far hence
unto the Gentiles.” (Acts 22:20-21).
“The sequence of events in Acts 1-11 clearly reveals that the stoning of Stephen was a watershed
event. In Acts 1:8 Jesus had said to His disciples:
“ ‘But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy
Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses
unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.’
“Notice the ever broadening concentric circles in
this verse:
“Jerusalem and Judaea-----------------------------Acts 1-6
“Stoning of Stephen----------------------------------Acts 7
“Samaria-----------------------------------Acts 8 (verse 25)
“Saul’s Conversion-----------------------------------Acts 9
“Gospel to Gentiles
(Uttermost Part of the Earth)-------------Acts 10-28
“It will be noticed that the gospel went to the uttermost part of the earth only after the conversion of
Saul of Tarsus. In fact, it was Paul who took the gospel to every region of the Roman Empire through his
missionary journeys. Thus in Acts 7 probation closes
for the Jewish theocracy and in chapter 9 the champion
to the Gentiles is converted. That is to say, one door
closed and shortly thereafter the other opened.
6. The official beginning of Paul’s ministry is described in Acts 13:1-2. There Paul and Barnabas were
ordained to the gospel ministry. Paul and Barnabas
then traveled to Antioch of Pisidia where Paul
preached a long gospel sermon to the Jews in the synagogue (13:16-41). The Gentiles then begged Paul to
preach to them (13:42-43). The next Sabbath almost
the whole city came out to hear the word of God
(13:44).
“This provoked the jealousy of the Jews and they
contradicted and blasphemed (13:45). This led Paul to
say some very significant words:
“‘It was necessary that the word of God should
first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye put it
from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. For so hath
the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be

a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth.’ (13:46-47).
“Notice that the gospel was to be preached to the
Jews first. And why was this? Because seventy weeks
had been apportioned to the Jewish nation. But when
the Jewish nation rejected the Messiah, by divine
command, Paul and Barnabas turned to the Gentiles.
Notice that the door of mercy did not close for individual Jews after 34 AD. This can be seen in the fact that
Saul of Tarsus was converted after the year 34 AD.”
Bohr, ND9, 33-40.

The Stoning of Stephen
with Saul Looking On, Holding the Coats.
“For the termination of the seventy weeks, Gabriel in Daniel 9:24-27 prescribed no specific event. Gabriel did not say what particular act or transaction, if
any, marked the close of the prophetic period which,
for 490 years, had counted out the privileges of the
Jewish nation. We do know, however, that a few years
after the cross—and various commentators have placed
the event around AD34—the Jewish leadership confirmed its rebellion against God by creating the first
Christian martyr. The Sanhedrin, the highest governing body in the Jewish commonwealth, officially
stoned Stephen.
“In killing Christ the Jewish leaders had persuaded the Roman to commit the murder for them. In killing Stephen they threw the rocks with their own hands,
employing the traditional Jewish procedure for execution. The symbolism was devastating.” Maxwell,
1GC, 227.
“The seventy weeks, or 490 years, especially allotted to the Jews, ended, as we have seen, in AD 34.
At that time, through the action of the Jewish Sanhedrin, the nation sealed its rejection of the gospel
by the martyrdom of Stephen and the persecution
of the followers of Christ. Then the message of salva-

371

GEMS FROM DANIEL
tion, no longer restricted to the chosen people, was
given to the world. The disciples, forced by persecution to flee from Jerusalem, ‘went everywhere preaching the word.’ ‘Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them.’ Peter, divinely
guided, opened the gospel to the centurion of Caesarea,
the God-fearing Cornelius; and the ardent Paul, won to
the faith of Christ, was commissioned to carry the glad
tidings ‘far hence unto the Gentiles.’ Acts 8:4,5;
22:21.” Great Controversy, 328.

the two ends that would follow the periods of their
ministrations are so commingled that it is rather difficult to separate them. This is also true of Christ’s great
sermon recorded in Matt. 24, Mark 13, and Luke 21.
The disciples added a double question regarding two
different events, and Christ does not separate the two in
His answer. This is doubtless because one is typical
of the other. The time allotted to the Jews and the
destruction that followed was typical of the time
allotted to the Gentiles and the destruction that will
follow their period of probation.” Bunch, BOD, 150.

“Although the period allotted by the Lord to the
Jews as His chosen nation ended in 34 AD when the
nation sealed its rejection of the gospel of Christ by
the persecution of His followers, a period of grace was
granted it before the destruction of Jerusalem and the
temple by Rome in 70 AD.” Thiele, OSID, 117.

Overspreading.—
“We are now told what would happen as a result
of the death of the Messiah: Jerusalem was to be destroyed. The word ‘overspreading’ is often translated “wings” in the Old Testament. It is used, for example, to describe the invasion of Assyria into Israel
(Isaiah 8:7-8). The picture is of a river which is at flood
stage. When the river goes over its banks, it spreads
out its wings (see also, Nahum 1:8).” Bohr, ND9, 31.

After the 70th Week, the Time of the Gentiles.—
“After 34 AD, the Jews were saved as individuals on the same basis as those of other races and
nations. Since then they have not been God’s chosen
people, and never will be again. Their rejection ushered in ‘the times of the Gentiles.’
“The disciples were commissioned to go to all the
world, and when the Jews had judged themselves ‘unworthy of everlasting life’ by rejecting the message of
salvation through Christ, the apostles said, ‘Lo, we
turn to the Gentiles.’ Acts. 13:46.” Bunch, BOD, 141.

Abominations.—
“The word ‘abominations’ here merits special attention because of its connection with Matthew 24:15
and Luke 21:20. In Matthew 24:15-16 Jesus warned
His disciples: ‘When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet,
stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand), then let them which be in Judaea flee to the
mountains....’ Extremely important here is the appeal
Jesus made to the prophecy of Daniel 9:26-27. He
explicitly tells us that the abomination of desolation
was spoken of by Daniel the prophet. And what was
this abomination of desolation?
“First let’s talk about the abomination. When the
Roman armies surrounded Jerusalem, they put their
standards into the ground and worshiped them.
The Roman standards had an eagle surrounded by a
golden wreath. Under the eagle and the wreath was a
solar disk, which represented the sun-god Mithra.
Says Josephus about the order in which the Roman
armies marched:
“ ‘Then came the ensigns encompassing the eagle,
which is at the head of every Roman legion, the king
and the strongest of birds, which seems to them a signal of domination, and an omen that they shall conquer
all against whom they march.’ (Wars of the Jews,
3:6:2)
“Ellen White concurs with the view of Josephus:
“ ‘When the idolatrous standards of the Romans
should be set up in the holy ground, which extended
some furlongs outside the city walls, then the followers of Christ were to find safety in flight.’ (The
Great Controversy, p. 26).
“Both Josephus (Wars of the Jews 2:19:7: ‘....
without having received any disgrace, he [Cestius] retired from the city, without any reason in the world.’)
and Ellen White (The Great Controversy, p. 30: ‘After

“The 2300 years would not only embrace the
times of the Jews, but also the times of the Gentiles,
reaching down to Christ’s final ministry in their behalf
before their probation closes. Just as Christ’s final
appeal to the Jews was made under the early rain of
Pentecostal power, so His final appeal to the Gentiles will be made under the latter rain of the power
of the Holy Spirit. The two time periods reach two
ends, one of the probationary time of the Jews, to be
soon followed by the destruction of their city, sanctuary and nation; and the other of ‘the times of the Gentiles’ to be soon followed by the destruction of their
cities and nations and the desolation of the world. One
would culminate in the first advent of Christ, and
the other in His second advent.
“The Scriptures bring to view two sanctuaries,
one earthly and the other antitypical [heavenly]. At
the time of the vision the earthly sanctuary was in ruins
and its services temporarily discontinued. The restoration of the sanctuary and its services was the burden of
Daniel’s prayer. The previous vision had to do with
the sanctuary. Dan. 8:10-12. That the sanctuary would
be destroyed and made desolate by the abomination of
desolation puzzled Daniel for at that very time the typical sanctuary was already in ruins. According to verses
13,14, the 2300 years would reach to the cleansing of
the sanctuary. The apparently conflicting statements
confused the prophet and he prayed for enlightenment.
In the vision and interpretation the two sanctuaries and

372

DANIEL 9
the Romans under Cestius had surrounded the city,
they unexpectedly abandoned the siege when everything seemed favorable for an immediate attack.’) explain that when Cestius unexpectedly withdrew the
Roman armies, the Christians within the city saw this
as a sign to flee, and as a result, ‘not one Christian perished in the destruction of the Jerusalem.’ (The Great
Controversy, p. 30). Luke 21:20, in unequivocal language, offers an explanation of what the abomination
was: ‘And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed by
armies....’ A comparison of Matthew 24:15 and Luke
21:20 clearly indicates that the abomination consisted
in the incursion of the Roman armies onto the holy
ground which surrounded Jerusalem.” Bohr, ND9,
31,32.

destruction of Jerusalem is spoken of as coming after
the death of the Messiah. It is also true in Luke 19:4144 (as well as other passages) where the destruction of
Jerusalem is linked with the rejection of Jesus.” Bohr,
ND9, 32.
“The desolation was caused by the Roman army
after its conquest of Jerusalem. The abominations were
those things going on in Jerusalem preceding its destruction and desolation. As the Roman troops broke
through the northern defenses of the city, one contingent of Judean troops retreated into the very temple
building itself. It was a strong, substantial structure
and therefore made a good final fortress. This required
the Roman soldiers to attack the temple building even
though their general wished to spare it. In the ensuing
fight, the temple caught fire and burned. It was never
God’s purpose that His temple would be turned into
a fortress for fighting in war, and to do so introduced the ultimate in secular abominations into that
holy space. After that abominable course of action
came the destruction and desolation, exactly as the
prophecy described.” Shea, DARG, 171.

He.—
“It must be noted that the prince is still the subject. It is the prince who makes Jerusalem desolate.
But didn’t we say above that the Jews destroyed their
own city and temple? Yes, but as we saw in Jeremiah,
God destroyed Jerusalem by the people’s choice.”
Bohr, ND9, 31.

“Jesus declared to the listening disciples the
judgments that were to fall upon apostate Israel,
and especially the retributive vengeance that would
come upon them for their rejection and crucifixion
of the Messiah. Unmistakable signs would precede
the awful climax. The dreaded hour would come suddenly and swiftly. And the Saviour warned His followers: ‘When ye therefore shall see the abomination
of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand
in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:)
then let them which be in Judea flee into the mountains.’ Matthew 24:15, 16; Luke 21:20, 21. When the
idolatrous standards of the Romans should be set up in
the holy ground, which extended some furlongs outside
the city walls, then the followers of Christ were to find
safety in flight.” Great Controversy, 25,26.

He Shall Make it Desolate.—
“But what about the desolation? It is noteworthy
that Daniel 9:27 employs the word ‘desolate’ two
times. Jesus picked up on this when he said to the Jewish leaders as He left the temple: ‘Behold, your house
is left unto you desolate.’ (Matthew 23:38). Luke
21:20 explains that the abomination was an omen that
the desolation of Jerusalem was near. In other
words, the best translation of Matthew 24:15 is: ‘When
ye therefore shall see the abomination which maketh
desolate.’ That is to say, the abominable standards
of the Romans were a sign that the desolation of
Jerusalem was at the doors.” Bohr, ND9, 32.
For the Overspreading of Abominations He Shall
Make it Desolate.—
“Margin reads: ‘With the abominable armies
he shall make it desolate,’ referring to the Roman
armies. Not only did Pagan Rome make the earthly
temple in Jerusalem desolate in 70 AD, but also Papal
Rome would pollute and cast the place of the heavenly
sanctuary to the ground in 508-538 AD.” Unknown
Source.

“The Jews had forged their own fetters; they
had filled for themselves the cup of vengeance. In
the utter destruction that befell them as a nation, and in
all the woes that followed them in their dispersion,
they were but reaping the harvest which their own
hands had sown. Says the prophet: ‘O Israel, thou
hast destroyed thyself;’ ‘for thou hast fallen by thine
iniquity.’ Hosea 13:9; 14:1. Their sufferings are often represented as a punishment visited upon them
by the direct decree of God. It is thus that the great
deceiver seeks to conceal his own work. By stubborn rejection of divine love and mercy, the Jews
had caused the protection of God to be withdrawn
from them, and Satan was permitted to rule them
according to his will. The horrible cruelties enacted in
the destruction of Jerusalem are a demonstration of
Satan’s vindictive power over those who yield to his
control.” Great Controversy, 35,36.

“As we compare Daniel 9:25-27 with the Gospels
we can reach the following conclusions:
“1. The abomination of desolation of Daniel
9:25-27 represents the destruction of Jerusalem by
the Roman armies in the year 70 AD. This can be
seen by the similarity in terminology between the Gospels and Daniel 9:26-27 (Matthew 23:28; Luke 21:20
compared with Matthew 24:15).
“2. The reason for the destruction of Jerusalem
was the rejection of the Messiah by the Jewish nation. This is true in Daniel 9:26-27 where twice the

373

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Satan the author of sin. In the seven last plagues
complete destruction will overwhelm the earth, and
in this desolation Satan will see what he has done.
“…The chapter ‘Desolation of the Earth,’ in The
Great Controversy, 653-661, gives many striking details revealed by God concerning the terrible situation
that will overtake this world in the not far distant future.” Thiele, OSID, 118.

“This destruction and desolation through the coming of the prince and his army would not be among the
events to take place within the 70 weeks or the 70 th
week, but as a consequence of the events of that last
tragic and momentous prophetic and historic week
of years.
“ ‘And there shall be in the temple the abomination of desolation; and the desolation shall continue
even to the consummation, and the end.’—Douay.
‘And in the temple shall be the abomination of desolation.’—Vulgate. ‘And upon the temple there shall be
the abomination of desolation.’—Sept. ‘And upon the
sanctuary there shall be the abomination of ruin.’—
Arabic. ‘And in the temple (of the Lord) there shall be
abomination.’ Ancient Hebrew MS of the 13th century. ‘Upon the pinnacle of abominations shall come one
that maketh desolate.’—RV. How fully the Papacy
has fulfilled these predictions. Any false religion is
an abomination. See. Jer. 32:34. The Pope and his
priests have entered the temple or sanctuary of God
with a false system of religion and have dishonored
God and dethroned Christ and the Holy Spirit. This
desolating of the temple of God by grieving away the
Holy Spirit, and the entrance of ‘the man of sin’ and
‘the son of perdition’ or destruction, is pictured by
Paul in 2 Thess. 2:3-7.” Bunch, BOD, 142,143.

“From the fall of Jerusalem the thoughts of Jesus
passed to a wider judgment. In the destruction of the
impenitent city He saw a symbol of the final destruction to come upon the world.” Desire of Ages,
743.
“And the king shall do according to his will; and
he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvelous things against the
God of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be
accomplished: for that that is determined shall be
done.” Dan. 11:36.
“The appointed and determined doom of the Papacy is described in Dan. 7:11; 8:25; 11:45; Rev. 1620. This destruction and consumption will include the
whole wicked world [that is loyal to the Papacy.] See
Isa. 10:22,23; 28:21,22; Rev. 18.” Bunch, BOD, 143.
“My attention was again directed to the earth.
The wicked had been destroyed, and their dead
bodies were lying upon its surface. The wrath of God
in the seven last plagues had been visited upon the inhabitants of the earth… After the saints had been delivered by the voice of God, the wicked multitude
turned their rage upon one another. The earth
seemed to be deluged with blood, and dead bodies
were from one end of it to the other.
“The earth looked like a desolate wilderness. Cities and villages, shaken down by the earthquake, lay in
heaps. Mountains had been moved out of their places,
leaving large caverns. Ragged rocks, thrown out by the
sea, or torn out of the earth itself, were scattered all
over its surface. …Here is to be the home of Satan
with his evil angels for a thousand years. …He is then
to be deprived of his power, and left to reflect upon the
part which he has acted since his fall, and to look forward with trembling and terror to the dreadful future,
when he must suffer for all the evil that he has done
and be punished for all the sins that he has caused to be
committed.” Early Writings, 289,290.

Desolate Even to the Consummation.—
“We also learn that, after the crucifixion of Christ,
the Romans would come and destroy the city and sanctuary, and that wars will not cease until the consummation or end of the world.” Miller, Evidence, 53.
“The expression ‘until the consummation’
means ‘until the full end’. We have already found
this word once before in verse 26. The root meaning of
the Hebrew word kala (‘consummation’) means ‘to
bring a process to completion’ or ‘to finish a process.’
This means that when Jerusalem was destroyed, God
was finished with the Jewish theocracy.” Bohr, ND9,
33.
“The Hebrew word ‘kalah’ here translated ‘consummation’ means ‘a completion,’ ‘a full end.’ A total
end is to be brought about to everything evil. In Isa.
28:22 this word is translated ‘a consumption.’ God’s
message to the wicked is, ‘Your covenant with death
shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall
not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, then ye shall be trodden down by it…. For the
Lord shall rise up …that he may do His work, His
strange work; and bring to pass His act, His strange act,
…a consumption, even determined upon the whole
earth.’ Isaiah 28:18,21,22. Here God declares that
those who have made a covenant with death and with
hell will reap the rewards of their decisions. In the
destruction to overwhelm the world, the final result of
sin will be made altogether clear. All this comes from

Poured Out.—
“Coupled with this idea of consummation is the
expression ‘poured out.’ The question is, What was
poured out upon the desolate until the end?
“The answer is, the wrath of God.
“One cannot help but think of the analogous
events of the book of Revelation. There, we are told
that because of the iniquity in the world in the last

374

DANIEL 9
days, God will pour out seven last plagues for in them
the wrath of God is filled up. The expression ‘filled
up” could very well be translated ‘consummated’ or
‘complete.’ In fact the Reina-Valera Spanish version
uses the word ‘consumada.’ Significantly, as soon as
all the cups have been poured out, the words are heard
from the heavenly temple, ‘It is done.’ (Revelation
15:1; 17:17). Putting all these concepts together we
have: The cup of the iniquity of the wicked will be
filled to the brim (see Genesis 15:16) and then God
will pour out upon them the plagues and these will
bring to an end the wrath of God.
Noteworthy is the fact that in his indictment of
the Jewish leaders, Jesus employed the symbolism of
the cup: ‘Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.’
(Matthew 23:32). In other words, there was no longer
any room for mercy. When God poured out His wrath
upon them He was finished with them. They drank the
dregs of the wrath of God. For this reason the apostle
Paul says that the wrath of God had fallen upon the
Jews ‘to the uttermost.’ (I Thessalonians 2:16).”
Bohr, ND9, 33.

happened to Israel, would happen to Babylon. That is,
Babylon would itself become desolate.
“At the end the ‘desolator’ would include the
beast system—‘Babylon the Great,’ Rev. 17:5. Papal
Rome is ‘the abomination of desolation’ because when
we worship the beast, we are worshipping Satan (Rev.
13:4).
“ ‘And the beast was taken, and with him the
false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These
both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone.’ Rev. 19:20.” PJ.
“He carries us to the consummation, destruction
of the little horn, called here the desolator. See marginal reading.” Miller, Evidence, 70.
“Here it is made clear that the vision of Daniel 9
is closely related to the vision of Daniel 8, and that the
sanctuary of chapters 8 and 9 is not the Jerusalem sanctuary then lying desolate, but is the sanctuary of Heaven in which the Messiah Himself is the great high
priest, of which the Jerusalem sanctuary was only a
type. Although the current desolation of Jerusalem and
its sanctuary [in Daniel’s day] was almost over and the
city and temple were soon to be rebuilt, another period
of repression for the people of God was ahead, another
prince would come who would ‘destroy the city and the
sanctuary’ (ch. 9:26), and that desolations would not
cease until the desolator himself had been brought
to his end (ch. 9:27).” Thiele, OSID, 110.

That Determined—Poured Upon the Desolate.—
“At the end of verse 27 we find once again that
this outpouring of the unmitigated wrath of God had
already been determined beforehand. This is clearly
indicated by the expression: ‘that determined shall be
poured out upon the desolate.’ This is clear evidence
that even though the city and temple were destroyed in
the year 70 AD, the sentence had already been determined previously, in the year 34 AD. It is common in
the Bible for the door of mercy to close sometime before destruction falls. Two monumental examples are:
The flood where the door of mercy closed seven days
before the destruction of the world and the end of the
world when the door of probation will close before the
Second coming (Rev. 22:11-12).” Bohr, ND9, 33.

“The doom that came upon Jerusalem is a forecast
of the doom that is to come upon all the world, and that
will finally involve the terrible desolator himself.
The abominable power that is responsible for all the
desolations of earth will not escape. The great conquering nations of earth were themselves ultimately
conquered. The great devastators became the devastated. In the ruin that Satan has brought upon others
he may read the ruin that he is bringing upon himself.” Thiele, OSID, 117.

“After stating the great events connected with our
Lord’s mission here upon the earth, the prophet in the
last part of Daniel 9:27 speaks of the soon-following
destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman power; and
finally of the destruction of that power itself, called
in the margin ‘the desolator.’ ” Smith, DR, 223.

Satan Discourages Study of This Prophecy.—
“It suits the policy of Satan that men should retain
the forms of religion if but the spirit of vital godliness
is lacking. After their rejection of the gospel, the Jews
continued zealously to maintain their ancient rites, they
rigorously preserved their national exclusiveness, while
they themselves could not but admit that the presence
of God was no longer manifest among them. The
prophecy of Daniel pointed so unmistakably to the
time of Messiah’s coming, and so directly foretold
His death, that they discouraged its study, and finally the rabbis pronounced a curse on all who should
attempt a computation of the time. In blindness
and impenitence the people of Israel during succeeding centuries have stood, indifferent to the gra-

“Rome would have its day upon the stage of history, but like the other powers that preceded it, Rome
would also fall (see Daniel 2:40-44; 7:7,8,23,24; 8:25).
Thus the tile of Gibbon’s famous work of history, The
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, actually illustrates the fulfillment of the final prophetic statement of
Daniel 9.” Shea, DARG, 172.
“The Marginal reading for ‘the desolate’ is ‘the
desolator,’ or Satan. But Satan uses earthly kingdoms
to do his work of desolating.
“Babylon was a desolator to Israel because of Israel’s sins. But Isaiah and Jeremiah show that what

375

GEMS FROM DANIEL
for the time of the end, and AD 34 is not near the time
of the end.
“The only other alternative, then, is to cut it off
from the logical place: the beginning of the 2300
days. …If you start with the first 490 years of the
2300 years (again using day-year principle) and come
to AD 34, and then add the remaining 1810 years left
from the 2300, you get 1844! Or if you add 2300 years
directly to 457 BC (remember to delete the zero calendar year), you get 1844, too!” Goldstein, 1844MS, 5153

cious offers of salvation, unmindful of the blessings
of the gospel, a solemn and fearful warning of the
danger of rejecting light from heaven.
“Wherever the cause exists, the same results
will follow. He who deliberately stifles his convictions
of duty because it interferes with his inclinations will
finally lose the power to distinguish between truth and
error. The understanding becomes darkened, the conscience callous, the heart hardened, and the soul is separated from God. Where the message of divine truth is
spurned or slighted, there the church will be enshrouded in darkness; faith and love grow cold, and estrangement and dissension enter. Church members
center their interests and energies in worldly pursuits,
and sinners become hardened in their impenitence.”
Great Controversy, 378,379.

To the End of the 2300 Days.—
“On the ancient Israelites' Day of Atonement,
God expected all of His faithful people to demonstrate
their loyalty in a special way by humbling themselves
through self-denial and by abstaining from work while
His sanctuary was being cleansed (Leviticus 16:29-31;
23:26-32). So, if the end-time judgment is a greater
equivalent of the Israelite Day of Atonement, shouldn't
Christians know when it begins? If you invite people to
an event but your announcement doesn’t specify the
time, how many people could you expect to show up?
“...Now let's look at the ten steps necessary for
finding when the pre-Advent, Day of Atonement
judgment begins....
“Step 1: Identify the little horn (Daniel 8).
“Step 2: Recognize that the 2,300 days cannot be
literal days.
“Step 3: Recognize that Daniel 8 explains the vision of Daniel 9.
“Step 4: Identify the date when the seventy weeks
(490 days) began.
“Step 5: Recognize that the seventy weeks are
weeks of years and thus 490 years.
“Step 6: Find the end of the 490 years.
“Step 7: Recognize that the end of Daniel 9 refers
to events that would happen after the 490 years, but
still during the 2,300 days.
“Step 8: Recognize that the 2,300 days, like the
490 days, must represent years.
“Step 9: See how the 490 years overlap the first
part of the 2,300 years.
“Step 10: Find the end of the 2,300 years.” Gane,
WAJ, 59,62.

“In our day as in Christ’s day, there may be a
misreading and misinterpreting of the Scriptures.
If the Jews had studied the Scriptures with earnest,
prayerful hearts, their searching would have been rewarded with a true knowledge of the time, and not only
the time, but also the manner of Christ’s appearing.
They would not have ascribed the glorious second appearing of Christ to His first advent. They had the testimony of Daniel; they had the testimony of Isaiah and
the other prophets; they had the teachings of Moses;
and here was Christ in their very midst, and still they
were searching the Scriptures for evidence in regard to
His coming. And they were doing unto Christ the very
things that had been prophesied they would do. They
were so blinded they knew not what they were doing.” Evangelism, 612,613.
Why 70 Weeks Aren’t Cut Off From End of 2300
Days?—
“The seventy weeks, which begins in 457 BC, is
cut off from the larger 2300 days. Someone once said
to me, ‘I see how the 70 weeks are cut off from the
2300 days, but why don’t we cut it off from the end of
the 2300 days, not the beginning?’
“…Two major problems arise with this interpretation: the 2300 days would end in 34 AD, placing the
start of the time period in the year 2267 BC, a date far
out of the picture from anything else we have studied
so far. We saw that Babylon is the beginning nation in
our prophetic studies. If we cut off the seventy weeks
from the end, the beginning of the 2300 days would
begin 1600 years before Babylon—clearly out of the
time frame of anything we are dealing with in these
prophecies.
“But more important, cutting it off from the end
would place the cleansing of the sanctuary in AD 34.
And we saw from our previous studies, the cleansing of
the sanctuary must come after the 1260-year period
of the little horn, which ended in 1798. The date AD
34 for the cleansing of the sanctuary does not fit. Plus,
three times Daniel says that the vision in Daniel 8 is

“With the seventy weeks we are now through; but
there remains a longer period, and other important
events are to be considered. The seventy weeks are but
the first 490 years of the 2300-year period. Take 490
from 2300, and there remains 1810. The 490, as we
have seen, ended in the autumn of AD 34. If to this
date we now add the remaining 1810 years, we shall
have the termination of the whole period. So to AD 34,
autumn, add 1810, and we have the autumn of AD
1844. Thus speedily and surely do we find the termination of the 2300 days, when once the seventy weeks
have been located.” Smith, DR, 217,219.

376

DANIEL 9
“Thus far every specification of the prophecies is
strikingly fulfilled, and the beginning of the seventy
weeks is fixed beyond question at 457 BC, and their
expiration in AD 34. From this data there is no difficulty in finding the termination of the 2300 days. The
seventy weeks—490 days—having been cut off from
the 2300, there were 1810 days remaining. After the
end of 490 days, the 1810 days were still to be fulfilled.
From A.D. 34, 1810 years extend to 1844. Consequently the 2300 days of Daniel 8:14 terminate in
1844. At the expiration of this great prophetic period,
upon the testimony of the angel of God, ‘the sanctuary
shall be cleansed.’” Great Controversy, 328.

ary; and that when the sanctuary is cleansed, the work
is done. Then the great plan of salvation devised at the
fall of man is brought to its final termination. Mercy
no longer pleads, and the great voice is heard from the
throne in the temple in heaven, saying, ‘It is done.’
Revelation 16:17. What then? All the righteous have
the gift of everlasting life; all the wicked are doomed to
everlasting death. Beyond that point, no decision can
be changed, no reward can be lost, and no destiny of
despair can be averted.
“We have seen (and this is what brings the solemnities of the judgment to our own door) that that
long prophetic period which was to mark the beginning
of the final work in the heavenly sanctuary, has met its
termination. In 1844 the days ended. Since that time
the final work for man’s salvation has been going forward. This work involves an examination of every
man’s character, for it consists in the remission of the
sins of those who shall be found worthy to have them
remitted, and determines who among the dead shall be
raised. It also decides who among the living shall be
changed at the coming of the Lord, and who of both
dead and living shall be left to have their part in the
fearful scenes of the second death. All can see that
such a decision as this must be rendered before the
Lord appears.
Every man’s destiny is to be determined by deeds
done in the body, and each one is to be rewarded according to his works. (2 Corinthians 5:10; Revelation
22:12.) In the books of record kept by the heavenly
scribes above, every man’s deeds will be found recorded. (Revelation 20:12.) In the closing sanctuary work
these records are examined, and decisions are rendered
in accordance with the findings. (Daniel 7:9, 10.) It
would be natural to suppose that the work would begin
with the first members of the human race, that their
cases would be first examined, and decision rendered,
and so on with all the dead, generation by generation,
in chronological succession, until we reach the last
generation—the generation of the living, with whose
cases the work would close.
“…The plan of salvation is about finished. The
last precious years of probation are almost finished.
The Lord is about to come to save those who are ready
and waiting, and to cut asunder the careless and unbelieving.
“To the careful attention of every student of
prophecy we commend the subject of the sanctuary and
its service. In the sanctuary is seen the ark of God’s
testament, containing His holy law. This suggests a
reform in our obedience to that great standard of morality. The opening of this heavenly temple, or the beginning of the service in its second apartment, marks the
commencement of the sounding of the seventh angel.
(Revelation 11:15,19.) The work performed therein is
the foundation of the third angel’s message of Revelation 14—the last message of mercy to a perishing
world. …It gives a definite idea of the position and
work of our great High Priest, and brings out the plan

“Reckoning from the autumn of 457, the 2300
years terminate in the autumn of 1844. Arguments
drawn from the Old Testament types also pointed to the
autumn as the time when the event represented by the
‘cleansing of the sanctuary’ must take place. …Under
the Mosaic system the cleansing of the sanctuary, or
the great Day of Atonement, occurred on the tenth day
of the seventh Jewish month (Leviticus 16:29-34),
when the high priest, having made an atonement for all
Israel, and thus removed their sins from the sanctuary,
came forth and blessed the people. …The tenth day
of the seventh month, the great Day of Atonement,
the time of the cleansing of the sanctuary, …in the
year 1844 fell upon the twenty-second of October.”
Great Controversy, 399,400.
“The query may here arise how the days can be
extended to the autumn of 1844 if they began in 457
BC, as it requires only 1843 years, in addition to the
457, to make the whole number 2300. Attention to one
fact will clear this point of all difficulty: It takes 457
full years before Christ, and 1843 full years after, to
make 2300; so that if the period began with the very
first day of 457, it would not terminate till the very last
day of 1843. Now it will be evident to all that if any
part of the year 457 passed away before the 2300 days
began, just so much of the year 1844 must pass away
before they would end. We therefore inquire, From
what point in the year 457 are we to begin to reckon?
From the fact that the first forty-nine years were allotted to the building of the street and wall, we learn that
the period is to be dated not from the starting of Ezra
from Babylon, but the actual beginning of the work at
Jerusalem. This beginning could hardly be earlier than
the seventh month (autumn) of 457, as he did not arrive
at Jerusalem until the fifth month of that year. (Ezra 7:
9.) The whole period would therefore extend to the
seventh month, autumn, Jewish time, of 1844.”
Smith, DR, 219.
The Solemn Judgment Hour.—
“We have seen that the cleansing of the sanctuary
consists in the removing of the sins from it, and is the
closing act of the ministration performed in it; that the
work of salvation now centers in the heavenly sanctu-

377

GEMS FROM DANIEL
of salvation in its distinctive and beautiful features. It
reins us up, as no other subject does, to the realities of
the judgment, and shows the preparation we need to be
able to stand in the coming day. It shows us that we
are in the waiting time, and puts us upon our watch, for
we do not know how soon the work will be finished,
and our Lord appear. Watch, lest coming suddenly He
find you sleeping.” Smith, DR, 219-223.

described in chapter 8. That sacrifice is the one that
is foretold in chapter 9, the final and ultimate
atonement for iniquity which brought in everlasting
righteousness.
“This everlasting righteousness has been ministered to the people by the priestly Prince in the
heavenly sanctuary according to chapter 8. The
provision for it was made, however, by the death of
the Messiah that is prophesied in chapter 9. Thus
there is a thematic link both between the Son of
man in chapter 7 and the Prince in chapter 8, and
between the Prince in chapter 8 and the Messiah in
chapter 9. These titles refer to the same person—
Jesus Christ.
“There is also a stepwise explanation in these
prophecies for the nature of the work of Christ in each
of the preceding prophecies. In chapter 7 the Son of
man appears in the final scene of the judgment. At that
event He receives title to rulership over God’s eternal
kingdom. But no explanation is given in chapter 7 as
to why He is worthy to receive the kingdom. The explanation for this is given in chapter 8. He has served
as the great High Priest in the heavenly sanctuary and
has saved the saints who enter that kingdom. But there
is no explanation given in chapter 8 as to how the
Prince came to occupy His priestly position. That explanation is given in chapter 9 where the Messiah is
seen to offer Himself up as the great and final atonement for iniquity. That accomplished atonement
brought in the everlasting righteousness which the
Prince subsequently ministers from the heavenly sanctuary to the people.
“Thus these three prophecies in Daniel form
an interlocking chain of explanations about the
work of this one figure who is common to them all.
In ch. 9 He is the sacrifice. In ch. 8 He is the priest. In
ch. 7 He is the king. As these different phases of His
work are linked together by a common thread, the figure involved in all of them should be identified as the
same. The first two phases of this work have been fulfilled in Jesus Christ and we await the conclusion of
the third when the saints will be ushered into God’s
eternal kingdom.” BRI (Shea), 2SOD, 238,239.

The Order of Time in Daniel 7,8, and 9.—
“It should also be noted that their sequence (in
terms of events) are reversed (a common Hebrew
thought pattern that reasons from effect to cause).
Chapter 9 spotlights the Messiah’s death; chapter 8
reveals His priestly ministry in the heavenly sanctuary
and the attack of the little horn in an attempt to disrupt
it; chapter 7 looks beyond that point to the Messiah’s
reception of His eternal kingdom. Thus, in chapter 9
He is depicted as sacrifice under the title ‘Messiah the
Prince.’ In chapter 8 He is depicted as priest under
the title ‘Prince of the Host.’ In chapter 7 He is depicted as king under the title ‘Son of Man.’
“In our western way of thinking—and in the actual historical fulfillments—the events of chapter 9
should and did come first, then those of chapter 8, followed in turn by the final judgment and reception of
the kingdom in chapter 7.” BRI, 2SOD, 221,222.
“Ancient Semitic people commonly reasoned
from effect back to cause. …A good biblical example
of this kind of thought order can be found in Micah
1:10-15 where the cities that mourn for the exiles are
listed first, followed by a list of the cities from which
the exiles came. We would put the matter the other
way around.” Shea, DARG, 225.
The Role of Jesus Christ in Chapters 7,8, and 9.—
“The priestly work that the Prince carries on in
chapter 8 explains how the saints came to be received
in the kingdom ruled over by the Son of man in chapter 7. Thus there are definite textual grounds for identifying these two figures as representing the same individual.
“The description of the work of the Messiah in
chapter 9 can now be added into this equation.
In order for the Prince (chap. 8) to serve as a
priest in His heavenly sanctuary, it had to be
anointed to commence such service. This is the
anointing of the holy of holies referred to in 9:24.
Thus the service that is described as being carried on in
chapter 8 had its commencement referred to in chapter
9.
“For the Prince of chapter 8 to serve as a priest,
however, He had to offer a sacrifice (cf. Heb. 7:27;
8:3). This sacrifice was a prerequisite to His ministry

Prophecy
Length
Picture of
Christ
Spiritual

Daniel 9
Short
Sacrifice

Daniel 8
Medium
Priest

Daniel 7
Long
King

Past

Present

Future

Sanctification

Glorification

Point of View

JustifiSpiritual
cation
Experience
Shea, DARG, 229.

378

DANIEL 9

379

GEMS FROM DANIEL

380

DANIEL 9

381

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL: CHAPTER TEN
1 In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed
unto Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing
was true, but the time appointed was long: and he understood the
thing, and had understanding of the vision.
2 In those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.
3 I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my
mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks
were fulfilled.
4 And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I was
by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel;
5 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain
man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of
Uphaz:
6 His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and
his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his words
like the voice of a multitude.
7 And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with
me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that
they fled to hide themselves.
8 Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and
there remained no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned
in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.
9 Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the
voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my
face toward the ground.
10 And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my
knees and upon the palms of my hands.
11 And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thee, and stand upright: for
unto thee am I now sent. And when he had spoken this word unto

me, I stood trembling.
12 Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first
day that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten
thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for
thy words.
13 But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one
and twenty days: but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came
to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia.
14 Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall
thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision is for many days.
15 And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face
toward the ground, and I became dumb.
16 And, behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men
touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, and said
unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength.
17 For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my
lord? for as for me, straightway there remained no strength in
me, neither is there breath left in me.
18 Then there came again and touched me one like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me,
19 And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not: peace be unto
thee, be strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken unto me,
I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast
strengthened me.
20 Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee?
and now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia: and when
I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.
21 But I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of
truth: and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but
Michael your prince.

INTRODUCTION TO DANIEL 10

of four great wild beasts. In like manner, the memorable events that were revealed to Daniel in the ram and
he-goat, are here more clearly revealed in this last
vision by an angel.
“The last vision of Daniel covers the three closing
chapters of his book. While it is spoken of as a vision,
it was not really a vision in the same sense as those
recorded in chapters seven and eight, but rather a further interpretation of the latter. Daniel had but two
prophetic visions and both were interpreted by Gabriel.
The two visions were closely related, the second being
a further explanation of the first in which ‘not all was
made clear to the prophet.’ (PK 554). ‘Through another vision further light was thrown upon the events of
the future.’ (Ibid. 554.) It required three visits of the
angel of prophecy to complete the interpretation of
the second vision [of Daniel 8:1-14]. This vision and
its three fold interpretation is the subject of the last five
chapters of the book. Chapter ten is the prologue and
chapter twelve the epilogue of the angel’s last interpretation which is embraced in chapter eleven.”
Bunch, BOD, 154.

“Daniel ten is introductory to Daniel eleven
and twelve. All three of these chapters constituting
a single unit in which Gabriel makes a number of detailed revelations concerning events that will take place
to the very end.” Thiele, OSID, 119.
“Daniel’s final prophecy covers three chapters in
the book—chapters 10, 11, and 12. Chapter 10 is the
introduction or prologue, chapter 11 is the body of the
prophecy, and chapter 12 is the conclusion or epilogue.
All three belong together as shown by the fact that elements in chapter 10 reappear in chapter 12.
“…Remember that the chapter divisions of the
English Bible were not present in the scroll of this
book as originally written by Daniel. They were added
during the twelfth century AD. This means that chapter 10 should read consecutively into Daniel 11, and
Daniel 11 should read progressively into Daniel 12
unseparated by any major breaks.” Shea, DARG,
230.
“The four great empires shown to Nebuchadnezzar, under the symbol of a great image, were again
more particularly represented to Daniel under the forms

“The detailed prophecy of chapter 11 covers
the whole period of the 2300 years and reaches on to
the end itself when probation would close and the

382

DANIEL 10
all his ways: he shall build My city, and he shall let go
My captives, not for price nor reward,’ his heart was
profoundly moved, and he determined to fulfill his
divinely appointed mission. Isaiah 45:5,6,4,13. He
would let the Judean captives go free; he would help
them restore the temple of Jehovah.
“In a written proclamation published
‘throughout all his kingdom,’ Cyrus made known
his desire to provide for the return of the Hebrews
and for the rebuilding of their temple:
“‘Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia,
that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit
of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation
throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing,
saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia,] The Lord
God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the
earth,’ the king gratefully acknowledged in this public
proclamation; ‘and He hath charged me to build Him
an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is
there among you of all His people? his God be with
him, and let him go up to Jerusalem,... and build the
house of the Lord God of Israel, (He is the God,) which
is in Jerusalem. And whosoever remaineth in any place
where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him
with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with
beasts, beside the freewill offering.’ Ezra 1:1-4.
“ ‘Let the house be builded,’ he further directed
regarding the temple structure, ‘the place where they
offered sacrifices, and let the foundations thereof be
strongly laid; the height thereof threescore cubits, and
the breadth thereof threescore cubits; with three rows
of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the
expenses be given out of the king’s house: and also let
the golden and silver vessels of the house of God,
which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple
which is at Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, be
restored, and brought again unto the temple which is at
Jerusalem.’ Ezra 6:3-5.
“Tidings of this decree reached the farthermost
provinces of the king’s realm, and everywhere among
the children of the dispersion there was great rejoicing.
Many, like Daniel, had been studying the prophecies, and had been seeking God for His promised
intervention in behalf of Zion. And now their prayers were being answered; and with heartfelt joy they
could unite in singing:
“ ‘When the Lord turned again the captivity of
Zion, We were like them that dream.
“Then was our mouth filled with laughter, And
our tongue with singing:
“Then said they among the heathen, The Lord
hath done great things for them.
“The Lord hath done great things for us;
Whereof we are glad.’ Psalm 126:1-3.” Prophets
and Kings, 557-559.

world would be made desolate at the coming of
Christ, just as the prophecy of the 70 weeks reached to
the close of Jewish probation and on to the desolation
of the city and temple and the destruction of the nation.” Bunch, BOD, 155.

DANIEL 10:1
In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose
name was called Belteshazzar; and the
thing was true, but the time appointed was
long: and he understood the thing, and had
understanding of the vision.
Cyrus.—
“As Cyrus, who is mentioned at the commencement of this prophecy (Daniel 10: 1), dried up the
waters of the Euphrates as part of his strategy in the
overthrow of Babylon, so Jesus will also dry up the
waters of the great- river Euphrates as part of His
plan for the overthrow of spiritual Babylon.” Were,
KONAJ, 105
In the Third Year of Cyrus King of Persia.—
“The time was spring in the ‘third year of King
Cyrus,’ probably 535 BC.” God Cares, Vol. 1, 258.
What Happened in the First Year of Cyrus.—
“Within about two years of the fall of Babylon,
Cyrus succeeded to the throne, and the beginning of
his reign marked the completion of the seventy
years since the first company of Hebrews had been
taken by Nebuchadnezzar from their Judean home
to Babylon.
“The deliverance of Daniel from the den of lions had been used of God to create a favorable impression upon the mind of Cyrus the Great. The
sterling qualities of the man of God as a statesman of
farseeing ability led the Persian ruler to show him
marked respect and to honor his judgment. And now,
just at the time God had said He would cause His temple at Jerusalem to be rebuilt, He moved upon Cyrus
as His agent to discern the prophecies concerning himself, with which Daniel was so familiar, and to grant
the Jewish people their liberty.
“As the king saw the words foretelling, more than
a hundred years before his birth, the manner in which
Babylon should be taken; as he read the message addressed to him by the Ruler of the universe, ‘I girded
thee, though thou hast not known Me: that they may
know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that
there is none beside Me;’ as he saw before his eyes the
declaration of the eternal God, ‘For Jacob My servant’s
sake, and Israel Mine elect, I have even called thee by
thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast
not known Me;’ as he traced the inspired record, ‘I
have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct

“Cyrus began to reign in 536 BC, the year the 70
years of captivity were to end. In that very year, Cy-

383

GEMS FROM DANIEL
struggle.’ Daniel 11 is a presentation of a long conflict—not many conflicts, but a conflict. There are
many battles, but one war.
“The river beside which Daniel saw this long
warfare was the Hiddekel, or Tigris. This was a swift
and turbulent stream of considerable length. Thus it
provides a fit setting for the vision. The great warfare
may involve nations, but it is not between nations. In
chapter 10 the curtain of the invisible is lifted, and it
can be seen that behind the affairs and actions of nations, the powers of heaven and the powers of darkness
are in deadly conflict. Commenting on Daniel 10, Ellen G. White wrote:
‘Through the prophet we are given a glimpse
of this mighty struggle between the forces of good
and the forces of evil.’—Prophets & Kings, 571.
“The antagonistic forces of good and evil are not
really contending for the control of countries and cities.
The battle is for the minds of men. God has a people
upon the earth through whom He plans to demonstrate
the principles of His kingdom and bring about the overthrow of the forces of evil. Satan’s supreme object has
been to destroy their faith or their persons. He seeks to
control the minds of rulers so that the powers of earth
will make war on God’s people. At the same time,
God overrules in the affairs of nations and influences
the minds of rulers to do His will. ‘The king’s heart is
in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: He turneth it withersoever He will.’—Proverbs 21:1.
“Where necessary He brings about the overthrow
of kingdoms. God’s people are the focal point of concern in the long conflict. The angel said to Daniel,
‘Now I am come to make thee understand what shall
befall thy people in the latter days.’—Daniel 10:4.”
Hiddekel, 14,15.

rus issued his decree in fulfillment of the prophecy
of Isaiah. The decree ended the time period of the
70 years, and, when confirmed and enforced by the
two subsequent decrees of Darius and Artaxerxes,
marked the beginning of the time periods of the 70
weeks and the 2300 days.” Bunch, BOD, 156.
A Thing Was Revealed Unto Daniel.—
“This verse introduces the last recorded vision of
the prophet Daniel… The death of Daniel is supposed
to have occurred soon after this, he being at this time,
according to Prideaux, not less than ninety years of
age.” Smith, DR,225.
“Upon the occasion just described, the angel Gabriel imparted to Daniel all the instruction he was then
able to receive. A few years afterward, however, the
prophet desired to learn more of subjects not yet fully
explained, and again set himself to seek light and wisdom from God… No less a personage than the Son of
God appeared to Daniel. Our Lord comes with another
heavenly messenger to teach Daniel what would take
place in the latter days.” Bible Sanctification, 42.
“The light that Daniel received direct from God
was given especially for these last days. The visions he
saw by the banks of the Ulai and the Hiddekel, the
great rivers of Shinar, are now in process of fulfillment, and all the events foretold will soon have come
to pass.” (Letter 57, 1896). 4BC 1166.
And the Thing Was True.—
Daniel 8
Daniel 10
The vision is true—v26.
The vision is true—v1.
Shut up the vision—v26.
Shut up the Words—12:4,
9.
Vision for many days— Vision for many day—
v26.
v14, 1.
None understood it—v27. Daniel then understood
it—v1.
Thiele, OSID, 109.

“But the greatest troubles would come to God’s
true people, not from so-called ‘heathen’ sources, but
from a power which, while making the high claim of
being ‘the true church,’ would actually be led of
Satan to inflict the most fearful sorrows upon God’s
people. This power, after the Dark Ages, through
God’s overruling Providence, would be held back for a
time while the work of God would be completed, just
as God’s providence enabled Israel to complete the
rebuilding of Jerusalem ‘even in troubled times’ (Daniel 9: 25; see also Ezra and Nehemiah). As the work of
God progressed, the opposition to it became more and
more bitter and determined. See Nehemiah 4: 6-8; etc.
Thus will it be in the closing up of the work of God.
More and more the power of God will be poured out to
meet Satan’s opposition. Finally, Satan will stir up the
powers of evil—the king of the north and all of his
forces—to subdue or destroy the people of God. But
Christ will deliver His people in this final attempt to
destroy them.” Were, KONAJ, 99.

The Time Appointed Was Long.—
“‘A thing was revealed unto Daniel, and the thing
was true, but the time appointed (2300 days) was long.’
This shows that Daniel understood the time; for he
says it was long. For no man would have called 2300
common days (not quite seven years) a long time for so
many great and important events, as are noticed in the
vision, to transpire in. ‘And he understood the thing,
(that is, the time,) and had understanding of the vision.’
Daniel 10:1.” Miller, Evidence, 74.
The Conflict Was Long.—
“The words translated ‘time appointed’ are from
the Hebrew word saba, which means ‘warfare’ or ‘conflict.’ The Revised Standard Version translates the
passage, ‘It was a great conflict.’ Prophets & Kings,
p.571, says that Daniel was given a view of a ‘mighty

“The return of Christ to our world will not be
long delayed. Let this be the keynote of every mes-

384

DANIEL 10
foretold the coming of the Messiah, but He would be
‘cut off’ and the restored city and temple would be
destroyed and made a perpetual desolation. That this
second period of prayer and fasting was for still further
light on the same vision is evident. In verse 12 we are
told that in Daniel’s prayer, he ‘set his face to understand’ something that puzzled him. …As the result of
this third interpretation, Daniel declared that he
‘understood the thing, and had understanding of
the vision.’ The thing about the vision that still troubled him was made plain. (verse 1). That the last
three chapters of the book contain a further explanation of Daniel’s second vision is the opinion of the
best Bible commentators.” Bunch, BOD, 154.

sage. The blessed hope of the second appearing of
Christ, with its solemn realities, needs to be often
presented to the people. Looking for the soon appearing of our Lord will lead us to regard earthly things as
emptiness and nothingness.
“The battle of Armageddon is soon to be fought.
He on whose vesture is written the name, King of
kings, and Lord of lords, is soon to lead forth the armies of heaven.
“It cannot now be said by the Lord’s servants,
as it was by the prophet Daniel: ‘The time appointed was long.’ Daniel 10:1. It is now but a short time
till the witnesses for God will have done their work
in preparing the way of the Lord.” 6 Testimonies,
406.

“Daniel uses two Hebrew words for ‘vision.’
In this instance it is the Hebrew word mar’eh, which
is used in Daniel 8 and 9 in reference to the 2300
days and the cleansing of the sanctuary. Thus, right
at the outset, the vision by the Hiddekel is shown to
be linked to his earlier vision by the Ulai. (See Daniel 8.) As the two rivers, Ulai and Hiddekel (Euphrates
and Tigris), by which Daniel saw his visions of chapters 8 and 11, merge into one river, so the two visions
must be seen as merging into one.
“In his vision in chapter 8, Daniel beheld the Roman ‘horn’ making war on the sanctuary and God’s
people. The question was asked, ‘How long shall be
the vision …to give both the sanctuary and the host to
be trodden underfoot? The answer was given, ‘Unto
two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed.’—Daniel 8:13,14. The angel
did not answer both questions specifically. He merely
said when the sanctuary would be restored. The last
vision specifically answers the question concerning
the restoration of God’s people.
“Daniel 8 uses two words which the Authorized
Version translates as ‘vision.’ The first word is chazon. It is used in verses 2,13,15,17, and 26 (last part).
The second word is mar’eh, and is used in verses 16,26
(first part), and 27. [Bible expositors write:] ‘The Hebrew words for “vision” may be significant. It is possible that when the word chazon is used, the reference
is to the vision as a whole. On the other hand, where
the word mar’eh is employed, the reference could be to
the particular things seen and heard in the chazon. One
feature seen in the over-all chazon was the “two thousand and three hundred days” of Daniel 8:14.’
“Referring to the cleansing of the sanctuary, the
angel said, ‘Make this man to understand the vision
[mar’eh].’ The angel then said to Daniel, ‘The vision
[mar’eh] of the evening and the morning [i.e., the 2300
evenings and morning] which was told is true.’ But the
spectacle of the sanctuary and the saints being trodden
down over such a long period caused the prophet to
faint, and he records, ‘I was astonished at the vision
[mar’eh], but none understood it.’—Daniel 8:27.
Daniel did not say that he did not understand the
chazon. He said that he did not understand the

“The great controversy between good and evil
will increase in intensity to the very close of time.”
Great Controversy, ix.
The Great Conflict, Heaven and Earth Involved.—
“In chapter 10, the figure of a heavenly prince appears again, named for the first time—this is Michael—and for the first time involved in the war
(10:13,21). The end of the times is now in the offing
(10:14), and the last step of human history is described
as a gigantic war, saba gadol (Daniel 10:1). In this
connection, the parallel between Daniel praying and
fasting on earth during three weeks (10:4) and the
heavenly battle involving supernatural powers during
the same period of time (10:13) suggests the nature of
the impending war. The battle will take place on
both fronts, heaven and earth, implying again a
special connection between the two.” Doukhan,
DVE, 75.
Daniel Had Understanding.—
“Daniel talked with God. Heaven was opened before him. But the high honors granted him were the
result of humiliation and earnest seeking. All who
believe with the heart the word of God will hunger and
thirst for a knowledge of His will. God is the author of
truth. He enlightens the darkened understanding and
gives to the human mind power to grasp and comprehend the truths which He has revealed.” Sanctified Life, 49.
Daniel Had Understanding of the Vision.—
“The revelations of the first vision ‘troubled’ and
‘alarmed’ Daniel. As the result of the second vision
and Gabriel’s first interpretation the prophet ‘fainted,
and was sick certain day.’ His sickness was followed
by a period of fasting and earnest prayer for further
light which came with the second visit of the angel and
his further interpretation of the unexplained part of the
vision relating to time. But this second explanation
again filled Daniel with grief and he enters into a period of prayer and fasting and mourning which continued
for three full weeks. Gabriel’s second interpretation

385

GEMS FROM DANIEL
powers of darkness, seeking to counteract the influences at work on the mind of Cyrus; and before the
contest closed, Christ Himself came to Gabriel’s aid.
‘The prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one
and twenty days,’ Gabriel declares; ‘but, lo, Michael,
one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia.’ Daniel 10:13.
All that heaven could do in behalf of the people of
God was done. The victory was finally gained; the
forces of the enemy were held in check all the days
of Cyrus, and all the days of his son Cambyses, who
reigned about seven and a half years.’ Prophets &
Kings, 571,572.
“Daniel’s attitude of affliction of soul serves as a
type of the attitude that will characterize God’s
people in the last days. As Daniel prayed for the restoration of the temple at the end of the seventy years,
so the saints are called to a similar response at the
end of the 2300 years. (See Prophets & Kings, 714.)
“The experience of the prophets often serve as a
representation of the experience of the church in the
last days. Isaiah’s vision of the Lord, high and lifted
up in the temple (Isaiah 6:1-7), ‘represents the condition of God’s people in the last days. They are privileged to see by faith the work that is going forward in
the heavenly sanctuary.’—Ellen G. White in The SDA
Bible Commentary, vol.4, p.1139. John’s experience
of eating the sweet and bitter book represents the experience of God’s people in the early Advent Movement.
(See Rev. 10.) Zechariah’s vision of Joshua and his
filthy garments ‘applies with peculiar force to the experience of God’s people in the closing up of the great
day of atonement.’—Testimonies, vol.5, p.472. So also
does Daniel’s experience recorded in chapter 10
portray the experience of God’s people in the last
days. With fasting, mourning and humiliation of
soul (Joel 2:15,17), they will pray for the cleansing
and restoration of the heavenly sanctuary.” Hiddekel, 17,18.

mar’eh—that is, the part about the cleansing of the
sanctuary. This point provides the certain link to
chapter 9. As Daniel sought God in prayer for further
light, the angel came to the prophet, saying, ‘I am now
come forth to give thee skill and understanding
…therefore understand the matter, and consider the
vision [mar’eh].’—Daniel 9:22,23. Adventist expositors are agreed that the mar’eh refers to the
cleansing of the sanctuary and the 2300 days of
Daniel 8.
“Chapter 9 does not fully explain the mar’eh. It
merely gives the starting point of the 2300 days (457
BC) and concludes with the destruction of the sanctuary again in AD 70. That is no place to end the glorious account of the triumph of the sanctuary and God’s
people. So one more vision (chazon) was necessary in
order to clear up the vital point about the mar’eh which
Daniel said he did not understand. In Daniel 10:1 the
prophet records, “[I] had understanding of the vision
[mar’eh].’ One must therefore expect this last vision
to throw more light on the great work of restoring
the sanctuary and the saints in the last days.” Hiddekel, 15-17.

DANIEL 10:2,3
In those days I Daniel was mourning
three full weeks.
I ate no pleasant bread, neither came
flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I
anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks
were fulfilled.
I Was Mourning Three Full Weeks.—
“Daniel had not been able to return to Palestine,
but with deepest interest he followed the progress of
God’s work in the homeland. Great hindrances to the
work of restoring the sanctuary had arisen. The Samaritans were trying to bring the work to a halt by
stirring up suspicion in the mind of Cyrus. Apparently Daniel, being a high statesman in the Persian
realm, was close enough to the affairs of the palace to
detect a change in the current of sympathy for the Jews.
The mind of the king was being agitated against God’s
people. With a heart burdened for the restoration of the
temple, Daniel engaged in fasting, mourning and intercession with God. The angel showed Daniel what was
transpiring behind the scenes. It was a great conflict
for the mind of Cyrus:
“ ‘While Satan was striving to influence the highest powers in the kingdom of Medo-Persia to show
disfavor to God’s people, angels worked in behalf of
the exiles. The controversy was one in which all
heaven was interested. Through the prophet Daniel
we are given a glimpse of this mighty struggle between the forces of good and the forces of evil.
“ ‘For three weeks Gabriel wrestled with the

“Upon the occasion just described [Daniel
9:20,21], the angel Gabriel imparted to Daniel all the
instruction which he was then able to receive. A few
years afterward, however, the prophet desired to
learn more of subjects not yet fully explained [in
Daniel 8,9], and again set himself to seek light and
wisdom from God. [Daniel 10:2-6 quoted.]
“…The great truths revealed by the world’s Redeemer are for those who search for truth as for hid
treasures. Daniel was an aged man. His life had been
passed amid the fascinations of a heathen court, his
mind cumbered with the affairs of a great empire. Yet
he turns aside from all these to afflict his soul before
God, and seek a knowledge of the purposes of the Most
High. And in response to his supplications, light from
the heavenly courts was communicated for those who
should live in the latter days. With what earnestness,
then, should we seek God, that He may open our

386

DANIEL 10
(vs. 4). Given the close proximity of these statements,
the implication is that the twenty-fourth day of the first
month took place immediately at the end of the three
weeks of fasting. The original language uses an idiom
here to indicate that the weeks were ‘full.’ Full weeks
come to an end after seven days; they end on Sabbath, the seventh day. Since this vision appeared to
Daniel at the end of three full weeks, it must also have
come to him on a Sabbath day. That means that this
final prophecy of the book of Daniel was most likely
given on a Sabbath. This is the only vision in the book
that we can date with such precision.
“In this regard, there is a rather direct parallel between Daniel and John who was the recipient of the
visions of the book of Revelation. John says he received his vision on the ‘Lord’s day’ (Revelation
1:10). As we know from both the Old Testament and
the New Testament, the day that the Lord has claimed
as His special possession is the Sabbath (Isa. 58:13;
Mark 2:28). Thus Daniel received his final prophecy
on the Sabbath, and John received the visions of his
book on that day too. Both of these men were elderly
at the time. …Both were exiles at the time they received their visions. Daniel was in Babylon, and John
was imprisoned on the island of Patmos ‘because of the
word of God and the testimony of Jesus’ (Revelation
1:9). …A comparison can also be made between the
form God [the Son’s] appearance took in both Daniel
10 and in Revelation 1.” Shea, DARG, 234.

understanding to comprehend the truths brought to
us from heaven.” Sanctified Life, 49,50.
Ate No Pleasant Bread.—
“For what purpose did this aged servant of God
thus humble himself and afflict his soul?—Evidently to
understand more fully the divine purpose concerning
events that were to befall the church of God. The divine messenger sent to instruct him says, ‘From the
first day that thou didst set thine heart to understand.’
Verse 12. There was still something, then, which Daniel did not understand. What was it? Undoubtedly it
was some part of the vision of Daniel 8, of which
Daniel 9 was but a further explanation. As the result
of his supplication, he now receives more minute information respecting the events included in the great
outlines of his former visions.
“This mourning of the prophet is supposed to
have been accompanied with fasting, not an absolute
abstinence from food, but a use of only the plainest
and most simple articles of diet. He ate no pleasant
bread, no delicacies or dainties; he used no flesh or
wine; and he did not anoint his head, which was to the
Jews an outward sign of fasting. How long he would
have continued this fast had he not received the answer
to his prayer, we do not know, but his course in continuing it for three weeks shows that he was not a person
to cease his supplications till his petition was granted.”
Smith, DR, 225,226.
Neither Came Flesh Nor Wine in My Mouth.—
“As Daniel and his fellows were brought to the
test, they placed themselves fully on the side of righteousness and truth. They did not move capriciously,
but intelligently. They decided that as flesh-meat
had not composed their diet in the past, it should
not come into their diet in the future, and as wine
had been prohibited to all who should engage in the
service of God, they determined that they would not
partake of it. The fate of the sons of Aaron had been
presented before them, and they knew that the use of
wine would confuse their senses, that the indulgence of
appetite would becloud their powers of discernment.
These particulars were placed on record in the history
of the children of Israel as a warning to every youth to
avoid all customs and practices and indulgences that
would in any way dishonor God.” Youth Instructor,
8/18/1898.

DANIEL 10:4
And in the four and twentieth day of
the first month, as I was by the side of the
great river, which is Hiddekel;
The Great River, Hiddekel.—
“The word Hiddekel in the Syriac is applied to the
Euphrates River; in the Vulgate, Greek, and Arabic, to
the Tigris; therefore some conclude that the prophet
had this vision where these rivers unite, near the Persian Gulf.” Smith, DR, 226.
“The light that Daniel received direct from God
was given especially for these last days. The visions he
saw by the banks of the Ulai and the Hiddekel, the
great rivers of Shinar, are now in process of fulfillment, and all the events foretold will soon have come
to pass (Letter 57, 1896).” 4BC, 1166.

Vision on the Sabbath--Three Whole Weeks (Full)
Were Fulfilled.—
“The marginal reading for ‘three full weeks’ is
‘weeks of days,’ here used to distinguish the time spoken of from the weeks of years brought to view in the
preceding chapter.” Smith, DR, 225

DANIEL 10:5,6
Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked,
and behold a certain man clothed in linen,
whose loins were girded with fine gold of
Uphaz:
His body also was like the beryl, and

“He says that he had been mourning and fasting
for three ‘full’ weeks and that then God appeared to
him on the twenty-fourth day of the first month Nisan

387

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Leviticus 16:4. [Day of Atonement dress for priest.]

his face as the appearance of lightning, and
his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and
his feet like in color to polished brass, and
the voice of his words like the voice of a
multitude.

“The linen garments worn by our Lord, when
seen by Daniel at the time he was given his last prophecy (Daniel 10: 5, 6), would indicate His priestly
work-particularly His High Priestly ministration on
the day of Atonement (see Leviticus 16: 4). In this
connection, notice that a part of the description given
of our Lord in Revelation 1 comes from the description
given of Him in Daniel 7 in connection with the Judgment: the Judgment would sit and the Papacy would be
destroyed (see Daniel 7:11, 26). As the commencement of Daniel’s last prophecy the priestly work of
Christ is indicated, so the end of that prophecy
brings us to the time when He ceases His mediation
in the heavenly temple (Daniel 12:1). The king of the
north gathers his forces (Daniel 11: 44, 45) against the
people of God just as the Lord is about to close His
heavenly ministry: ‘At that time shall Michael stand
up, the great Prince [mentioned in the commencement
of the prophecy, see Daniel 10: 13] which stands for
the children of thy people’ (Daniel 12:1).” Were,
KONAJ, 101,102.

Jesus, A Certain Man Clothed in Linen.—
“The Bible contains two descriptions of Michael
or Emmanuel in his glorious state, one before, and the
other after His incarnation. This picture is almost identical with the one revealed to the Revelator as recorded
in Rev. 1:13-16. Daniel sees the Son of God before
His humiliation into human flesh, and John after He
was again glorified in answer to His prayer. See John
17:5. In both visions Michael was clothed ‘in fine linen.’” Bunch, BOD, 157
“And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one
like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment
down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a
golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white like
wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame
of fire. And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they
burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of
many waters. And he had in his right hand seven
stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged
sword: and his countenance was as the sun shineth in
his strength.” Rev 1:13-16.

Same One as Described in Revelation 10.—
“This man is the same as Michael standing up for
the children of thy people. The reason I assign is, he is
clothed in linen, which shows he is the high priest
for the people of God. It is the same angel that John
describes, Rev. 10:1-6.” Miller, Evidence, 111.

“[Dan. 10:2, 5,6 quoted.] No less a personage
than the Son of God appeared to Daniel. This description is similar to that given by John when Christ
was revealed to him upon the Isle of Patmos. Our
Lord now comes with another heavenly messenger
to teach Daniel what would take place in the latter
days. This knowledge was given to Daniel and recorded by Inspiration for us upon whom the ends of the
world are come.” R&H, 2/8/1881.

“The importance of Daniel’s last prophecy and its
relationship to the book of Revelation will be recognized by noting that both commence with a ‘revelation of Jesus Christ’ (compare Daniel 10: 5, 6 and
Revelation 1: 14-17). In both, the glory of His person
fills Daniel and John with awe and fear. In both,
Jesus comforts His faithful servants with the
knowledge that while He possesses Almighty power,
His power is used to show Himself strong on behalf of
those whose hearts are perfect towards Him. How fitting that both Daniel’s last prophecy and the Revelation, which is the enlargement of that prophecy, should
commence with a description of Jesus in His purity and
power, and also in His capacity of the High Priest interceding on behalf of His people. If the display of His
power filled His loyal subjects with fear, how will His
adversaries fare when that Almighty power is used on
behalf of His persecuted people!” Were, KONAJ,
99,100.

“As the high priest laid aside his pontifical
dress, and officiated in the white linen dress of a
common priest, so Christ emptied Himself, and took
the form of a servant, and offered sacrifice, Himself the
priest, Himself the victim. As the high priest, after
performing his service in the holy of holies, came forth
to the waiting congregation in his pontifical robes, so
Christ will come the second time clothed in glorious
garments of the whitest white, ‘such as no fuller on
earth can whiten them.’ He will come in His own glory, and in the glory of His Father, as King of kings and
Lord of lords, and all the angelic host will escort Him
on His way (MS 113, 1899).” 1BC, 1111,1112.

Eyes As Lamps of Fire.—
“And was transfigured before them: and his face
did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as
the light.” Matthew 17:2. “And his raiment became
shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on
earth can white them.” Mark 9:3.

“He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall
have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be
girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre
shall he be attired: these are holy garments; therefore
shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.”

VIEWS OF CHRIST IN VISIONS

388

DANIEL 10
Daniel’s View (Dan.10)

fled to hide themselves. The godly prophet himself
was unable to endure the revelation of divine love.
Although he was faultless before men and beloved by
God, the weakness and sinfulness of human nature
appeared in painful contrast to the infinite purity of
Christ. His moral as well as his physical ‘comeliness’
(brightness, beauty) turned in him to corruption as the
painful awareness of the sinful state of human nature
rolled upon him like the waves of the sea. (See verses
8, 16.) Like John the Revelator, who also saw the glorified Christ, Daniel was left without breath, and doubtless would not have recovered had he not been revived
and strengthened by the angel of God.
“As Daniel sought to hasten the restoration of the
temple by fasting and affliction of soul, so also God’s
people in the last days will seek to hasten the cleansing
of the heavenly sanctuary by fulfilling the conditions of
the great anti-typical day of atonement.
“Not for themselves alone will they intercede
with God, but for the honor and glory of Christ. They
will realize that Jesus will feel the pain and agony of
sin until His sanctuary is cleansed. (See Education,
p. 263.)
“It is submitted that Daniel’s humiliating experience recorded in chapter 10 is an illustration of
the experience that God’s people will pass through
at the time of the judgment and the latter rain.”
[See comments on verse 2; Zech. 10:12.] Hiddekel,
18,19.

John’s View (Rev. 1)

A certain man 10:5
One like Son of man, 1:13
Clothed in linen, v.5
Clothed with garment, v.13
Girded with fine gold, v.5 A golden girdle, v.13
His body like beryl, v.6
His head and hairs were
white like wool, v.14
His face as lightning, v.6 Countenance as sun, v.16
Eyes as lamps of fire,v.6 Eyes as a flame of fire, v.14
Arms and feet as polished Feet like fine brass, v.15.
brass, v.6
Words like the voice of a Voice as the sound of
multitude, v.6
many waters, v.15
Thiele, OSID, 120.
The Voice of His Words Like a Multitude.—
“His speech was ‘like the voice of a multitude,’ or
‘as the sound of many waters.’—John. The voice of a
great multitude in perfect unison, like the roar of a
great cataract, has the sense of vastness that is impressive and awe-inspiring. Michael is the Word of God
and the Spokesman of the Godhead. When He
speaks He speaks for the whole universe of unfallen
beings.” Bunch, BOD, 158.
“To the ears of Daniel, accustomed by long experience to heavenly sounds, the voice of the ‘One Man’
was as the voice of the multitude, or as the sound of
many waters, clear and beautiful. To human ears,
dull of hearing, it is like thunder. The Jews at the time
that the Greeks came to Christ had a similar experience
to that of the companions of Daniel. Sitting in the
temple court, the lightning played about the head of
Christ, and a voice which to him was the voice of God,
to them sounded like the crash of a thunder bolt.”
Haskell, SDP, 156.

Others Fled.—
“The countenance of Christ was like lightning,
and as he gazed upon the prostrate form of Daniel, the
other men fled for their lives. But what would have
been death to those who harbored sin, was life to the
one whose character was pure. The dross had been
consumed before, and the light shone upon the prophet
as sunlight on a mirror.
“So full of life is the Son of God that his eyes appeared as lamps of fire, flashing light. He it is who
says, ‘I will guide thee with mine eye.’ Daniel could
bear the gaze, but his companions felt that those eyes
burned into their very souls, and they hid from his
gaze.” Haskell, SDP, 156.

DANIEL 10:7
And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for
the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so
that they fled to hide themselves.

DANIEL 10:8
Therefore I was left alone, and saw this
great vision, and there remained no
strength in me: for my comeliness was
turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.

I Daniel Alone Saw the Vision.—
“The word for ‘vision’ is mar’eh, and is used
again in verses 8 and 16. The mar’eh was a confrontation with the unveiled glory of Jesus Christ. After
seeing Him, Daniel could testify that he ‘had understanding of the mar’eh’ (verse 1), for Christ is the reality of the sanctuary and its cleansing. When the saints
finally see Him as Daniel saw Him, they too will be
overwhelmed with a sense of their weakness and imperfection.
“Daniel stood alone to see the mar’eh. His companions, being aware of something of dreadful import,

Isaiah’s Experience.—
“Thus when the servant of God is permitted to
behold the glory of the God of heaven, as he is unveiled to humanity, and realizes to a slight degree the
purity of the Holy One of Israel, he will make star-

389

GEMS FROM DANIEL
character of Christ. He will then reflect the character
of Christ, the hope of glory. It will be the greatest
mystery to him that Jesus should have made so
great a sacrifice to redeem him. He will exclaim,
with humble mien and quivering lip, ‘He loved me. He
gave himself for me. He became poor that I, through
his poverty, might be made rich. The man of sorrows
did not spurn me, but poured out his inexhaustible,
redeeming love that my heart might be made clean;
and he has brought me back into loyalty and obedience
to all his commandments. His condescension, his
humiliation, his crucifixion, are the crowning miracles in the marvelous exhibition of the plan of salvation. That the just should die for the unjust, the pure
for the impure, is beyond all manifestations of human
love; and all this he has done to make it possible to
impart to me his own righteousness, that I may keep
the law I have transgressed. For this I adore him. I
will proclaim him to all sinners. I will cry, ‘Behold
the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the
world!”’ R&H, 10/16/1888.

tling confessions of the pollution of his soul, rather
than proud boasts of his holiness. In deep humiliation Isaiah exclaimed, ‘Woe is me! for I am undone;
because I am a man of unclean lips:... for mine eyes
have seen the king, the Lord of hosts.’…
“As humanity, with its weakness and deformity,
was brought out in contrast with the perfection of divine holiness and light and glory, he felt altogether
inefficient and unworthy. How could he go and speak
to the people the holy requirements of Jehovah, who
was high and lifted up, and whose train filled the temple? While Isaiah was trembling and consciencesmitten, because of his impurity in the presence of this
unsurpassed glory, he says, ‘Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he
had taken with the tongs from off the altar; and he laid
it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy
lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin
purged. Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying,
Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said
I, Here am I; send me.’
“We may always be startled and indignant when
we hear a poor, fallen mortal exclaiming, ‘I am holy; I
am sinless!’ Not one soul to whom God has granted
the wonderful view of his greatness and majesty, has
every uttered one word like this. On the contrary,
they have felt like sinking down in the deepest humiliation of soul, as they have viewed the purity of
God, and contrasted with it their own imperfections
of life and character. One ray of the glory of God,
one gleam of the purity of Christ, penetrating the soul,
makes every spot of defilement painfully distinct, and
lays bare the deformity and defects of the human character. How can anyone who is brought before the holy
standard of God’s law, which makes apparent the evil
motives, the unhallowed desires, the infidelity of the
heart, the impurity of the lips, and that lays bare the
life—make any boast of holiness? His acts of disloyalty in making void the law of God, are exposed to his
sight, and his spirit is stricken and afflicted under the
searching influences of the Spirit of God. He loathes
himself, as he views the greatness, the majesty, the
pure and spotless character of Jesus Christ.
“When the Spirit of Christ stirs the heart with its
marvelous awakening power, there is a sense of deficiency in the soul, that leads to contrition of mind, and
humiliation of self, rather than to proud boasting of
what has been acquired. When Daniel beheld the glory
and majesty surrounding the heavenly messenger that
was sent unto him, he exclaimed, as he described the
wonderful scene, ‘Therefore I was left alone, and saw
this great vision, and there remained no strength in me;
for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption,
and I retained no strength.’ The soul that is thus
touched will never wrap itself about with selfrighteousness, or a pretentious garb of holiness; but
will hate its selfishness, abhor its self-love, and will
seek, through Christ’s righteousness, for that purity of
heart which is in harmony with the law of God and the

John’s Experience.—
“And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead.”
Revelation 1:17.
Peter’s Similar Experience.—
“Simon and his brother together let down the net.
As they attempted to draw it in, so great was the quantity of fish enclosed that it began to break. They were
obliged to summon James and John to their aid. When
the catch was secured, both the boats were so heavily
laden that they were in danger of sinking.
“But Peter was unmindful now of boats or lading.
This miracle, above any other he had ever witnessed,
was to him a manifestation of divine power. In Jesus
he saw One who held all nature under His control. The
presence of divinity revealed his own unholiness.
Love for his Master, shame for his own unbelief,
gratitude for the condescension of Christ, above all,
the sense of his uncleanness in the presence of infinite purity, overwhelmed him. While his companions were securing the contents of the net, Peter fell at
the Saviour’s feet, exclaiming, ‘Depart from me; for I
am a sinful man, O Lord.’
“It was the same presence of divine holiness that
had caused the prophet Daniel to fall as one dead before the angel of God. He said, ‘My comeliness was
turned in me into corruption, and I retained no
strength.’ So when Isaiah beheld the glory of the Lord,
he exclaimed, ‘Woe is me! for I am undone; because I
am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of hosts.’ Daniel 10:8; Isaiah 6:5. Humanity, with its weakness and sin, was brought in
contrast with the perfection of divinity, and he felt
altogether deficient and unholy. Thus it has been
with all who have been granted a view of God’s
greatness and majesty.

390

DANIEL 10
“Peter exclaimed, ‘Depart from me; for I am a
sinful man;’ yet he clung to the feet of Jesus, feeling
that he could not be parted from Him. The Saviour
answered, ‘Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch
men.’ It was after Isaiah had beheld the holiness of
God and his own unworthiness that he was entrusted
with the divine message. It was after Peter had been
led to self-renunciation and dependence upon divine
power that he received the call to his work for Christ.”
Desire of Ages, 246.

him instruction, Daniel says: ‘My comeliness was
turned in me into corruption, and I retained no
strength.’ Daniel 9:18, 15, 20; 10:8.
“When Job heard the voice of the Lord out of the
whirlwind, he exclaimed: ‘I abhor myself, and repent
in dust and ashes.’ Job 42:6. It was when Isaiah saw
the glory of the Lord, and heard the cherubim crying,
‘Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts,’ that he cried
out, ‘Woe is me! for I am undone.’ Isaiah 6:3, 5. Paul,
after he was caught up into the third heaven and heard
things which it was not possible for a man to utter,
speaks of himself as ‘less than the least of all saints.’ 2
Corinthians 12:2-4, margin; Ephesians 3:8. It was the
beloved John, who leaned on Jesus’ breast and beheld
His glory, that fell as one dead before the feet of the
angel. Revelation 1:17.
“There can be no self-exaltation, no boastful
claim to freedom from sin, on the part of those who
walk in the shadow of Calvary’s cross. They feel that
it was their sin which caused the agony that broke
the heart of the Son of God, and this thought will
lead them to self-abasement. Those who live nearest
to Jesus discern most clearly the frailty and sinfulness
of humanity, and their only hope is in the merit of a
crucified and risen Saviour.” Great Controversy,
470,471.

Comparison of Daniel and Paul in Vision.—
Daniel in vision (ch. 10)
Paul in vision (Acts 9)
Daniel alone saw the
vision, (eyes open) v.7,8.
Men with him saw not
the vision, v.7.
Men fled to hide
themselves, v.7
No strength, v.8,17.
No breath, v. 17.
Strengthened, v.18,19.
Heard voice speaking, v.9
In deep sleep, face to
ground, v.9
Thiele, OSID, 120.

Men with him saw
no man, ch.9:7
Men with him are
speechless, v.7
Falls to earth, v.4.
Heard voice speaking, v.4
Falls to the earth, v.4

“One ray of the glory of God, one gleam of the
purity of Christ, penetrating the soul, makes every
spot of defilement painfully distinct, and lays bare
the deformity and defects of the human character.
It makes apparent the unhallowed desires, the infidelity
of the heart, the impurity of the lips. The sinner’s acts
of disloyalty in making void the law of God, are exposed to his sight, and his spirit is stricken and afflicted
under the searching influence of the Spirit of God. He
loathes himself as he views the pure, spotless character
of Christ.
“When the prophet Daniel beheld the glory surrounding the heavenly messenger that was sent unto
him, he was overwhelmed with a sense of his own
weakness and imperfection. Describing the effect of
the wonderful scene, he says, ‘There remained no
strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me
into corruption, and I retained no strength.’ Daniel
10:8. The soul thus touched will hate its selfishness,
abhor its self-love, and will seek, through Christ’s
righteousness, for the purity of heart that is in harmony with the law of God and the character of Christ.
“Paul says that as ‘touching the righteousness
which is in the law’—as far as outward acts were concerned—he was ‘blameless’ (Philippians 3:6); but
when the spiritual character of the law was discerned,
he saw himself a sinner. Judged by the letter of the law
as men apply it to the outward life, he had abstained
from sin; but when he looked into the depths of its holy
precepts, and saw himself as God saw him, he bowed
in humiliation and confessed his guilt. He says, ‘I was
alive without the law once: but when the command-

Our Experience Will Be Like Daniel’s.—
“[Daniel 10:7,8 quoted.] All who are truly sanctified will have a similar experience. The clearer
their views of the greatness, glory, and perfection of
Christ, the more vividly will they see their own weakness and imperfection. They will have no disposition
to claim a sinless character; that which has appeared right and comely in themselves will, in contrast with Christ’s purity and glory, appear only as
unworthy and corruptible. It is when men are separated from God, when they have very indistinct views
of Christ, that they say, ‘I am sinless; I am sanctified.’”
Sanctified Life, 50.
“Those who experience the sanctification of the
Bible will manifest a spirit of humility. Like Moses,
they have had a view of the awful majesty of holiness,
and they see their own unworthiness in contrast with
the purity and exalted perfection of the Infinite One.
“The prophet Daniel was an example of true
sanctification. His long life was filled up with noble
service for his Master. He was a man ‘greatly beloved’
(Daniel 10:11) of Heaven. Yet instead of claiming to
be pure and holy, this honored prophet identified himself with the really sinful of Israel as he pleaded before
God in behalf of his people: ‘We do not present our
supplications before Thee for our righteousness, but for
Thy great mercies.’ ‘We have sinned, we have done
wickedly.’ He declares: ‘I was speaking, and praying,
and confessing my sin and the sin of my people.’ And
when at a later time the Son of God appeared, to give

391

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ment came, sin revived, and I died.’ Romans 7:9.
When he saw the spiritual nature of the law, sin
appeared in its true hideousness, and his self-esteem
was gone.” Steps to Christ, 29,30.

voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me?” Acts 9:3,4.

DANIEL 10:10,11
And, behold, an hand touched me,
which set me upon my knees and upon the
palms of my hands.
And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man
greatly beloved, understand the words that
I speak unto thee, and stand upright: for
unto thee am I now sent. And when he had
spoken this word unto me, I stood trembling.

“He who beholds Christ in His self-denial, His
lowliness of heart, will be constrained to say, as did
Daniel, when he beheld One like the sons of men, ‘My
comeliness was turned in me into corruption.’ Daniel
10:8. The independence and self-supremacy in which
we glory are seen in their true vileness as tokens of
servitude to Satan. Human nature is ever struggling for
expression, ready for contest; but he who learns of
Christ is emptied of self, of pride, of love of supremacy, and there is silence in the soul. Self is yielded to
the disposal of the Holy Spirit. Then we are not anxious to have the highest place. We have no ambition
to crowd and elbow ourselves into notice; but we
feel that our highest place is at the feet of our Saviour. We look to Jesus, waiting for His hand to lead,
listening for His voice to guide. The apostle Paul had
this experience, and he said, ‘I am crucified with
Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in
me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
Himself for me.’ Gal. 2:20.” Mount of Blessing, 15.

An Hand Touched Me.—
“Here is introduced another being from the one
Daniel had just seen and heard. This messenger had
been ‘sent’ and could not therefore be Michael.
This was Gabriel, the chief messenger of Michael,
and the angel of prophecy, whom Michael had before commanded to make Daniel understand the
vision, and who had already made two partial interpretations. See Dan. 8:16; 9:21-23. He now returns to complete his task. It was the hand of Gabriel
that raised the prostrate prophet from a lying posture
and set him on his hands and knees ‘all shaking.’—
Moffatt. …As a token of respect and reverence men
and women fell before Oriental rulers and remained in
a bowed position till commanded to arise. Standing is
an attitude of attention and respect. Daniel stands to
hear the message of Gabriel.” Bunch, BOD, 160.

“Not one boastful word of self-esteem will be
presented by those who have a knowledge of the true
God, and of Jesus Christ whom He has sent. No one
who has a clear conception of God will be uplifted
in himself. This was the impression made upon the
man who is thrice called “greatly beloved,” because he
was contrite in spirit, and faithful, and true.’”
18MR, 18.

“There was power in the touch of the angel’s
hand. There was power in the touch of the Saviour’s
hand. When on earth, virtue, life, the healing power of
God, constantly radiated from him. He could touch the
leper, and a life-current flowed from him to the diseased one. So it was with Gabriel’s touch. He who
stood in the presence of God was so filled with life that
as he laid his hand on man, a thrill of life was felt in
every nerve. It may be so with beings today. The follower of Christ should have the life-current so
strong within him that sin is rebuked, and disease
driven from him. ‘A thousand shall fall at thy side
and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come
nigh thee,’ is the promise. Christ came that we might
have an abundance of life; the cup full to overflowing.
We do not half realize our privilege.” Haskell, SDP,
157.

DANIEL 10:9
Yet heard I the voice of his words: and
when I heard the voice of his words, then
was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my
face toward the ground.
“A most majestic being visited Daniel on this occasion. The description here given of him is almost
parallel to the description of Christ in Rev. 1:14-16.
Also since the effect on Daniel was experienced was
similar to that experienced by Paul and his companions
when the Lord appeared to them on the road to Damascus (Acts 9: 1-7), we conclude that Christ Himself
appeared to Daniel. We learn in verse 13 that Michael had come to assist Gabriel in influencing the Persian king. How natural then that He should show Himself to Daniel on this occasion.” Smith, DR, 226.

O Daniel, A Man Greatly Beloved.—
“Gabriel now appeared to the prophet, and
thus addressed him: [Daniel 10:11, 12 quoted].
“What great honor is shown to Daniel by the
Majesty of heaven! He comforts His trembling servant
and assures him that his prayer has been heard in heav-

“And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus:
and suddenly there shined round about him a light
from heaven: And he fell to the earth, and heard a

392

DANIEL 10
en.” Sanctified Life, 51.

derstand the words. Being thus assured, the holy and
beloved prophet stood trembling, before the angel.
“ ‘Fear not, Daniel,’ continued Gabriel. He had
no occasion to fear before one, even though a heavenly
being, who had been sent to him because he was greatly beloved, and in answer to his earnest prayer. Nor
ought the people of God of any age to entertain a servile fear of any of those agents who are sent forth to
minister to their salvation. There is, however, a disposition manifested among far too many to conceive of
Jesus and His angels as only stern ministers of justice,
rather than as beings who are earnestly working for
their salvation. The presence of an angel, should he
appear bodily before them, would strike them with
terror, and the thought that Christ is soon to appear
distresses and alarms them. We recommend to such
more of that perfect love which casts out all fear.”
Smith, DR, 227.

“We must put to the stretch every spiritual nerve
and muscle if we would stand as Daniel stood. God
spoke of Daniel as a man greatly beloved. Would
we not rejoice if this could be said of us? Strive,
then, to be like Daniel, affable, kind, and forbearing. Show your love for those who are striving to
help you form right characters. Do all you can to
help yourselves, that your intelligence may reach the
highest point of excellence. God does not desire you to
remain novices. He needs in his work everything that
you can gain here in the lines of mental culture and
clear discernment. He desires to have you reach the
very highest round of the ladder, and then step off it
into the kingdom of God.”
Youth Instructor,
5/10/1900.
And Stand Upright.—
“Although Gabriel was an exalted angel he was a
created being and was not to be worshiped as a God.
When John fell down to worship him, he said, ‘See
thou do it not: I am thy fellowservant, and of thy
brethren.’ (Rev. 19:10; 22:8,9).” Thiele, OSID, 121.

From the First Day Thy Words Were Heard.—
“And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the LORD, and he heard me; out of the belly of
hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.” Jonah 2:2.
“If we as a people would pray as Daniel prayed,
and wrestle as he wrestled, humbling our souls before
God, we should realize as marked answers to our
petitions as were granted to Daniel.” Sanctified Life,
47.

DANIEL 10:12
Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou didst set
thine heart to understand, and to chasten
thyself before thy God, thy words were
heard, and I am come for thy words.

“This earth was the field of battle; here the Son of
God had to contend with the wily foe in our behalf.
Behold him on Jordan’s bank just before he entered the
desert of temptation. He offered up a prayer such as
heaven never heard before, and the heavens opened and
the Spirit of God, like a dove of burnished gold, encircled the Son of God, and there was heard a voice, saying, ‘This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.’ Do you comprehend all that this scene signifies? It tells you that heaven is opened before you,
and that your petitions will find access to the Father. After the transgression of Adam, God no longer
communicated directly with man; earth was separated,
as it were, from the continent of heaven; but Jesus was
made our substitute, our surety, that he might bring us
back to the Father, and his human arm encircles the
race, while his infinite arm reaches to the highest heavens, and thus he unites finite man to the infinite God,
and connects earth with heaven. The voice that came
from heaven to our Surety, tells us that heaven’s
portals are open and God hears our prayers, and
that the light that enshrouded the Son of God will be
over us if we follow in his way.” R&H, 6/10/1890.

Then Said He Unto Me, Fear Not, Daniel.—
“And when the disciples heard it, they fell on
their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and
touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.”
Matthew 17:6
“And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead.
And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me,
Fear not; I am the first and the last.” Revelation 1:17.
Gabriel Encourages Daniel.—
“After Daniel had fallen at the majestic appearance of Christ, the angel Gabriel, obviously the speaker
in verse 11-13, laid his hand upon him to give him assurance and confidence. He told Daniel that he was a
man greatly beloved. Wonderful declaration! A member of the human family, one of the same race with us,
loved, not merely in the general sense in which God
loved the whole world when He gave His Son to die for
mankind, but loved as an individual, and that greatly!
Well might the prophet receive confidence from such a
declaration as that! He tells him, moreover, that he is
come for the purpose of an interview with him, and he
wishes him to bring his mind into a proper state to un-

“To Daniel doubtless it seemed that his prayer
was unheard, but God was working out the answer in a
way unknown to the prophet. Had he ceased to make
intercession at the end of one week, or at the end of
two weeks, the history of an entire people would have

393

GEMS FROM DANIEL
been changed. The promise is, ‘Before they call I
will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will
hear.’ God is often testing the strength of our desires
when he withholds an immediate answer to our prayer.” Haskell, SDP,158.

them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus
king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius.’ Ezra 4:4,
5.
“By false reports they aroused suspicion in minds
easily led to suspect. But for many years the powers
of evil were held in check, and the people in Judea
had liberty to continue their work.
“While Satan was striving to influence the highest powers in the kingdom of Medo-Persia to show
disfavor to God’s people, angels worked in behalf of
the exiles. The controversy was one in which all
heaven was interested. Through the prophet Daniel
we are given a glimpse of this mighty struggle between the forces of good and the forces of evil.
“For three weeks Gabriel wrestled with the
powers of darkness, seeking to counteract the influences at work on the mind of Cyrus; and before the
contest closed, Christ Himself came to Gabriel’s aid.
‘The prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one
and twenty days,’ Gabriel declares; ‘but, lo, Michael,
one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia.’ Daniel 10:13.
All that heaven could do in behalf of the people of
God was done. The victory was finally gained; the
forces of the enemy were held in check all the days
of Cyrus, and all the days of his son Cambyses, who
reigned about seven and a half years.
“This was a time of wonderful opportunity for the
Jews. The highest agencies of heaven were working on
the hearts of kings, and it was for the people of God
to labor with the utmost activity to carry out the
decree of Cyrus. They should have spared no effort to
restore the temple and its services, and to re-establish
themselves in their Judean homes. But in the day of
God’s power many proved unwilling. The opposition
of their enemies was strong and determined, and gradually the builders lost heart. Some could not forget the
scene at the laying of the cornerstone, when many had
given expression to their lack of confidence in the enterprise. And as the Samaritans grew more bold, many
of the Jews questioned whether, after all, the time had
come to rebuild. The feeling soon became widespread. Many of the workmen, discouraged and
disheartened, returned to their homes to take up the
ordinary pursuits of life.” Prophet & Kings, 571,572.

“The chief purpose of the introductory part of this
vision is to give us a knowledge of the interest of heaven in the affairs of men and nations. It shows that the
relation between the rulers of heaven and the children of God on earth is close and decided; that angel
messengers keep open the lines of communication. All
during the 21 days of Daniel’s prayer it was being answered by a mighty conflict in the unseen world between Gabriel and Satanic agencies. God has such
respect for the sincere prayer of an honest heart
that if necessary the mightest angel of His kingdom
will be sent to answer it, and if he fails, Michael the
first Prince, the Son of God, comes to assist.”
Bunch, BOD, 162.

DANIEL 10:13
But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days: but,
lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came
to help me; and I remained there with the
kings of Persia.
Prince.—
“The word comes from the Hebrew word ‘sar’
and means—a head person (of any rank or class): captain (that had rule), chief (captain), general, governor, keeper, lord, ([-task-]) master, prince (-ipal), ruler, steward.” E-sword.
The Prince of the Kingdom of Persia Withstood Me.-“Cyrus had issued his decree permitting the Jews
to return to Jerusalem to rebuild the temple, but now
Satan was putting forth desperate efforts to have that
work stopped. He had succeeded to a large degree in
bringing Cyrus under his influence and the work in
Jerusalem was in jeopardy.” Thiele, OSID, 121.
“The prince of Persia was evidently an angelprince who identified him with the Persian Empire.
Because he opposed an angel of God for three weeks,
we conclude that he was an evil angel. …Our real
enemies are not ordinary people made of ‘flesh and
blood’ but are the ‘principalities’ and ‘powers,’ the
‘spiritual hosts of wickedness.’ Ephesians 6:12. Jesus
three times identified Satan as the ‘prince’ (KJV) or
‘ruler’ (RSV) of this present world. John 12:31;
14:30; 16:11.” Maxwell, 1GC, 260.

“[Daniel 10:12, 13 quoted.] By this we see that
heavenly agencies have to contend with hindrances
before the purpose of God is fulfilled in its time. The
king of Persia was controlled by the highest of all
evil angels. He refused, as did Pharaoh, to obey the
word of the Lord. Gabriel declared, He withstood me
twenty-one days by his representations against the
Jews. But Michael came to his help, and then he remained with the kings of Persia, holding the powers in
check, giving right counsel against evil counsel. Good
and evil angels are taking a part in the planning of God
in His earthly kingdom. It is God’s purpose to carry

“Then the people of the land [the Samaritans]
weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building, and hired counselors against

394

DANIEL 10
forward His work in correct lines, in ways that will
advance His glory. But Satan is ever trying to counterwork God’s purpose. Only by humbling themselves before God can God’s servants advance His
work. Never are they to depend on their own efforts or
on outward display for success.
“We have before us in the Word of God instances
of heavenly agencies working on the minds of kings
and rulers, while at the same time satanic agencies
were also at work on their minds. No human eloquence, in strongly set forth human opinions, can
change the working of satanic agencies. Satan seeks
continually to block the way, so that the truth shall be
bound about by human devising; and those who have
light and knowledge are in the greatest danger unless
they constantly consecrate themselves to God, humiliating self, and realizing the peril of the times.
“Heavenly beings are appointed to answer the
prayers of those who are working unselfishly for the
interests of the cause of God. The very highest angels
in the heavenly courts are appointed to work out the
prayers which ascend to God for the advancement of
the cause of God. Each angel has his particular post
of duty, which he is not permitted to leave for any
other place. If he should leave, the powers of darkness would gain an advantage....
“Day by day the conflict between good and evil is
going on. Why is it that those who have had many
opportunities and advantages do not realize the intensity of this work? They should be intelligent in regard to
this. God is the Ruler. By His supreme power He
holds in check and controls earthly potentates.
Through His agencies He does the work which was
ordained before the foundation of the world.
“As a people we do not understand as we should
the great conflict going on between invisible agencies,
the controversy between loyal and disloyal angels.
Evil angels are constantly at work, planning their
line of attack, controlling as commanders, kings,
and rulers, the disloyal human forces.... I call upon
the ministers of Christ to press home upon the understanding of all who come within the reach of their
voice, the truth of the ministration of angels. Do not
indulge in fanciful speculations. The written Word is
our only safety. We must pray as did Daniel, that we
may be guarded by heavenly intelligences. As ministering spirits angels are sent forth to minister to those
who shall be heirs of salvation. Pray, my brethren,
pray as you have never prayed before. We are not prepared for the Lord’s coming. We need to make thorough work for eternity.” 4BC, 1173.

briel was sent to affect the heart of the Persian king.
The monarch had resisted the impressions of the
Spirit of God during the three weeks while Daniel
was fasting and praying, but heaven’s Prince, the
Archangel, Michael, was sent to turn the heart of the
stubborn king to take some decided action to answer
the prayer of Daniel.” Sanctified Life, 51.
“How often the prayers of God’s people are heard
while as yet there is no apparent answer! It was even
so in this case with Daniel. The angel told him that
from the first day he set his heart to understand, his
words were heard. Yet Daniel continued to afflict his
soul with fasting, and to wrestle with God for three full
weeks, unaware that any respect had been paid to his
petition. But why was the delay? The king of Persia
withstood the angel. The answer to Daniel’s prayer
involved some action on the part of that king. This
action he must be influenced to perform. It doubtless
pertained to the work which he was to do, and had already begun to do, in behalf of the temple at Jerusalem
and the Jews, his decree for the building of that temple
being the first of the series which finally constituted
that notable commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, at the going forth of which the great prophetic
period of 2300 days was to begin. The angel was dispatched to influence him to go forward in accordance
with the divine will.
“How little do we realize what is going on in
the unseen world in relation to human affairs! Here
the curtain is for a moment lifted, and we catch a
glimpse of the movements within. Daniel prays. The
Creator of the universe hears. The command is issued
to Gabriel to go to his relief. But the king of Persia
must act before Daniel’s prayer is answered, and the
angel hastens to the Persian king. Satan no doubt musters his forces to oppose. They meet in the royal palace
of Persia. All the motives of selfish interest and worldly policy which Satan can play upon, he doubtless uses
to the best advantage to influence the king against
compliance with God’s will, while Gabriel brings to
bear his influence in the other direction. The king
struggles between conflicting emotions. He hesitates;
he delays. Day after day passes away, yet Daniel prays
on. The king still refuses to yield to the influence of
the angel. Three weeks expire, and lo, a mightier than
Gabriel joins him in the palace of the king, and then
they come to Daniel to acquaint him with progress of
events. From the first, said Gabriel, your prayer was
heard; but during these three weeks which you have
devoted to prayer and fasting, the king of Persia has
resisted my influence and prevented my coming.
“Such was the effect of prayer. God has erected
no barriers between Himself and His people since Daniel’s time. It is still their privilege to offer up prayer as
fervent and effectual as his, and, like Jacob, to have
power with God, and to prevail.” Smith, DR, 228,229.

“Although Satan and Christ sought to influence
the mind of the king, neither could force him. God
displayed great condescension on His part to allow
Himself to be ‘withstood.’! Pfandl, DTSOB, 108.
Gabriel Delayed by Prince of Kingdom of Persia.—
“In answer to that fervent petition the angel Ga-

Michael.—

395

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Who was Michael, who here came to Gabriel’s
assistance? The term signifies, ‘He who is like God,’
and the Scriptures clearly show that Christ is the one
who bears this name. Jude (verse 9) declares that
Michael is the Archangel. This word signifies ‘head,
or chief, angel,’ and in our text Gabriel calls Him ‘one
[or, as the margin reads, ‘the first’] of the chief princes.’ There can be but one archangel, and hence it is
manifestly improper to use the word in the plural as
some do. The Scriptures never so use it. In 1 Thessalonians 4:16, Paul states that when the Lord appears
the second time to raise the dead, the voice of the
archangel is heard. Whose voice is heard when the
dead are raised?—The voice of the Son of God. (John
5: 28.) Taken together, these scriptures prove that the
dead are called from their graves by the voice of the
Son of God, that the voice which is then heard is the
voice of the Archangel, proving that the Archangel is
the Son of God, and that the Archangel is called Michael, from which it follows that Michael is the Son of
God. In the last verse of Daniel 10, He is called ‘your
Prince,’ and in the first of Daniel 12, ‘the great Prince
which standeth for the children of thy people,’ expressions which can appropriately be applied to Christ,
but to no other being.” Smith, DR,229.

swer our prayers, just as they were sent to answer Daniel’s prayers long ago.” Maxwell, 1GC, 264,265.
“Wherever found, all the Michael passages in the
Bible have this characteristic: they involve conflict,
and Michael is portrayed as the leader in the battle on
the side of God. Thus the pictures of Michael in Daniel 10 and 12 make a kind of envelope around the
prophecy of Daniel 11.” Shea, DARG, 238.
Michael Came to Help.—
“Gabriel was sent to affect the heart of the Persian
king. The monarch had resisted the impressions of the
Spirit of God during the three weeks while Daniel was
fasting and praying, but heaven’s Prince, the Archangel, Michael, was sent to turn the heart of the stubborn king to take some decided action to answer the
prayer of Daniel.” Sanctified Life, 51.
“Finally our Lord Jesus, referred to here as ‘Michael,’ the first of the princes (Daniel 10, 13, margin),
the Head of the angelic hosts, ‘the Archangel’ (Jude 9)the angels are said to be ‘His angels,’ Rev. 12:7 ‘came
to help.’ Thus this prophecy commences with the difficulties the people of God encountered from Satanic
sources, difficulties so great that our Lord Himself
came to the rescue and took personal charge of the
situation. The prophecy also closes with the greater
distresses God’s people will surely encounter in the
closing scenes, distresses so great that again the Lord
will come to the rescue and take personal charge of
the situation—He will deliver His people from imminent peril (Daniel 12: 1).” Were, KONAJ, 98.

“Michael means ‘like unto God’ and He is
therefore Christ, the Son of God who alone is in ‘the
image of the invisible God’ and is ‘the express image of His person.’ Gabriel calls Him ‘one of the
chief princes,’ or ‘the first prince.’ (Margin). ‘Michael
your prince’ (verse 21), and kingdom of heaven but
Michael is the first and greatest. He is called ‘the archangel’ in Jude 9, which indicates that He is the Commander and Captain of the angelic host, which position is occupied by Christ, the Son of God.” Bunch,
BOD, 160,161.

Heaven Affects Human History on Earth.—
“That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and
shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy
foundation shall be laid.” Isaiah 44:28.
“Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia,
that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah
might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit of
Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation
throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing,
saying, 2 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The LORD
God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the
earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house
at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 3 Who is there
among you of all his people? his God be with him, and
let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build
the house of the LORD God of Israel, (he is the God,)
which is in Jerusalem.” Ezra 1:1-3.

“The vision begins with a revelation of Jesus in
His glory. It ends with a revelation about Jesus at the
second coming. The history (of the world) here presented begins and ends with the Lord of history. Once
more we are reminded that God cares, that He is in
control.
“…When the angel in Daniel 10:21 calls Michael
‘your prince,’ he means that Jesus is our Prince. And
when in Daniel 12:1 he call Michael ‘the great prince
who has charge of your people,’ he is reminding us
that the Son of God Himself has the affairs of His
church in hand.
“Even this isn’t all. If Jesus is the chief Angel,
the General of heaven’s armies, He is in command
of heaven’s countless angels, some millions of whom
Daniel observed assembling in the heavenly sanctuary
at the beginning of the pre-advent judgment. Daniel
7:9,10. Hebrews 1:4 tells us that the good angels are
‘ministering spirits sent forth to serve, for the sake of
those who are to obtain salvation.’ This is good news.
To think that powerful, friendly angels are sent to an-

“In Ezra 1:2,3 we have the amazing statement of
Cyrus, a pagan king. This is amazing to have come
from a Persian king, because the Persians were Fire
and Sun worshippers and were opposed to the use of
buildings in worship. Yet here is a Persian king giving
a decree to restore the temple, for the worship of ‘the

396

DANIEL 10
Lord God of heaven.’ How could this be? Prophecy is
the answer!
“Cyrus was shown his own name in the prophecy
of Isaiah and the work he would accomplish in the
overthrow of Babylon, and that he would lay the
‘foundation of the temple.’” Burnside, DPUF, 65.

the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are
scattered abroad, greeting. My brethren….’ James
1:1,2. “Here is the patience of the saints: Here are
they that keep the commandments of God, and the
faith of Jesus.’ Revelation 14:12.” PJ.
The Vision is For Many Days.—
“The expression, ‘yet the vision is for many
days,’ reaching far into the future, and embracing what
should befall the people of God even in the latter
days, shows conclusively that the 2300 days given in
that vision cannot mean literal days, but must be days
of years. (See comments on Daniel 9: 25-27.)” Smith,
DR, 229,230.

“Daniel possesses the ability—so characteristic of
the ancients but rare in modern man—to perceive history not merely as conditioned by material and economic forces. Rather, he detects in and through the
processes of cause and effect a counterplay of celestial and human forces.
“Thus, in chapter 10 the controversy of Michael
and Gabriel with princes of Persia and Greece are a
counterpart of the experiences of God’s people with
dominant contemporary powers on earth. The archetypal contest in heaven assures Daniel and his contemporaries that God and celestial beings are vitally
interested in their present vicissitudes. The intervention of heavenly powers is not merely limited to the
end of the age!
“Behind the struggles on earth Daniel perceives a
conflict transpiring on a cosmic level in heaven. We
agree with Gammie that the book of Daniel “teaches
not only that there are dual planes, heaven and earth,
but that the events on one plane may affect significantly what takes place on the other.” BRI, 2SOD,
67.

DANIEL 10:15-17
And when he had spoken such words
unto me, I set my face toward the ground,
and I became dumb.
And, behold, one like the similitude of
the sons of men touched my lips: then I
opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by
the vision my sorrows are turned upon me,
and I have retained no strength.
For how can the servant of this my
lord talk with this my lord? for as for me,
straightway there remained no strength in
me, neither is there breath left in me.

DANIEL 10:14
Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the
latter days: for yet the vision is for many
days.

Daniel Becomes Dumb, Has No Strength.—
“Daniel fell to the ground, and the breath went
from his body. This was his condition when in vision,
He was unable to speak until Christ touched his lips.
Then he spoke to Gabriel, who stood by his side to
strengthen him, and to explain to him the history of the
latter days. God has had many prophets. The effect of
the Spirit upon a human being when in vision is unexplainable. There is an overpowering presence which
so overcomes the physical being that it has no
strength to act of itself. The breath leaves the body,
and the voice of God speaks through the human
instrument. The eyes remain open, as Balaam described his condition, but the person sees things
outside the world. He is often taken far beyond the
bounds of earth as was the case of Ezekiel, John,
and Paul. Earth’s attraction is broken, and with an
angel guide the prophet visits other places, or beholds
the future, reading there the history of men and nations.” Haskell, SDP, 158,159.

I am Come to Make Thee Understand.—
“The great truths revealed by the world’s Redeemer are for those who search for truth as for hid
treasures. Daniel was an aged man. His life had been
passed amid the fascinations of a heathen court, his
mind cumbered with the affairs of a great empire. Yet
he turns aside from all these to afflict his soul before
God, and seek a knowledge of the purposes of the Most
High. And in response to his supplications, light
from the heavenly courts was communicated for
those who should live in the latter days. With what
earnestness, then, should we seek God, that He may
open our understanding to comprehend the truths
brought to us from heaven.” Sanctified Life, 50.
Thy People in the Latter Days.—
“The following verses show that Daniel’s people
in the latter days are Spiritual Israel, commandmentkeeping Christians. ‘And if ye be Christ’s, then are
ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.’ Galatians 3:29. ‘James, a servant of God and of

One Like the Similitude of the Sons of Men.-“[Verses 15,16,19 quoted.] So great was the divine glory revealed to Daniel that he could not endure
the sight. Then the messenger of heaven veiled the

397

GEMS FROM DANIEL
in the presence of God,’ show that he holds a position
of high honor in the heavenly courts. When he came
with a message to Daniel, he said, ‘There is none
that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael
[Christ] your Prince.’ Daniel 10:21. Of Gabriel the
Saviour speaks in the Revelation, saying that ‘He sent
and signified it by His angel unto His servant John.’
Revelation 1:1. And to John the angel declared, ‘I am
a fellow servant with thee and with thy brethren the
prophets.’ Rev. 22:9, R. V. Wonderful thought—that
the angel who stands next in honor to the Son of
God is the one chosen to open the purposes of God
to sinful men.” Desire of Ages, 99

brightness of his presence and appeared to the
prophet as ‘one like the similitude of the sons of
men’ (verse 16). By his divine power he strengthened
this man of integrity and of faith, to hear the message
sent to him from God.
“Daniel was a devoted servant of the Most High.
His long life was filled up with noble deeds of service
for his Master. His purity of character and unwavering
fidelity are equaled only by his humility of heart and
his contrition before God. We repeat, The life of Daniel is an inspired illustration of true sanctification.”
Sanctified Life, 52.
Touched My Lips.—
“The live coal is symbolical of purification, and it
also represents the potency of the efforts of God’s true
servants. To those who make so full a consecration
that the Lord can place His touch upon their lips,
the word is spoken, Go forth into the harvest-field. I
will co-operate with you.” Gospel Workers, 23.

Be Strong, Yea, Be Strong.—
“The Lord wants to impart to us increased light.
He desires that we shall have distinct revealings of his
glory; that ministers and people shall become strong in
his strength. When the angel was about to unfold to
Daniel the intensely interesting prophecies to be recorded for us who are to witness their fulfillment, the
angel said, ‘Be strong, yea, be strong.’ We are to
receive the very same glory that was revealed to
Daniel, because it is for God’s people in these last
days, that they may give the trumpet a certain sound.
God help us to work unitedly and as we never have
worked before, is my prayer.” R&H, 12/24/1889.

By the Vision My Sorrows Are Turned Upon Me.—
“One of the most marked characteristics manifested by Daniel was the tender solicitude he felt for
his people. Having come now clearly to comprehend
that the vision portended long ages of oppression
and suffering for the church, he was so affected by
the view that his strength departed from him, his
breath ceased, and the power of speech was gone.
The vision of verse 16 doubtless refers to the former
vision of Daniel 8.” Smith, DR, 230.

“Men of God are men of strength and courage.
When earthly prospects would overwhelm them they
look up to Heaven, and in God’s strength they go forward in peace and courage.” Thiele, OSID, 124.

There Remained No Strength in Me.—
“Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my
comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I
retained no strength.” Daniel10:8.

DANIEL 10:20
Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore
I come unto thee? and now will I return to
fight with the prince of Persia: and when I
am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall
come.

“And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for
thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness.
Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.” 2
Cor. 12:9.

Divine Intervention in International Politics.—
“For three weeks the king of Persia had been influenced by demonic powers. It was not until Michael,
the pre-existent Son of God, came to his aid that Gabriel was able to visit Daniel. Now, Gabriel said that as
soon as he had delivered his full message he would
return to the king, thus helping to carry out God’s purpose in the rebuilding of Jerusalem.” Anderson, UDP,
129.

DANIEL 10:18,19
Then there came again and touched me
one like the appearance of a man, and he
strengthened me,
And said, O man greatly beloved, fear
not: peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, be
strong. And when he had spoken unto me, I
was strengthened, and said, Let my lord
speak; for thou hast strengthened me.

“The prophet is at length strengthened to hear in
full the communication which the angel has to make.
Gabriel says, ‘Knowest thou wherefore I come unto
thee?’ Do you understand my purpose so that you will
no more fear? He then announced his intention to return, as soon as his communication was complete, to
fight with the king of Persia. The word, im, signifying

One Like the Appearance of a Man.—
“The words of the angel, ‘I am Gabriel, that stand

398

DANIEL 10
‘with,’ is, in the Septuagint, meta, and signifies, not
‘against,’ but ‘in common with, alongside of;’ that
is, the angel of God would stand on the side of the
Persian kingdom as long as it was in the providence
of God that that kingdom should continue. ‘And
when I am gone forth,’ continued Gabriel, ‘lo, the
prince of Grecia shall come.’ That is, when he withdraws his support from that kingdom, and the providence of God operates in behalf of another kingdom,
the prince of Grecia shall come, and the Persian monarchy shall be overthrown.” Smith, DR, 230,231.

“God has revealed in His law the principles that
underlie all true prosperity both of nations and of
individuals. ‘This is your wisdom and your understanding,’ Moses declared to the Israelites of the law of
God. ‘It is not a vain thing for you; because it is your
life.’ Deut. 4:6; 32:47. The blessings thus assured to
Israel are, on the same conditions and in the same degree, assured to every nation and every individual
under the broad heavens.
“The power exercised by every ruler on the
earth is Heaven-imparted; and upon his use of the
power thus bestowed, his success depends. To each the
word of the divine Watcher is, ‘I girded thee, though
thou hast not known Me.’ Isaiah 45:5. And to each the
words spoken to Nebuchadnezzar of old are the lesson
of life: ‘Break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if it
may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.’ Dan. 4:27.
“To understand these things—to understand that
‘righteousness exalteth a nation;’ that ‘the throne is
established by righteousness’ and ‘upholden by mercy’
(Prov. 14:34; 16:12; 20:28); to recognize the outworking of these principles in the manifestation of His power who ‘removeth kings, and setteth up kings’ (Dan.
2:21)—this is to understand the philosophy of history.
“In the word of God only is this clearly set forth.
Here it is shown that the strength of nations, as of individuals, is not found in the opportunities or facilities
that appear to make them invincible; it is not found in
their boasted greatness. It is measured by the fidelity
with which they fulfill God’s purpose….
“Every nation that has come upon the stage of action has been permitted to occupy its place on the earth,
that it might be seen whether it would fulfill the purpose of ‘the Watcher and the Holy One.’ Prophecy has
traced the rise and fall of the world’s great empires—
Babylon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome. With each
of these, as with nations of less power, history repeated
itself. Each had its period of test, each failed, its glory
faded, its power departed, and its place was occupied
by another.
“While the nations rejected God’s principles, and
in this rejection wrought their own ruin, it was still
manifest that the divine, overruling purpose was working through all their movements.” Education, 173-177.

“Persia is an earthly kingdom, apparently under
the charge of human beings. On the human level, Persia has its own king and various rulers of rank and authority. But Daniel’s insight brings to view a behindthe-scenes ‘prince of the kingdom of Persia.’ This is
obviously not a human prince, since the angel Gabriel
is himself engaged in personal warfare with this being.
Verse twenty informs us that not only is there a demonic prince over Persia, but also the angel mentions ‘the
prince of Grecia.’ We can only conclude that Satan is
running a very highly organized operation. It seems
that he has divided up the world with all its various
human kingdoms, appointing demons to focus their
deceptive and destructive energies on territories he has
delegated to them. One demon-prince obviously is
responsible for the kingdom of Persia. Another is responsible for Grecia.” Light Bearers, UOD-12.
“In the annals of human history the growth of nations, the rise and fall of empires, appear as dependent
on the will and prowess of man. The shaping of events
seems, to a great degree, to be determined by his power, ambition, or caprice. But in the word of God the
curtain is drawn aside, and we behold, behind, above,
and through all the play and counterplay of human interests and power and passions, the agencies of the allmerciful One, silently, patiently working out the counsels of His own will.
“The Bible reveals the true philosophy of history.
In those words of matchless beauty and tenderness
spoken by the apostle Paul to the sages of Athens is set
forth God’s purpose in the creation and distribution
of races and nations: He ‘hath made of one blood all
nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth,
and hath determined the times before appointed, and
the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek the
Lord, if haply they might feel after Him, and find
Him.’ Acts 17:26, 27. God declares that whosoever
will may come ‘into the bond of the covenant.’ Ezekiel 20:37. In the creation it was His purpose that the
earth be inhabited by beings whose existence should be
a blessing to themselves and to one another, and an
honor to their Creator. All who will may identify
themselves with this purpose. Of them it is spoken,
‘This people have I formed for Myself; they shall show
forth My praise.’ Isaiah 43:21.

DANIEL 10:21
But I will shew thee that which is noted
in the scripture of truth: and there is none
that holdeth with me in these things, but
Michael your prince.
I Will Shew Thee That In the Scripture of Truth.—
“Daniel received not only the light and truth
which he and his people most needed, but a view of the
great events of the future, even to the advent of the
world’s Redeemer. Those who claim to be sanctified,

399

GEMS FROM DANIEL
while they have no desire to search the Scriptures or to
wrestle with God in prayer for a clearer understanding
of Bible truth, know not what true sanctification is.
“Daniel talked with God. Heaven was opened before him. But the high honors granted him were the
result of humiliation and earnest seeking. All who
believe with the heart the word of God will hunger and
thirst for a knowledge of His will. God is the author of
truth. He enlightens the darkened understanding
and gives to the human mind power to grasp and
comprehend the truths which He has revealed.”
Sanctified Life, 48,49.

him to Heaven.
“As Christ and the angels approached the grave,
Satan and his angels appeared at the grave, and were
guarding the body of Moses, lest it should be removed.
As Christ and his angels drew nigh, Satan resisted their
approach, but was compelled, by the glory and power
of Christ and his angels, to fall back. Satan claimed the
body of Moses, because of his one transgression; but
Christ meekly referred him to his Father, saying, ‘The
Lord rebuke thee.’ Christ told Satan that he knew
Moses had humbly repented of this one wrong, that
no stain rested upon his character, and that his
name in the heavenly book of records stood untarnished. Then Christ resurrected the body of Moses,
which Satan had claimed.” Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 1,
342.

Michael your Prince.—
“Satan exulted that he had succeeded in causing
Moses to sin against God. For this transgression, Moses came under the dominion of death. If he had continued faithful, and his life had not been marred with
that one transgression, in failing to give to God the
glory of bringing water from the rock, he would have
entered the promised land, and would have been translated to Heaven without seeing death. Michael, or
Christ, with the angels that buried Moses, came
down from Heaven, after he had remained in the
grave a short time, and resurrected him, and took

“Gabriel then announced that none had an understanding with him in the matters he was about to communicate except Michael the Prince. After he had
made them known to Daniel, there were four beings
in the universe who possessed a knowledge of these
important truths—Daniel, Gabriel, Christ, and
God. Four links appear in this chain of witnesses—the
first, Daniel, a member of the human family; the last,
Jehovah, the God of all!” Smith, DR, 231.

400

CHAPTER ELEVEN

DANIEL: CHAPTER ELEVEN
1 Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I, stood to
confirm and to strengthen him.
2 And now will I shew thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand
up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer
than they all: and by his strength through his riches he shall stir
up all against the realm of Grecia.
3 And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great
dominion, and do according to his will.
4 And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken,
and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to
his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for
his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside those.
5 And the king of the south shall be strong, and one of his
princes; and he shall be strong above him, and have dominion;
his dominion shall be a great dominion.
6 And in the end of years they shall join themselves together;
for the king's daughter of the south shall come to the king of the
north to make an agreement: but she shall not retain the power
of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be
given up, and they that brought her, and he that begat her, and
he that strengthened her in these times.
7 But out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his estate, which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the
fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them, and
shall prevail:
8 And shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods, with their
princes, and with their precious vessels of silver and of gold; and
he shall continue more years than the king of the north.
9 So the king of the south shall come into his kingdom, and
shall return into his own land.
10 But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of great forces: and one shall certainly come, and overflow,
and pass through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, even to
his fortress.
11 And the king of the south shall be moved with choler, and
shall come forth and fight with him, even with the king of the
north: and he shall set forth a great multitude; but the multitude
shall be given into his hand.
12 And when he hath taken away the multitude, his heart shall
be lifted up; and he shall cast down many ten thousands: but he
shall not be strengthened by it.
13 For the king of the north shall return, and shall set forth a
multitude greater than the former, and shall certainly come after
certain years with a great army and with much riches.
14 And in those times there shall many stand up against the
king of the south: also the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall fall.
15 So the king of the north shall come, and cast up a mount,
and take the most fenced cities: and the arms of the south shall
not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shall there be
any strength to withstand.
16 But he that cometh against him shall do according to his
own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall stand in
the glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.
17 He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his
whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shall he do: and
he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting her: but she
shall not stand on his side, neither be for him.
18 After this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and shall take
many: but a prince for his own behalf shall cause the reproach
offered by him to cease; without his own reproach he shall cause
it to turn upon him.
19 Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land:
but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found.
20 Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed,
neither in anger, nor in battle.
21 And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they

shall not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall come in
peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.
22 And with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from
before him, and shall be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant.
23 And after the league made with him he shall work deceitfully: for he shall come up, and shall become strong with a small
people.
24 He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the
province; and he shall do that which his fathers have not done,
nor his fathers' fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey,
and spoil, and riches: yea, and he shall forecast his devices
against the strong holds, even for a time.
25 And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the
king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south
shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army;
but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast devices against him.
26 Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy
him, and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall down slain.
27 And both of these kings' hearts shall be to do mischief, and
they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet
the end shall be at the time appointed.
28 Then shall he return into his land with great riches; and his
heart shall be against the holy covenant; and he shall do exploits,
and return to his own land.
29 At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the
south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.
30 For the ships of Chittim shall come against him: therefore
he shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the
holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have
intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.
31 And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the
sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and
they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate.
32 And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know their God shall be
strong, and do exploits.
33 And they that understand among the people shall instruct
many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity,
and by spoil, many days.
34 Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little
help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.
35 And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them,
and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the
end: because it is yet for a time appointed.
36 And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak
marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till
the indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined shall
be done.
37 Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire
of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself
above all.
38 But in his estate shall he honour the God of forces: and a
god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and
silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.
39 Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange
god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory: and he
shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for
gain.
40 And at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at
him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many
ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow
and pass over.
41 He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand,
even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.

401

GEMS FROM DANIEL
42 He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and
the land of Egypt shall not escape.
43 But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of
silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans
and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.
44 But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble

him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and
utterly to make away many.
45 And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the
seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end,
and none shall help him.

INTRODUCTION

“Medo-Persia was raised up to punish wicked
Babylon and to fulfill God’s purpose in the return
of His people from captivity and in the restoration
of Jerusalem, the temple, and its services. Gabriel,
as the ambassador of the heavenly kingdom, entered
the Persian court to strengthen and confirm the kings
of Persia that they might fulfill the divine purpose.
Prophecy had predicted and God had purposed that the
decree should be issued and the restoration accomplished through the kings of Persia. But Satan or one
of his mighty princes was also in the Persian court to
thwart the efforts of Gabriel. ‘I likewise, from the first
year of Darius the Mede, was standing that he might be
confirmed and strengthened.’—Vulgate. This, therefore, includes Cyrus and the other kings of Persia who
had a part in fulfilling God’s purpose, and is in agreement with Dan. 10:13. Gabriel ‘remained there with
the Kings of Persia.’” Bunch, BOD, 162.

“The language of Daniel 11 is considered to be
‘literal’ in that it isn’t symbolic in the same way that
the language of chapters 2, 7, and 8 is. There are no
multi-element images, no beasts or horns. Just the
same, its language is far from easy. It is cryptic, almost like a code. Each sentence condenses quantities
of information. Many metaphors are employed. Many
pronouns do not seem, at first, to have clear antecedents.
“…We have learned that the great prophetic panoramas of Daniel 2, 7, 8, and 9 not only parallel but
also augment each other. We will expect Daniel 11
also to introduce new material while at the same
time running parallel to the other visions.” Maxwell, 1GC, 269,271.
“Chapter 11 consists of further prophetic information given to Daniel by the angel Gabriel, based on
the earlier vision given in chapter 8. Daniel 8 provides the symbols, and Daniel 11 provides their literal interpretation. ... Daniel 11 is the closest and
most direct explanation of the symbolic prophecy of
Daniel 8.” Shea, DARG, 140, 149..

DANIEL 11:2
And now will I shew thee the truth.
Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings
in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer
than they all: and by his strength through
his riches he shall stir up all against the
realm of Grecia.

DANIEL 11:1
Also I in the first year of Darius the
Mede, even I, stood to confirm and to
strengthen him.

Now.—
“Darius was dead, and Cyrus was now reigning.” DR, Smith, 133.

Also I in the First Year of Darius the Mede, Stood.—
“The first year of Darius the Mede, 538 BC, is not
the year when Gabriel came to Daniel with the revelations of this chapter, for that was in the third year of
Cyrus (Daniel 10:1), 536, but Gabriel is here saying
that in the first year of Darius he was with him, to
confirm and strengthen him.” Thiele, OSID, 126.

And Now Will I Shew Thee.—
“We now enter upon a prophecy of future events,
clothed not in figures and symbols, as in the visions of
Daniel 2, 7, and 8, but given mostly in plain language.
Many of the signal events of the world’s history from
the days of Daniel to the end of the world, are here
brought to view. This prophecy, as Thomas Newton
says, may not improperly be said to be a comment
on and explanation of Daniel 8, a statement showing
how clearly he perceived the connection between that
vision and rest of the book of Daniel. [Thomas Newton, Dissertations on the Prophecies, Vol. I, p.335.]”
Smith, DR, 233.

Darius the Mede.—
“The Medo-Persian history is briefly spanned in
two verses. Upon the overthrow of Babylon in 538
BC, Darius the Mede ascended the throne of universal
rule.” Hiddekel, 21.
“The reign of Darius was honored of God. To
him was sent the angel Gabriel, ‘to confirm and to
strengthen him.’ Daniel 11:1.” Prophets & Kings, 556.

There Shall Stand Up Yet Three Kings.—
“The angel Gabriel, after stating that he had stood
in the first year of Darius to confirm and strengthen
him, turns his attention to the future. Darius was dead,

402

DANIEL 11
and Cyrus was now reigning. Three kings would yet
stand up, or reign, in Persia, doubtless the immediate successors of Cyrus. These were Cambyses
[530-522], son of Cyrus; Smerdis [522 BC], an impostor; and Darius Hystaspes [522-486 BC].” Smith,
DR, 233.

“During the reign of Cambyses the work on the
temple progressed slowly. And during the reign of the
false Smerdis (called Artaxerxes in Ezra 4:7) the Samaritans induced the unscrupulous impostor to issue
a decree forbidding the Jews to rebuild their temple and
city.” Prophets & Kings, 572, 573.

MEDO-PERSIA
Daniel 8
Daniel 11
Ram with two horns
3 kings yet to stand up
Higher horn came up last
4th king richer than a
Pushed west, north, south. Stirs up all against Grecia.
Ram is Medo-Persia
Kings stand up in Persia
Thiele, OSID, 137.

“Interestingly enough, Adventist theologian
Jacques Doukhan presents an alternative view on the
chronology of the four remaining Persian kings. He
suggests that the chronology of these four kings
should omit the second king, False Smerdis the
Usurper, and include the successor of Xerxes, i.e., Artaxerxes, for the following reasons: (1) Smerdis
reigned less than one year; (2) he was Median, not Persian, and the prophecy explicitly states that these kings
would be from ‘Persia,’ not Media; (3) his existence
may have been a rumor concocted by Darius to justify
taking the throne; (4) Herodotus, an authoritative ancient Greek historian, never mentioned False Smerdis
in any of his commentaries; and (5) other ‘numerous
commentators’ beside Herodotus ‘overlook Smerdis.’
[Doukhan, Daniel, pp. 167,180.] Edwin Thiele, in his
famous work, The Mysterious Numbers of the Hebrew
Kings, also excluded False Smerdis the Usurper from
his chronology of the Persian kings. [pp. 227-228].
“Doukhan therefore re-adjusts the chronology of
these four Persian kings to exclude Smerdis and substitute Artaxerxes, the successor of Esther’s Xerxes. He
also offers further justification for this inclusion of
Artaxerxes because he actually completed the decree to
rebuild and restore Jerusalem, providing a starting
point to begin both the 70-weeks’ and 2,300-day
prophecies of Daniel 8:14 and Daniel 9:20-27. Although Xerxes did in fact wage extensive warfare
against Greece, Artaxerxes was also a very wealthy and
powerful king who meddled in Greek affairs, and was
seen by many as the harshest of all the Persian kings.”
Swearingen, TOOTN, 96,97.

Persian King #1-Cambyses—
“Cambyses, his [Cyrus’s] son, reigned nearly
eight years, but most of his time was spent in useless
and expensive warfare in Egypt and Ethiopia. Cambyses is the Ahasuerus of Ezra 4:5. To him the Samaritans wrote letters of complaint against the Jews at Jerusalem. But Cambyses was too busy with his foreign
wars to give heed to this matter, and hence no action
was taken either for or against the work at Jerusalem.
The Jews were still at liberty to leave Babylon, but
such a time of national quiet was not conducive to
great activity on their part, and they remained where
they were. The time came when they wished with all
their hearts that they had gone out during those
peaceful years.” Haskell, SDP, 165.
“The Jews did not take full advantage of the favorable period. Selfishness and lack of faith hindered
the speedy restoration of the temple.” Hiddekel, 22.
—King #2—The False Smerdis.—
“Cambyses was slain while in Egypt; and before
the report was circulated throughout the Medo-Persian
empire, an impostor took the throne which belonged to
Smerdis, the son of Cambyses. The impostor, known
in history as Pseudo-Smerdis (the false Smerdis), is
the Artaxerxes of Ezra 4:7. He reigned but seven
months, but that gave him time to consider complaints
from the Samaritans, and the tribes about Jerusalem,
and to issue a commandment for the building of Jerusalem to cease until further word should come from the
throne. This letter of the false Smerdis is found in Ezra
4:18-22. This is the only act which the divine historian
mentions in the life of this Persian monarch.
“Although very little is said about him, God knew
every move he made. This is seen as we follow the
history of the decrees. As soon as the Jews at Jerusalem heard the reading of the letter from the false
Smerdis, all work ceased. ‘For,’ reasoned they, ‘how
can we go on?’ After they ceased to build, God raised
up two prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, and from these
we gain a knowledge of how matters then went in Jerusalem.” Haskell, SDP, 165,166.

1
2
3
4
5

NEXT FIVE KINGS OF PERSIA
Cambyses
530-522 BC
False Smerdis
522 BC
Darius II (issues 2nd decree)
522-486 BC
Xerxes (of Esther)
486-465 BC
Artaxerxes (issues 3rd decree) 465-423 BC

Persian King #3-Darius II, or Darius Hystaspes.—
“In the city of Babylon, six of the chief men of
the empire suspected that the reigning king was not the
rightful heir, and they banded themselves together to
find out. Forcing their way into the presence of
Smerdis, they recognized the impostor, and slew him,
and Darius, the chief of the band, was made king.
This is the man in history known as Darius Hystaspes,
and is Darius the Persian spoken of in Ezra 4:24.
“Gabriel still guarded the throne of the Persians,
and while the weak-hearted Jews left off building the

403

GEMS FROM DANIEL
temple because of a little opposition, God was bringing
a man to the throne who would carry forward the work
of Cyrus. Haggai and Zechariah gathered the people
together and urged them to resume the work of building, giving the word of the Lord that their poverty was
the direct result of their own refusal to build in the
face of difficulties. The Jews took up the burden, but
presently Tatnai and others, governors of tribes in Palestine, came to Jerusalem and warned the Jews to
cease. Haggai, Zechariah, Zerubbabel, and Jeshua
quoted the decree of Cyrus. Tatnai then wrote to Darius, expecting, of course, that he would put an end to
the work. Darius, however, caused a search to be
made, and found the decree of Cyrus, with all its particulars concerning the building, the sacrifices, and the
order for money for the same from the king’s treasury.
“Here is a manifestation of God’s goodness and
mercy. That which in the eyes of men looked like defeat was turned into a glorious victory. Darius issued
a decree which covered all that was contained in the
decree of Cyrus, and more also. Tatnai and the men
who had entered complaint were commanded to help
forward the work at Jerusalem by giving their own
money to bear the expense.” Haskell, SDP, 166, 167.

instruction of the prophets, every promise of Zechariah shall be theirs. If not, the history of the Jews
during the reign of the king who followed Darius,
will be repeated.” Haskell, SDP,170.
Persian King #4, Xerxes—Richer Than All.—
“The fourth king of Persia after Cyrus the Great
was noted for his wealth, and the great army he raised
against the Greeks. This king was Xerxes, who came
to the throne on the death of Darius, in the year 486
BC. Our interest lies in the record of his dealings with
the Jews, and to that history one entire book of the Bible is devoted. Xerxes is the Ahasuerus of Esther,
and the book of Esther is the record of the acts of this
king with reference to the people of God who were still
living in the kingdom of Babylon, over which Xerxes
was sole monarch.
“The Medo-Persian kingdom was at its height
during the reign of this king. He held in subjection
one hundred and twenty-seven provinces, extending
from India to Ethiopia. His capital was at Shushan,
in the province of Elam. Some estimate of the wealth
at the disposal of this ruler may be gained from the fact
that for six months the princes, rulers, and governors of
all the provinces, representing the power of the Persian
king in all parts of the realm, were entertained at the
royal palace; and that when this gathering was over, the
palace of Shushan was thrown open for a full week,
during which time all the people were feasted in the
gardens. There was drinking of wine and reveling. It
was similar to the time when Belshazzar feasted with a
thousand of his lords. The furnishings of the palace,
with its marble walls and floors, its rich curtains and
draperies of many colors, hanging by silver rings to the
lofty pillars, told of the gratification of pride. The beds
and couches were of gold and silver, and they drank
from wine cups of gold. Truly Medo-Persia was the
daughter of Babylon.” Haskell, SDP, 170,171

“For thirty-six years–think of it, over a quarter
of a century–Darius reigned, and Gabriel stood at his
right hand to keep his heart tender toward the chosen
people. The angels of heaven watched intently to see
Israel return and build Jerusalem. To the prophet
Zechariah, in the days of Darius, was given a wonderful view of the future history of the people of God.
Jerusalem was given an opportunity in those days to
build so as to become an everlasting city. Said one
angel to another in the hearing of Zechariah, ‘Run,
speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be
inhabited as towns without walls, for the multitude of
men and cattle therein.’ Instead of walls of stone, such
as Jerusalem and the cities of the world had hitherto
been accustomed to build, God promised to be a wall
of fire round about. ‘Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from
the land of the north... Deliver thyself, O Zion, that
dwellest with the daughter of Babylon….’
“Throughout all the world the glory of the Lord
should be seen upon Zion, daughter of the living God.
‘I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem: and JERUSALEM SHALL BE CALLED
A CITY OF TRUTH!’ ‘Rejoice greatly, O daughter
of Zion: shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy
King cometh unto thee.’” Haskell, SDP, 168,169.

He Shall Stir Up All Against the Realm of Grecia.—
“Xerxes “was determined to conquer the Greeks;
therefore he set about organizing a mighty army, which
Herodotus says numbered 5,283,220 men. Xerxes was
not content to stir up the East alone. He also enlisted the support of Carthage in the West. The Persian
king fought Greece successfully at the famous battle of
Thermopylae; but the mighty army was able to overrun
the country only when the three hundred brave Spartans who held the pass were betrayed by traitors.
Xerxes finally suffered disastrous defeat at the battle of
Salamis in the year 480 BC, and the Persian army made
its way back again to its own country.” Smith, DR,
233,234.

“Zechariah saw these things in the days of Darius,
king of Persia; and had the Jews come out of Babylon,
and followed where God would have led, such would
have been the history of the world. They heeded not
his voice, and after a lapse of nearly twenty-five hundred years, the people of today find themselves heirs to
exactly the same promises under precisely the same
conditions. If the church of God today follows the

“He truly stirred up ‘all.’ His army teemed with
contingents from forty nations—Persians sporting turbans, Assyrians wearing brass helmets, Colchians with
wooden hats, Thracians with fox-skin caps, Ethiopians
draped in leopard skins, and so on and on. Together

404

DANIEL 11
they marched, perhaps 300,000 of them, mostly on
foot, all the way from their homelands to the battles of
Salamis (480) and Plataea (479) in Greece—and to
complete defeat.” Maxwell, 1GC, 274.

“The angel of God had guarded Hadassah, and directed in her education. He had brought her to the
kingdom ‘for such a time as this.’ When there was no
man to represent his cause, Jehovah used a woman, and
she, a young woman. Her very beauty was consecrated
to the Lord, and he made use of that. God loves the
young people, as the history of the Jews certifies.
“Messengers were sent by post to carry the king’s
decree to every province in the vast empire. It was
sealed with the king’s signet, and the laws of the
Medes and Persians were unchangeable. On a set day
every Jew in the kingdom was to be put to death by the
sword; old, young, men, women, and little children,
none were excluded. Satan triumphed in the thought
that at last Israel was in his hand, and the cause of God
should fall. ‘The king and Haman,’ two of Satan’s
servants, ‘sat down to drink.’
“The city of Shushan first heard the decree, and
consternation filled the hearts of the Jews. There was
distress in every home. ‘The city of Shushan was perplexed.’ Scarcely one year from the date of the decree
and death would be their lot. There was seemingly no
way of escape. Years before they might have gone
up to Jerusalem, but now it was forever too late. A
bitter wail of agony reached heaven, and as those messengers of the king sped on, the cry grew louder. The
voices of the Jews at Shushan were strengthened by
sounds of mourning from thousands of Jews in all the
provinces.
“Esther, in the king’s palace was ignorant of the
decree, but Mordecai made known to her the universal
distress, and sent her a copy of the king’s command.
The crucial moment had come to her. Should she,
could she, be true to her God? The Hebrews of Shushan put on sackcloth, and for three days fasted for the
queen. Then she came forth in the strength of her God.
Queenly, beautiful, trusting, she stood in the inner
court over against the king’s house, awaiting the
recognition of the monarch of earth, to cross whose
will meant death. On one hand she saw death at the
hand of Xerxes; on the other, the approval of her God.
‘If I perish, I perish,’ she said, and God accepted her
sacrifice.
“God had prepared from afar for her deliverance.
The very act of kindness done years before by Mordecai wrought in the deliverance of his people. Who says
there is no record kept of man’s acts, or that man performs any deed of kindness unprompted by heavenly
beings? God used Esther to save his people; he also
used Mordecai.
“Haman, the one who proposed the decree, was
hung on a gallows built for Mordecai; Mordecai was
promoted to the position of chief counselor of Xerxes;
and a decree issued that on the day appointed for the
slaughter of the Jews, every Jew should bear arms and
defend himself against the Persians. And the fear of
the Jews fell upon all the people. Again God had defeated the schemes, not of men only, but of the archenemy. Truth triumphed in spite of the waywardness of

“Xerxes invaded Greece in 480 BC. Greece did
not retaliate for more than a century, but the Greeks
never forgot the humiliation that the Persians had visited upon their country. When finally they did come to
redress those wrongs, it was in direct response to what
the Persians had done to them so many years before.
The Greek retaliation took place under Alexander the
Great.” Shea, DARG, 240.
Xerxes and Esther.—
“The story of Vashti is a familiar one. Ahasuerus
commanded her to appear before his half-drunken
company, and she refused. Then she was set aside, and
a Jewish maiden, her nationality being unknown, became queen of the Persian kingdom. This was Hadassah, known as Esther. …She had lived always with a
cousin by the name of Mordecai, who treated her as his
own daughter.
“Mordecai sat at the king’s gate, and in time of a
conspiracy he reported the matter to the king; but there
were few occasions when he could mingle with those
in authority. Wickedness and injustice abounded, and
Mordecai refused to countenance such principles, and
would not bow before the haughty Haman, one of the
king’s counselors. This was pretense enough for the
enemies of the Jews to work upon, for they were now a
hated race throughout the empire. They had failed to
take advantage of the time of national favor, and
Persia had turned against them.
“For about forty years mercy had been extended to Israel, and that people had turned a deaf ear
to all entreaty. Forty years has often been called the
allotted time for a generation to settle its destiny
either for or against the truth. Moses was forty years
in the wilderness, unlearning the things of Egypt, and
being taught in the things of God; Israel wandered forty
years in the wilderness, when only eleven days were
necessary to make the journey from the Red Sea to the
border of Canaan; forty days Christ endured severe
temptation as a figure of the time before the destruction
of Jerusalem; forty years sealed the fate of the Reformation in Germany; and it was forty years from the
preaching of the sealing message until the time of the
loud cry. So Israel was given forty years in Babylon
while angels held the winds of strife. At the end of
that time Xerxes yielded to the suggestion of Haman, and issued a decree against that ‘certain people
scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in
all the provinces.’ If entreaty would no longer attract
the attention of the Jews, God would in his mercy let
persecution come, that they might be compelled to flee
to his side for protection. But when persecution and
hardship are approaching, the love of God is so great
that he prepares the deliverer beforehand.

405

GEMS FROM DANIEL
his people. This decree of Ahasuerus, or Xerxes, is
the counterpart of the decree which will soon be
issued by the beast of Revelation thirteen against
the followers of God. It will find a people situated
as were the Jews in Babylon; it will find others who
have withdrawn from Babylon, and as the enemy
rushes upon this latter class to slay them, the
swords will fall like broken straws, for the angels of
God will fight for his people.
“This record, given in the book of Esther, is preserved in Bible history that men may know the future.
God’s dealings with the Jews reveal the principles of
his government, and in this history is a graphic description of the sins and deliverance of spiritual Israel.”
Haskell, SDP, 171-176.

only then that they began to pay tithe, and to cease
from ordinary traffic on the Sabbath; it was then that
they put away their heathen wives; but they did it only
because threatened by God’s wrath.
“Truly Israel was stiffnecked and rebellious. A
remnant was saved from Babylon, but it was only a
remnant; and that remnant, after years of struggling and much halting, was as a brand snatched
from the burning. Jerusalem, which might have been
the glory of the earth, fell a prey to each succeeding
kingdom. Daniel’s mind turned to the rising power of
the kingdom of Grecia, and Gabriel next spoke of the
mighty one who should rule with great dominion.”
Haskell, SDP, 176,177.

“Xerxes was the last Persian king to invade
Greece; and now the prophecy passes over six minor
rulers to introduce the ‘mighty king.’ Alexander the
Great.” Smith, DR, 234.

DANIEL 11:3,4
And a mighty king shall stand up, that
shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.
And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided
toward the four winds of heaven; and not
to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom
shall be plucked up, even for others beside
those.

The Fifth King of Persia, Artaxerxes Longimanus.—
“The Spirit of God was not yet withdrawn from
the Medo-Persian court, and although Xerxes is the last
king mentioned in the vision which Daniel saw, yet
God was still holding out mercy to the Israelites; and it
was during the reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus, the
successor of Xerxes that the final decree for the return
of the Jews was issued. In like manner the grand
jubilee will immediately follow Satan’s last effort to
destroy the people of God.
“In the seventh year of the reign of Artaxerxes,
the heart of Ezra was stirred by the Spirit of God, and
he appealed to the king for assistance. In response to
the appeal Artaxerxes issued the commandment recorded in Ezra seven. This is the decree of the year 457
BC, and is the date from which to reckon the beginning
of the two thousand three hundred days of Daniel 8:14,
and the seventy weeks of Daniel 9:24. The decree of
Artaxerxes included all that was contained in the decrees of Cyrus and Darius, and gave further commandment to build the wall and establish a government.
“Eighty years had passed since the decree of Cyrus–eighty years of forbearance; but even after the experience of the days of Esther and Xerxes there was
little interest manifested in the rebuilding of Zion, and
the company who went with Ezra was small compared
with what it should have been. The condition in Jerusalem was discouraging, for there the Jews had intermarried with the Canaanites, bringing in iniquity and
confusion. The Sabbath was desecrated, and the services of the Lord’s house were neglected. It was not
until the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, after Ezra had
labored for Israel thirteen years, that Nehemiah came
from Babylon and stirred the people into activity.
Then, and not till then, were the walls rebuilt. Even
then it was fighting with one hand and building with
the other, because of a multitude of enemies. It was

A Mighty King Shall Stand Up.—
“We have the plain history of Alexander, the conqueror of the world, his death, and division of the
kingdom into four great empires. Hear what Gabriel
says of him more than 200 years before the event
happened, and learn, ye skeptics, the evidence that this
prophecy is of divine origin.” Miller, Evidence, 87.
THE THIRD KINGDOM OF GRECIA
Daniel 8
Daniel 11
Notable horn is first A mighty king shall arise.
king.
Smote the ram and Does according to his will
stamped on him.
Waxed very great
Ruled with great dominion.
Great horn is broken
His kingdom is broken.
Thiele, OSID, 137.
“It is in this language that Alexander is introduced in the divine records. …Alexander, in Greek
history, corresponds in some ways to Cyrus, the Persian.
“Alexander, as a boy, showed an indomitable
will, and as he grew to manhood the trait strengthened.
He was educated by Aristotle, the illustrious pupil
of Plato, in the wisdom of the Greeks. When twenty
years of age, Philip, king of Macedon, died, leaving
the government to Alexander. This was the year

406

DANIEL 11
336 BC. Alexander united the independent states of
Greece, and placed himself at the head of their amphictyonic council. The Greeks were ambitious, and the
new general organized an army for foreign conquest.
“The third kingdom was represented by a leopard
with four wings on its back. This symbol covered the
time not only when Alexander was king, but during its
divided state, as well. The swiftness of conquest is
well represented by the wings of a fowl; the cunning,
insinuating nature by the lithe form of the leopard, and
the mingling together of truth and error in its doctrines
and practices by the spots. ‘Can the leopard change his
spots?’ No more could Greece give truth without a
portion of the false; no more can truth and error be
separated in that system of education founded upon the
wisdom of the Greeks–her philosophy, her myths, and
her nature teaching.
“Again Daniel saw the progress of this third nation, as a rough goat coming from the west without
touching the earth. This marks the rapidity of the conquests carried on by Alexander. It was Granicus, Asia
Minor, Issus, Tyre, Gaza, with the surrender of all
Egypt; Arbela, Babylon, Susa, Bactria, and India–all in
the space of eight short years. Having conquered
those who opposed him, he planned to unite the extensive territory over which he bore sway. He was an
organizer and diplomat as well as a general. By marrying a princess of Babylon, and giving several members
of the royal family of Persia in marriage to his generals, he sought to win the favor of the conquered races.
It was while in Babylon, directing affairs in that ancient Eastern capital, that Alexander died, probably as
a result of intemperance and excess. He was still a
young man, but the nations of the world bowed at his
feet.
“…As God brought Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus
in direct contact with his people, that they might know
the God of heaven, so he permitted Alexander to learn
of him. While that conqueror was passing from Tyre,
after its surrender, toward Gaza, which guards the entrance into Egypt, he stopped at Jerusalem. Josephus
states that great consternation filled the city when it
was known that the Greek warrior was coming. But
the high priest, Juddas, had a dream in which he was
bidden to go out to meet Alexander, arrayed in his
priestly garments, and accompanied by the temple officers clad in white.
“When Alexander met this company, much to the
surprise of his army and generals, he bowed to the
ground to worship the God whose name was on the
miter worn by the high priest. He then accompanied
the priest to the temple at Jerusalem, where the sacrifices were explained. Moreover, the prophecies of
Daniel concerning the rise and fall of Babylon, the
conquests of Medo-Persia, and its subsequent fall and
the rise of a third empire were explained. Daniel, who
had witnessed before Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus,
was then quoted to Alexander. The mighty conqueror was in the presence of the Spirit of God, and

was given the message that the Most High ruleth in
the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he
will. Would he bow in submission, and let God conquer for him? This was the opportune moment in his
life.
“Alexander acknowledged God, but left Jerusalem and pushed forward in battle. Gaza fell. Egypt was
entered, and there, in order to gratify a selfish pride,
he had himself proclaimed son of Jupiter Ammon.
He who might have become a son of God chose rather to be called the son of Jupiter. The result of
Greek education and learning is fully exemplified in
this one act. The outcome of such a choice–a fit consummation of all Greek teaching–was met at Babylon
when the king, at his very prime, laid down and died
with no hope for the future.” Haskell, SDP, 184-187.
“The prophecies of Daniel (chapters 7 and 8) so
impressed Alexander …that he became the protector of
the Jews throughout his whole realm. And this occurred a century and a half before the date (165 BC)
which Porphyry [born 233 AD] and the critics of our
day assign to the writing of the book of Daniel.” Anderson, UDP, 30.
He Shall Do According To His Will.—
“This clause suggests that the ruler considers
himself worthy of worship as a god. When Alexander founded the city of Alexandria in Egypt, he declared himself the successor to the Pharaohs, and his
troops hailed him as a god. The clause also denotes
universal dominion.” Teach, D&R, 73.
“After a mere five years of military conquest, Alexander became undisputed ruler of the world. He
spent another five years extending and consolidating
his kingdom.
“ ‘Undoubtedly his vision of himself had grown
as his power grew, until he saw himself as more
than human…. Many a great Greek had come to be
recognized as a god, and there was in Greek belief no
sharp line dividing gods from men …the east would
accept the deification of Alexander as a matter of
course, because it had for ages been customary to regard the king as divine in Egypt, where he was held to
be the son of the Sun-god….
“ ‘As an outward observance vividly suggesting
his character as a god he adopted the Oriental requirement that all who approached him on official occasions
should bow down to the earth and kiss his feet. He also
sent formal notification to all the Greek cities that the
league of which he had been head was dissolved, that
he was henceforth to be officially numbered among the
gods of each city, and that as such he was to receive the
state offerings which each city presented.’—James
Henry Breasted, Ancient Times, History of the Early
World, pp. 505-507.
“Alexander’s self-deification was bound to
bring him into serious conflict with God’s people,

407

GEMS FROM DANIEL
almost as unexpectedly as that of Belshazzar who in
the same city and perhaps in the same banquet hall 215
years before had given a feast to his lord and ladies.”
Bunch, BOD, 164.

who, being within his dominion, would refuse to
worship the deified king. Perhaps Satan was engineering matters for another effort to exterminate the
Jews, but Providence quickly interposed. In the year
323 BC, while only thirty-two years of age, Alexander
fell victim to fever which was invited by his own intemperance. He died at the very time he was in Babylon, dreaming of making that ancient city the center of
his universal dominion.” Hiddekel, 25,26.

“The scripture is a repetition of Daniel 8: ‘Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was
strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up
four notable ones toward the four winds of heaven.
Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for
it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but
not in his power.’ Daniel 8:8,22.
“No sooner had Alexander stood up—that is, assumed his full sovereign authority—than he was cut
down. The whole empire was convulsed in a series of
wars as the generals vied for dominion. Alexander’s
heir and next of kin were murdered. Antigonus,
surnamed The One-eyed, was Alexander’s most capable and influential general. Vainly did he endeavor to
realize the conception of an undivided empire under his
personal rule. Four generals formed an alliance against
him—Lysimachus in Thrace, Seleucus in Syria, Ptolemy in Egypt, and Cassander in Macedon. Antigonus
was slain in the Battle of Ipsus in 301 BC, and the four
generals established separate kingdoms in their territories.
“The kingdom of Lysimachus (Thrace) only lasted about twenty years, whereas the other three divisions remained until they were incorporated into the
Roman Empire. Furthermore, Thrace was in the same
general direction as Macedon.
“Four permanent geographical divisions did not
appear until about forty-eight years after the death of
Alexander. A historian says:
‘The wars had finally resulted [about 275 BC] in
a permanent division, in accord with geographical conditions: the Seleucid Empire in Asia [east], the empire
of the Ptolemies in Egypt and Syria [south], Macedon
under the Antigonids [west], and Pergamum under the
Attalids [north].’—Albert A. Trever, History of Ancient
Civilization, vol.1, p.474. (Quoted in The SDA Bible
Commentary, vol.9, Alexander’s Empire.)
“These four kingdoms remained as distinct remnants of Alexander’s empire until each was incorporated into the Roman Empire.” Hiddekel, 26,27.

“One thing which the inspired historian notes,
is, that he would do ‘according to his will.’ When
man makes such a resolution, it means that he has
been offered a choice between God and Satan, and
has chosen the latter. There are but two minds in the
universe, and he who rejects God may claim that he
exercises his own mind, but it means that he is swayed
by the mind of the enemy of God. ‘Let this mind be in
you which was also in Christ Jesus,’ for it brings liberty. The spirit which wishes to exalt self is imitating the
philosophy of the Greeks, and its result is death; for
Greek philosophy is but a continuation of the philosophy used to deceive Adam and Eve in Eden at the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil.” Haskell, SDP,
187,188.
“After overthrowing the Persian Empire, Alexander ‘became absolute lord of that empire in the utmost extent in which it was ever possessed by any of
the Persian kings.’ His dominion comprised ‘the
greater portion of the then-known habitable world.’
How well he has been described as ‘a mighty king,. . .
that shall rule with great dominion, and do according to
his will’!” Smith, DR, 234.
When He Shall Stand Up, His kingdom Shall Be
Broken.—
DIVISIONS OF GRECIA: PARALLELS WITH
Daniel 8

Daniel 11

The Great horn was
Broken—v8.

His kingdom shall be
Broken—v4.

four notable horns
spring up

the kingdom shall be
divided

toward four winds of
heaven

toward four winds of
heaven

four kingdoms from his
nation

not to his posterity

not in his power

not according to his
dominion.

His Kingdom Will Be Divided Toward the 4 Winds.—
“The Grecian Empire did not go to Alexander’s
sons. Within a few years after his death, all his posterity had fallen victims to the jealousy and ambition of his
leading generals, who tore the kingdom into four parts.
…“After the death of Antigonus [301 BC], the
four confederated princes divided his dominions between them; and hereby the whole empire of Alexander
became parted, and settled into four kingdoms. Ptolemy had Egypt, Libya, Arabia, Coele-Syria, and Palestine; Cassander, Macedon and Greece; Lysimachus,
Thrace Bithynia, and some other of the provinces beyond the Hellespont and the Bosphorus; and Seleucus

Thiele, OSID, 108.
“With his sudden death his power was broken

408

DANIEL 11
all the rest. And these four were the four horns of the
he-goat mentioned in the prophecies of the prophet
Daniel, which grew up after the breaking off of the first
horn. That first horn was Alexander, king of Grecia,
who overthrew the kingdom of the Medes and Persians; and the other four horns were these four kings,
who sprung up after him, and divided the empire between them. And these also were the four heads of the
leopard, spoken of in another place of the same prophecies. And their four kingdoms were the four parts,
into which, according to the same prophet, the ‘kingdom of the mighty king (i.e., of Alexander) should be
broken, and divided toward (i.e., according to the number of) the four winds of heaven,’ among those four
kings, ‘who should not be of his posterity,’ as neither
of the four above-mentioned were. And therefore, by
this last partition of the empire of Alexander, were all
these prophecies exactly fulfilled.’”
Smith, DR,
234,235.

and Thrace were annexed to Syria. These facts prepare the way for an application of the text before us.”
Smith, DR, 235,236.
THE KINGS OF THE SOUTH
THE PTOLEMIES
Ptolemy I, Soter
Ptolemy II, Philadelphus
Ptolemy III, Euergetes
Ptolemy IV, Philopator
Ptolemy V, Epiphanes
Ptolemy VI, Eupator
Ptolemy VII, Philometer
Ptolemy VIII, Philopator
Ptolemy IX, Euergetes
Ptolemy X, Soter
Ptolemy XI, Alexander
Bernice III
Ptolemy XII, Alexander
Ptolemy XIII, Auletes
Cleopatra VII

DANIEL 11:5
And the king of the south shall be
strong, and one of his princes; and he shall
be strong above him, and have dominion;
his dominion shall be a great dominion.

Regnal Dates
305-282 BC
285-246
246-221
221-204
204-181
181
181-145
145
145-116
116-80
106-88
80
80
80-51
51-30

The King of the South Shall Be Strong.—
“The king of the south, Egypt, shall be strong.
Ptolemy Soter annexed Cyprus, Phoenicia, Caria,
Cyrene, and many islands and cities to Egypt. Thus
was his kingdom made strong.” Smith, DR, 236.

King of the South.—
“The king of the north and the king of the south
are many times referred to in the rest of this chapter.
Therefore it is essential to an understanding of the
prophecy to identify these powers clearly. When Alexander’s empire was divided, the portions lay toward
the four winds of heaven—north, south, east, west.
These divisions may well be reckoned from Palestine,
the central part of the empire. That division of the empire lying west of Palestine would thus constitute the
kingdom of the west; that lying north, the kingdom of
the north; that lying east, the kingdom of the east; and
that lying south, the kingdom of the south.
“…Whatever changes might occur, these first division of the empire must determine the names which
these portions of territory should ever afterward bear.
In other words, whatever power at any time should
occupy the territory which at first constituted the kingdom of the north, that power would be king of the
north as long as it occupied that territory. Whatever
power should occupy that which at first constituted the
kingdom of the south, that power would so long be the
king of the south. We speak of only these two, because
they are the only ones afterward spoken of in the
prophecy, and because, in fact, almost the whole of
Alexander’s empire finally resolved itself into these
two divisions.
“The successors of Cassander were very soon
conquered by Lysimachus, and his kingdom, Greece
and Macedon, was annexed to Thrace. Lysimachus
was in turn conquered by Seleucus, and Macedon

“The Ptolemy who gained Egypt was surnamed
Soter, or Saviour, and on his death he was succeeded
by his son, Ptolemy Philadelphus.” Haskell, SDP, 189.
One of His Princes, Shall Be Strong Above Him.—
“To the north of Palestine, ‘one of his princes’—
that is one of Alexander’s generals—established the
Syrian dynasty. This was Seleucus, who was ‘strong
above him’—that is, he possessed a greater portion of
Alexander’s empire than Ptolemy possessed. It included all the territory from Asia Minor to the river Indus.
The line of kings which descended from Seleucus are
called the Seleucid dynasty.” Hiddekel, 25,26.
“But another of Alexander’s princes is introduced
in the expression, ‘one of his princes.’ This must
refer to Seleucus Nicator, who, as already stated, by
annexing Macedon and Thrace to Syria became
possessor of three parts out of four of Alexander’s
dominion, and established a more powerful kingdom than that of Egypt.” Smith, DR, 236.
“Seleucus [Nicator] who gained the three divisions was succeeded by his son Antiochus Soter, who
was killed by the Gauls in Asia Minor. The third in the
line of Greco-Syriac kings was Antiochus Theos, who
was reigning in Syria while Ptolemy Philadelphus was
on the Egyptian throne.” Haskell, SDP, 189.

409

GEMS FROM DANIEL
and Ruth the Moabitess, turned from idolatry to the
worship of the true God, were to unite themselves with
His chosen people. As the numbers of Israel increased they were to enlarge their borders, until
their kingdom should embrace the world.” Christ
Object Lesson, 290.

THE KINGS OF THE NORTH
THE SELEUCIDAE
Regnal Dates
Seleucus I, Nicator
312-280 BC
Antiochus I, Soter
280-261
Antiochus II, Theos
261-246
Seleucus II, Callinicos
246-226
Seleucus III, Ceraunos
226-223
Antiochus III, The Great
223-187
Seleucus IV, Philopator
187-175
Antiochus IV, Epiphanes
175-164
Antiochus V, Eupator
164-162
Demetrius I, Soter
162-150
Alexander Balus—usurper
150-145
Demetrius II, Nicator
145-138, 128-124
Antiochus VII, Sidetes
138-128
Seleucus V
125
Antiochus VIII, Grypos
125-113, 111-96
Antiochus IX, Cyzicenos
113-95
Antiochus X, Eusebes
Seleucus VI
Antiochus XI
Philip
Kings in almost [constant]
Demetrius III
conflict; Syria ruled by
Antiochus XII
Tigranes of Armenia, 83-69
Antiochus XIII, Asiaticus
69-65

“Israel had once been miraculously delivered
from physical bondage in Egypt. They had been
warned against fleeing to Egypt for protection in the
days of Nebuchadnezzar at the siege of Jerusalem.
They may have escaped the bondage of those earlier
times, but they were captured by the learning of the
Greeks. In the days of Ptolemy Soter, many Jews
flocked into Egypt, and those who remained in Jerusalem and Palestine imbibed many of the ideas of the
Greeks.
“It has been stated that the history of Greece fills
the time between the prophecy of Malachi and John the
Baptist. We are now ready to appreciate the reason
why Israel was so long without the sound of the
prophet’s voice. God gave Israel a system of education, separate and distinct from the system of all other
nations; a system which, if followed, would forever
make it impossible for the people to go into captivity.
But Israel often gave up her God-given system for the
teaching of heathen nations.
“When the Jews returned from Babylon, they
were strongly tinctured with Babylonian ideas of education and religion. This prepared them to accept with
readiness the teachings of the Greeks. The rabbis of
Jerusalem mingled the principles of Greek philosophy so thoroughly with the statutes of Jehovah,
which they were commanded to teach the children,
that from the death of Malachi to the birth of John
the Baptist, there was not a family in Judah to
whom the education of a prophet could be entrusted.
“The Greek games were performed in Jerusalem itself, and Jewish youth, dressed only in the scarf
and broad hat in imitation of the god Hermes, wrestled
like the Athenian athletes. It is stated by Dr. Mears
that the priests, when the signal was given for the
sports, left their work in the temple to watch the
games. Greek names replaced the Jewish in many instances, and even priests intermarried with the Greeks.
It is no wonder that Gabriel gave specific instruction
concerning the name to be given the babe of Zacharias
and Elizabeth, for although there was once a time when
every child in Israel was named under the inspiration of
the Spirit, the Israelites had now chosen Greece in
place of God.
“The whole Jewish teaching was Hellenized;
and when John the Baptist was born, his mother
and father were commanded to leave the city of Jerusalem, and educate the child in the desert, away
from the influence of the schools and society of the
Jews. Christ himself never entered the schools of
his day because of the mixture of the truth of God

The Grecian Period a Dark Time in Israel History.—
“The rest of Daniel 11 is a recital of the efforts of
various powers to secure control of Palestine and Jerusalem. The first contestants would be Ptolemy and
Seleucus, with Ptolemy in Egypt to the south and
Seleucus in Syria to the north. Jerusalem was the
focal point, with Ptolemy being then the king of the
South and Seleucus the king of the North.
“God had established His people Israel in a strategic location. From its original position in Palestine it
was to grow until it became a great world state. Jerusalem was to be its capital, and there God would have
His earthly throne. But the forces of evil were determined to thwart this purpose, for Satan planned to
make God’s city his own capital for the control of the
world. His efforts at Babylon had been brought to
naught, and Jerusalem at the crossroads of the
world and on the heights of Zion offered military
and commercial advantages as well as beauty that
were far beyond those of Babylon on the inland, arid,
flat Mesopotamian plain.” Thiele, OSID, 129.
“The children of Israel were to occupy all the
territory which God appointed them. Those nations
that rejected the worship and service of the true
God were to be dispossessed. But it was God’s purpose that by the revelation of His character through
Israel men should be drawn unto Him. To all the world
the gospel invitation was to be given. Through the
teaching of the sacrificial service Christ was to be uplifted before the nations, and all who would look unto
Him should live. All who, like Rahab the Canaanite,

410

DANIEL 11
with heathen philosophy. Greek teaching exalted
nature; but the Son of God could not hear the voice of
the Father in the teachings of the schools, and he wandered through the woods alone, or in company with his
mother. Then it was that nature, the great object lesson
of the Creator, was opened to his expanding mind.
Other Jewish youth sat at the feet of the rabbis, learning what the spirit of the Greeks taught, and they crucified the Lord of life.” Haskell, SDP, 190-192.

and Egypt and calls the respective kings the Lord of
the North and the Lord of the South.’—Vol.4,
p.866.” Hiddekel, 28.
“Another great principle lies side by side with the
one given in those first verses. This second, which is
hidden in verses six to thirteen, has to do with the
working out of those same principles through the government as a channel. The kingdom of Alexander resolved itself into two divisions, a northern and a southern. Both were Hellenized, but the northern represented more truly Greek principles, while the southern division was strongly tinctured with the old Egyptian ideas both of government and religion. It was the
northern division which carried forward the work
of the prophecy as symbolized by the leopard and
the rough goat…. Consequently it must be right to
conclude that it is the Greco-Syriac division, rather
than the Egyptian division, which will do the work of
which Alexander was the forerunner. Nevertheless
there will be throughout the ages until the end of
time a strength rising from the south and opposing
the northern power.” Haskell, SDP, 193.

God Works Amidst Apostasy.—
“It is a wonderful thing to man, who is so limited
in means, to watch the workings of God, who is so
limitless in resources. When the Jews fled to Egypt,
then God took advantage of their presence there, and
turned it to his glory. Ptolemy Philadelphus founded
the Alexandrian Library, and it was he who encouraged the translation of the Old Testament into
Greek. It was thus that the prophecies concerning
the promised Messiah were put into the universal
language nearly three hundred years before the
birth of Christ. The world might become intoxicated
with Greek philosophy, but God left man without excuse by placing the word of life in the household
tongue of the nations. Satan may scheme, and his
agents on earth may be wise, but they can do nothing
against the truth without in that very act promoting the
truth. While the dark wings of paganism were drawing
closer and closer about the world, to shut out if possible the very light of heaven, the word of God, as a
lighted candle, a torch among the sheaves, was shining
under that darkness, and proclaiming the advent of the
Desire of all ages.” Haskell, SDP, 192.

DANIEL 11:6
And in the end of years they shall join
themselves together; for the king’s daughter of the south shall come to the king of
the north to make an agreement: but she
shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she
shall be given up, and they that brought
her, and he that begat her, and he that
strengthened her in these times.

King of North Always Opposed by King of South.—
“The terms ‘king of the north’ and ‘king of the
south’ occur repeatedly in Daniel 11. Syria was the
king of the north referred to above, while Egypt was
the king of the south. The significant point to notice is
that Syria was the eastern division of Alexander’s empire. Why then does the Bible call it the ‘king of the
north’? It was called the king of the north because it
lay to the north in respect to Jerusalem. Egypt, being
south of Palestine, was called the king of the south. So
it must be understood that ‘north’ and ‘south’ were
terms indicating directional relationship to God’s people.
“Daniel the prophet could readily appreciate the
meaning of ‘king of the north’ and ‘king of the south,’
for Isaiah and Jeremiah had spoken of Babylon coming
from the north and Egypt lying to the south. The days
of Seleucus and Ptolemy were not the first time that
God’s people found themselves lying between two
great powers. For centuries Israel had witnessed struggles between Assyria and Egypt, Babylon and Egypt,
and Persia and Egypt. The Seventh-day Adventist Bible
Commentary makes an interesting historical point:
‘One of the best known south Arabian inscriptions (Glaser No. 1155) refers to a war between Persia

Introduction.—
“Verse 6 begins a description of a long series of
conflicts known as the Syrian wars. Ten verses of
Daniel 11 (verses 6-15) are devoted to this portion of
history. The purpose of this part of the prophecy is not
merely to demonstrate how well God can read the future. If the study of Daniel 2,7 and 8 has not already
convinced one of the amazing accuracy of Bible
prophecy, neither will Daniel 11. The principal seat of
the wars between Syria and Egypt was Palestine. Indeed, the strategic lands of the chosen people were
often the prize of the contestants. As victory alternated
from side to side. God’s people were first under the
dominion of Egypt and then under the dominion of
Syria. God devoted prophetic space to the SyrianEgyptian wars solely because His people were involved in the century of conflict.
“It must be remembered that the rulers of Syria
and Egypt were Greeks. The wars between them were
often in the nature of petty and sordid family quarrels.”
Hiddekel, 28,29.

411

GEMS FROM DANIEL
murdered. ‘They that brought her.’ All of her Egyptian women and attendants, in endeavoring to defend her, were slain with her. ‘He that begat her,’
margin, ‘whom she brought forth,’ that is, her son,
who was murdered at the same time by order of Laodice. ‘He that strengthened her in these times,’ was
doubtless her husband, Antiochus, or those who took
her part and defended her.” Smith, DR, 237.

They Shall Join Themselves Together.—
“There were frequent wars between the kings
of Egypt and of Syria. [First and Second Syrian
Wars.] Especially was this the case with Ptolemy Philadelphus, the second king of Egypt, and Antiochus
Theos, third king of Syria. They at length agreed to
make peace upon condition that Antiochus should
put away his former wife, Laodice, and her two
sons, and should marry Berenice, the daughter of
Ptolemy Philadelphus. Ptolemy accordingly brought
his daughter to Antiochus, bestowing with her an immense dowry.” Smith, DR, 237.

“Thus did all efforts to unite the divided Grecian
Empire come to nought. Apparently it was in the
interests of God’s people that the empire remain
divided.” Hiddekel, 29.

Daughter of South Shall Come to King of North.—
“The modern nations of Europe were not the first
powers to try to patch up old quarrels by way of marriage alliances between the royal houses. Seleucus
died in 280 BC. His grandson, Antiochus II Theos,
married Berenice, the daughter of Ptolemy II Philadelphus.” Hiddekel, 29.

DANIEL 11:7
But out of a branch of her roots shall
one stand up in his estate, which shall come
with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal
against them, and shall prevail:

“It was a marriage of expediency and furnishes a
striking illustration of the uselessness of marriages for
such purposes. Kings, however, have been slow to
learn. During the 18th and 19th centuries the kings of
Europe tried it on a large scale, but the first World War
demonstrated its impotency and also the truthfulness of
the divine prediction in Dan. 2:43. Again in the cast of
Antiochus and Ptolemy, the forecast was that ‘they
shall not cleave one to another.’ The marriage was
solemnized in the year 249 BC in the city of Seleucia, the capital of the Seleucian kingdom.” Bunch,
BOD, 166.

A Branch of Her Roots Shall Stand up.—
“The branch out of the same root with Berenice was her brother, Ptolemy Euergetes. He had no
sooner succeeded his father Ptolemy Philadelphus in
the kingdom of Egypt, than, burning to avenge the
death of his sister Berenice, he raised an immense army
and [in 246 BC] invaded the territory of the king of the
north, Seleucus Callinicus, who with his mother Laodice reigned in Syria. He prevailed against them, even
to the conquering of Syria, Cilicia, the upper parts beyond the Euphrates, and eastward to Babylon.” Smith,
DR, 238.

But she shall not retain the power of the arm.—
“That is, [Berenice shall not retain] her interest
and power with Antiochus. So it proved; for shortly
afterward [Philadelphus died two years after the
agreement], Antiochus brought back to the court his
former wife Laodice and her children.” Smith, DR,
237.

Shall Enter Into the Fortress of the King of North—
The Third Syrian War.—
“Ptolemy III (246-221), a brother of Berenice’s,
determined to avenge Berenice’s death by invading
Syria. He took his army all the way to Babylon and
beyond before voluntarily pulling back! His navy occupied Seleucia, the port that served Antioch, the capital of Syria, and for some time Egyptian shipping dominated the eastern Mediterranean.” Maxwell, 1GC,
277.

Neither Shall He Stand, Nor His Arm.—
“Then says the prophecy, ‘Neither shall he [Antiochus] stand, nor his arm,’ or posterity. Laodice, being
restored to favor and power, feared lest in the fickleness of his temper Antiochus should again disgrace her
by recalling Berenice. Concluding that nothing short
of his death would be an effectual safeguard against
such a contingency, she caused him to be poisoned
shortly afterward. Neither did his children by Berenice
succeed him in the kingdom, for Laodice so managed
affairs as to obtain the throne for her eldest son Seleucus Callinicus.” Smith, DR, 237.

DANIEL 11:8,9
And shall also carry captives into
Egypt their gods, with their princes, and
with their precious vessels of silver and of
gold; and he shall continue more years
than the king of the north.
So the king of the south shall come into
his kingdom, and shall return into his own
land.

But she (and others) shall be given up.—
“Laodice, not content with poisoning her husband
Antiochus, caused Berenice and her infant son to be

412

DANIEL 11

and pass through: then shall he return, and
be stirred up, even to his fortress.

Shall Carry Captives Into Egypt Their Gods.—
“Ptolemy returned to Egypt with an enormous
quantity of booty, including the gods of the fortress of
the king of the north. There is a strange tendency in
human nature to worship the gods of conquered enemies. Ahaz brought the altar of the god of Damascus
back to Jerusalem. (See 2 Kings 16:10.) The Romans
also worshipped the gods of their defeated foes.” Hiddekel, 30.

His Sons Shall Be Stirred Up.—The Fourth Syrian
War.—
“The first part of this verse speaks of sons, in the
plural; the last part, of one, in the singular. The sons of
Seleucus Callinicus were Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus Magnus. These both entered with zeal upon
the work of vindicating and avenging the cause of
their father and their country. The elder of these,
Seleucus, first took the throne. He assembled a great
multitude to recover his father’s dominions; but was
poisoned by his generals after a short, inglorious reign.
His more capable brother, Antiochus Magnus, was
thereupon proclaimed king. He took charge of the
army, recovered Seleucia and Syria, and made himself
master of some places by treaty and of others by force
of arms. Antiochus overcame Nicolas, the Egyptian
general, in battle and had thoughts of invading Egypt
itself. However, a truce followed, wherein both sides
treated for peace, yet prepared for war. Here is the
‘one’ who should certainly ‘overflow and pass
through.’” DR, Smith, 239.

“But hearing that a sedition was raised in Egypt
requiring his return home, he plundered the kingdom of
Seleucus by taking forty thousand talents of silver and
precious vessels and two thousand five hundred images of gods. Among these were the images which
Cambyses had formerly taken from Egypt and carried into Persia [three centuries earlier]. The Egyptians, being wholly given to idolatry, bestowed upon
Ptolemy the title Euergetes, or the Benefactor, as a
compliment for restoring their captive gods after
many years.
“ ‘There are authors still extant,’ says Thomas
Newton, ‘who confirm several of the same particulars.
Appian informs us that Laodice having killed Antiochus, and after him both Berenice and her child, Ptolemy the son of Philadelphus to revenge these murders
invaded Syria, slew Laodice, and proceeded as far as to
Babylon. From Polybius we learn that Ptolemy, surnamed Euergetes, being greatly incensed at the cruel
treatment of his sister, Berenice, marched with an army
into Syria, and took the city of Seleucia, which was
kept for some years afterward by the garrisons of the
kings of Egypt. Thus did he “enter the fortress of the
king of the north.” Polyaenus affirms that Ptolemy
made himself master of all the country from Mount
Taurus as far as to India without war or battle; but he
ascribes it by mistake to the father instead of the son.
Justin asserts that if Ptolemy had not been recalled by a
domestic sedition into Egypt, he would have possessed the whole kingdom of Seleucus. So the king
of the south came into the kingdom of the north,
and then returned into his own land.’ [Thomas Newton, Dissertations on the Prophecies, Vol. I, pp. 345,
346.]” Smith, DR, 238,239.

He Shall Overflow and Pass Through.—
“Antiochus III Magnus, waged war on Egypt
in 218 BC. The locale of this war was Palestine. In
his struggle with Egypt, the king of the north overflowed the land of the chosen people, and Palestine
was incorporated into his dominion. The verse finds a
significant repetition of history in Daniel 11:40,41.”
Hiddekel, 30.

DANIEL 11:11
And the king of the south shall be
moved with choler, and shall come forth
and fight with him, even with the king of
the north: and he shall set forth a great
multitude; but the multitude shall be given
into his hand.
Kings of the North and South in Conflict.—
“Ptolemy Philopator succeeded his father Euergetes in the kingdom of Egypt, being advanced to the
crown not long after Antiochus Magnus had succeeded
his brother in the government of Syria. He was an
ease-loving and vicious prince, but was at length
aroused at the prospect of an invasion of Egypt by Antiochus. He was indeed ‘moved with choler’ because
of the losses he had sustained and the danger which
threatened him. He marshaled a large army to check
the progress of the Syrian king, but the king of the
north was also ‘to set forth a great multitude.’ The
army of Antiochus, according to Polybius, amounted to
62,000 footmen, 6,000 horsemen, and 102 elephants.

He Shall Continue More Years Than the King of
North.—
“[In 226 BC] Seleucus Callinicus died in exile
of a fall from his horse, and Ptolemy Euergetes survived him about four or five years [died 221 BC].”
Smith, DR, 239.

DANIEL 11:10
But his sons shall be stirred up, and
shall assemble a multitude of great forces:
and one shall certainly come, and overflow,
413

GEMS FROM DANIEL
In this conflict, the Battle of Raphia, Antiochus was
defeated, with nearly 14,000 soldiers slain and 4,000
taken prisoner, and his army was given into the hands
of the king of the south—a fulfillment of prophecy.”
Smith, DR, 239,241.

“His heart was lifted up by his success, but he
was far from being strengthened by it, for the inglorious use he made of it caused his own subjects to rebel
against him. But the lifting up of his heart was especially made manifest in his transactions with the
Jews. Coming to Jerusalem, he offered sacrifices,
and was desirous of entering into the most holy
place of the temple contrary to the law and religion
of the Jews. But being restrained with great difficulty,
he left the place, burning with anger against the whole
nation of the Jews.” Smith, DR, 241.

“It is a point of interest that both armies at Raphia, like armies at some other major battles, deployed
trained elephants to confuse the cavalry and to provide
elevated mobile fortresses. Wrote a later Roman war
reporter, Ammianus Marcellinus: ‘Elephants, frightful
with their wrinkled bodies and loaded with armed men,
[are] a hideous spectacle, dreadful beyond every form
of horror.’ The Egyptians used 73 of the big beasts,
herded in from Somalia, and the Syrians, 102, brought
all the way from India. Despite their numerical advantage, Egypt won the battle, for Antiochus lacked
discipline.
“Yet victory gained Ptolemy little in the long run.
He was a notorious debauchee. He failed to follow up
the success his generals had handed him—and Antiochus III was eager for a rematch.” Maxwell, 1GC, 279.

“Ptolemy was so elated over recovering Palestine
that he held a great victory procession into Jerusalem.
He was not content with civil dominion. Assuming
the prerogatives of religious authority, he blasphemously offered sacrifice at the temple and even attempted to enter the most holy place in spite of the
protests and entreaties of the Jews. The story is well
told in Empires of Prophecy, which cites Prideaux’
Connection, 217 BC:
“ ‘He was smitten from God with such a terror
and confusion of mind that he was carried out of the
place in a manner half-dead. On this he departed
from Jerusalem, filled with great wrath against the
whole nation of the Jews for that which happened to
him in that place, and venting many threatenings
against them for it.’—Quoted by A.T. Jones in Empires
of Prophecy, ch.xvii.” Hiddekel, 31.

The Multitude Shall Be Given Into His Hand.—
“Antiochus was defeated in the Battle of Raphia
(217 BC), and his multitude was ‘given into his
hand’—that is, into the hand of the king of the south.
Palestine once more changed hands.” Hiddekel, 31.

DANIEL 11:12
And when he hath taken away the multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he
shall cast down many ten thousands: but he
shall not be strengthened by it.

He Shall Cast Down Many Ten Thousands.—
“[Ptolemy] immediately began against them [the
Jews] a relentless persecution. In Alexandria, where
Jews had resided since the days of Alexander, enjoying
the privileges of the most favored citizens, forty thousand according to Eusebius, sixty thousand according to Jerome, were slain. The rebellion of the Egyptians and the massacre of the Jews certainly were not
calculated to strengthen Ptolemy in his kingdom, but
were sufficient rather to ruin it almost totally.” Smith,
DR, 241,242.

When He Hath Taken Away the Multitude.—
“Although he had cast down ten thousand soldiers, yet he did not profit by the victory. Nothing was
gained; it was but a merciless slaughter of human
beings; a contest for brute supremacy which is hateful in the sight of God and man. The difference is
striking between such warfare and the progress of
mighty generals whom God used to establish kingdoms
and punish kings.” Haskell, SDP, 196.

“Upon returning to Egypt, the king embarked upon a program to force the Jews in Egypt to renounce
the worship of Jehovah in favor of the Egyptian religion. When they resisted, he persecuted them with
great cruelty. In 213 BC, he slew 40,000 Jews. Thus
did the king of the south ‘cast down many ten thousands.’ Satan was stirring up this licentious, drunken
ruler to destroy God’s people. They would have faced
extermination had not Providence interposed.” Hiddekel, 31.

His Heart Shall Be Lifted Up.—
“Ptolemy lacked the prudence to make good use
of his victory. Had he followed up his success, he
would probably have become master of the whole
kingdom of Antiochus; but after making only a few
threats, he made peace that he might be able to give
himself up to the uninterrupted and uncontrolled indulgence of his brutish passions. Thus having conquered
his enemies, he was overcome by his vices, and forgetful of the great name which he might have established,
he spent his time in feasting and sensuality.

“Those Jews who sought Egypt, either for protection or for the advantages of her schools and libraries,
withdrew from the sheltering hand of their God, and
the time came sooner or later when they felt the wrath
of the enemy. Through all these struggles the nation
whom God had chosen might have stood as a beacon

414

DANIEL 11
on a hill, instead of being trampled upon by every army
in its marches between Egypt and Syria. Nay, more,
the location of the Jews in Palestine and her capital was
by divine appointment. They were at the gateway of
the nations, and might have held the balance of power.
Had they held aloft the sword of the Spirit, all nations
would have bowed before their kings and paid tribute
into their treasury. It was so in the days of Solomon; it
might have been repeated in the days of Greek history.
“Alexander’s act of reverence when he met the
company of priests at Jerusalem should have been an
object lesson to all Judea of what God by his Spirit
would cause all nations to do. But so blinded by Greek
teaching were those Jewish leaders, even at that time,
that they failed to see this. Instead of flocking to Alexandria for the wisdom of Greece, nations should
have sent their youth to schools of the prophets at
Jerusalem, and scholars of the world should have
sought wisdom from those who knew the God of
wisdom. But it was not so. Israel then was as the
church of today. Instead of leading by virtue of the
spiritual life, she sought the wisdom of Egypt and
Greece. Such things bring sadness to the angels of
God.
“As the Jews during the days of Alexander and
his successors were without excuse, so the Israel of
today has set before it the wisdom of the Eternal in
contrast with the wisdom of Greece. And the message
is, ‘Choose ye this Day’ at which shrine thou wilt
bow. Sitting at the feet of Jesus, learning of him, taking his word as the authentic history of the world, his
truth as the interpreter of nature, will insure eternal life.
Accepting the writings of men, human speculations
regarding the history of the world, its creation, its age,
placing a human interpretation upon the works of nature, and seeking to find out by experiment and speculation what must be known by faith–this brings death;
for it leads away from Christ, the center of the universe, the source of all wisdom–the great drawing
power of creation. The first is the system of God, of
which faith is the motive power; the second is the
Greek system, which exalts human reasoning. One
may not bow down to the idols of Egypt, nor drink
of the wines of Babylon, but if he is entrapped by
the more pleasing sophistries of Greece, his fate is
the same in the end. For this reason Eternal Truth has
shone along the pathway of men in all ages to guard
against the enemy. In these last days, when all the evil
of the past is renewed and presented to man in all its
varied forms, then it is that Greek philosophy and skepticism come forth in full force. A heart filled with truth
is the only safeguard against error.” Haskell, SDP,
196,197.

age of thirty-seven, leaving a crumbling empire to his
five-year old heir, Ptolemy V Epiphanes.” Hiddekel,
32.
“He was not strengthened by this course [the slaying of the Jews] as it led to insurrection among his subjects and he was compelled to revoke his decrees and
restore the Jews to their former privileges. After this
he gave himself up to a life of revelry and dissipation,
‘drinking, gaming, and lasciviousness, were the
whole employment of his life.’—Prideaux.” Bunch,
BOD, 169.

DANIEL 11:13
For the king of the north shall return,
and shall set forth a multitude greater than
the former, and shall certainly come after
certain years with a great army and with
much riches.
“The events predicted in this verse were to occur
‘after certain years.’ The peace concluded between
Ptolemy Philopator and Antiochus Magnus lasted
fourteen years. Meanwhile Ptolemy died from intemperance and debauchery, and was succeeded by his
son Ptolemy Epiphanes, then five years old. Antiochus suppressed rebellion in his kingdom during the
same time, and reduced the eastern provinces to obedience. He was then at leisure for any enterprise when
young Epiphanes came to the throne of Egypt. Thinking this too good an opportunity for enlarging his dominion to let slip, he raised an immense army,
‘greater than the former,’ and set out against
Egypt, expecting to have an easy victory over the infant king.” Smith, DR, 242.
“Antiochus III felt that the youth of Ptolemy V
presented an ample opportunity to seek revenge for his
defeat at Raphia (217 BC). By starting the ‘Fifth Syrian War’ (202-200 BC) through an invasion of southern Syria, the seizure of Gaza, and the occupation of
Palestine, Antiochus III desired to press south to pulverize the young Egyptian monarch with an outright
invasion of Egypt itself. The young boy–king would
respond by dispatching his army under the leadership
of an Aetolian commander named Scopas, who would
initially meet with success in recapturing southern Syria, Gaza, and Palestine, driving the forces of Antiochus
III back into the region of Lebanon (202-201 BC).
“Yet, even in the face of Scopas’ initial success
during the re-invasion of Coele Syria, Antiochus III
would not be deterred and launched another attack on
the region; he would eventually meet Scopas in battle
near a mouth of the Jordan River at a place called ‘the
Panium’ (201-200 BC), later renamed Caesarea Philippi. This battle would serve as the major turning
point in the history of the Syrian wars, because An-

He Shall Not Be Strengthened By It.—
“After the king of the south waged war on the
Jews, Egypt began to decline rapidly. The kingdom
was racked with disorder, insurrection, and dissension.
Within a few years (204 BC) the king died at the early

415

GEMS FROM DANIEL
The Romans, who had been rising to great strength in
the west, complied with the appeal and sent embassies
to Egypt. Rome defeated Philip in 196 BC and Antiochus Magnus in the Battle of Magnesia in 191 BC.
The Syrian dynasty was greatly weakened by this defeat.
“Antiochus was succeeded by his son, Seleucus
IV Philopator, in 187 BC. When he was murdered
within about two years, the next son, who had been
held hostage in Rome since the Battle of Magnesia,
came to the throne of Syria. He was the notorious Antiochus IV Epiphanes. While Rome was engaged in a
war with Macedonia, Antiochus Epiphanes attempted
to seize Egypt as his father had done. So it was that ‘in
those times’ many stood up ‘against the king of the
south’—the Syrian kings, the Macedonian king, the
Romans, who pretended an unselfish protection of
Egypt, and even the Egyptians themselves, who
loathed the Grecian house of the Ptolemies.” Hiddekel,
32.

tiochus III would rout Scopas and the Egyptian armies so decisively that Ptolemaic control of Coele
Syria would end once and for all. With the eventual
besiegement of the remaining Egyptian forces at Sidon,
Scopas had no choice but to surrender unconditionally.
Thus, the Battle of the Panium eventually concluded
the “Fifth Syrian War” and Egypt would never have
control over Coele Syria again.” Swearingen, TOOTN,
110,111.
“The significant point to observe in this history is
that Egypt’s war on the Jews was the signal for the
rapid decline of the king of the south. When the child
king, Ptolemy V, came to the throne, Antiochus Magnus prepared a great army for another campaign against
Egypt. He invaded Judea and overthrew the Egyptian
forces near the Jordan. The inhabitants of Jerusalem
and Judea gladly welcomed the rule of Syria, which
was at first mild and conciliatory.” Hiddekel, 32.

DANIEL 11:14
And in those times there shall many
stand up against the king of the south: also
the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall
fall.

Robbers of Thy People Shall Exalt Themselves.—
“Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I
have seen it, saith the LORD.” Jeremiah 7:11
“My face will I turn also from them, and they
shall pollute my secret place: for the robbers shall
enter into it, and defile it.” Ezekiel 7:22.

Many Shall Stand Up Against King of South.—
“There was unrest along the Nile, Egyptians defying and even rioting against their Greek overlords. It is
of interest to know that the famous Rosetta Stone,
now housed in the British Museum, records concessions made to the restless Egyptian people by the
regents of the boy king, Ptolemy V, in an effort to prevent further trouble.” Maxwell, 1GC, 279.

“This is a high point in the point in the prophetic
drama. The word ‘robbers’ is from the Hebrew ben
parits, which means, in the plural, ‘sons of violence.’
Other translations render the text:
“—‘The children of the violent among thy people.’—A.S.V.
“—‘The men of violence among your own people.’—R.S.V.
“—‘The children of the violent among thy people.’—The Holy Scriptures According to the Masoretic
Text, a New Translation.
“—‘The most powerful people of thy nation.’—
Lengerke, cited by Albert Barnes in Notes on the Book
of Daniel, p.442.
“…None but the professed people of God could
attempt ‘to establish the vision.’ According to Daniel
10:14, the vision is about the deliverance of God’s
people from the oppression of heathen powers. Accordingly, the passage means that in these times the
violent or powerful leaders among the Jews would
attempt to bring about a premature deliverance
from Gentile dominion.
“The prophecy was fulfilled in the following
manner. The Jews had been so persecuted and threatened by Ptolemy that they welcomed Syria’s victory
over Egypt and the subjection of their territory to Syrian rule. But under Antiochus Epiphanes, Syrian
rule became more oppressive than that of Egypt.
The king was a fanatical Greek idolater who proceeded
to persecute the Jews with such fury that they were

“Agathocles, his [Ptolemy’s] prime minister, having possession of the king’s person and conducting the
affairs of the kingdom in his stead, was so dissolute
and proud in the exercise of his power that the provinces which before were subject to Egypt, rebelled.
Egypt itself was disturbed by seditions, and the Alexandrians, rising up against Agathocles, caused him,
his sister, his mother, and their associates, to be put to
death. At the same time, Philip of Macedon entered
into a league with Antiochus to divide the dominions of Ptolemy between them, each proposing to
take the parts which lay nearest and most convenient to him. Here was a rising up against the king of
the south sufficient to fulfill the prophecy, and it resulted, beyond doubt, in the exact events which the
prophecy forecast.” Smith, DR, 242,243.
“Antiochus Magnus and Philip V of Macedonia formed a league against Egypt, as both aspired to
vital territories of the Egyptian Empire. The guardians
of the young Egyptian king appealed to Rome for help.

416

DANIEL 11
threatened with genocide. Epiphanes was determined
to wipe out the Jewish religion or, failing that, to
wipe out the Jews themselves. God’s people were
faced with a crisis comparable to the crises in the days
of Pharaoh, Sennacherib and Ahasuerus. Returning
from Egypt in 168 BC, Antiochus Epiphanes took
Jerusalem with slaughter and devastation. He entered
the temple, robbed and polluted it, and installed a
profane and wicked person in the high-priestly office.
Those who resisted his sacrilege were cut down by
the thousands. Josephus records:
“ ‘And when the king had built an idol upon
God’s altar, he slew swine upon it, and so offered a
sacrifice neither according to the law, nor the Jewish
religious worship in that country. He also compelled
them to forsake the worship which they paid their
own God, and to adore those whom he took to be gods;
and made them build temples, and raise idol altars, in
every city and village, and offer swine upon them every day. He also commanded them not to circumcise
their sons, and threatened to punish any that should be
found to have transgressed his injunction.’—Whiston’s
Josephus, bk. xii, ch. v, p.306.
“As for those who resisted, Josephus says:
‘…they every day underwent great miseries and bitter
torments; for they were whipped with rods, and their
bodies were torn to pieces, and were crucified while
they were still alive and breathed. They also strangled
those women and their sons whom they circumcised, as
the king had appointed, hanging their sons about their
necks as they were upon the crosses. And if there
were any sacred book of the law found, it was destroyed; and those with whom they were found,
miserably perished also.’—Ibid.
“A prominent Jewish family, known later as the
house of Maccabees, led the Jews in a famous resistance against the Syrians. The father, Mattathias,
and his five sons swore that they would resist the Syrians unto blood. As a certain Jew was offering a profane sacrifice in obedience to the command of Apelles,
the king’s general, Josephus records:
“ ‘Mattathias had great indignation, and ran upon
him violently with his sons who had sworn with him,
and slew both the man himself that sacrificed, and
Apelles, the king’s general, who compelled them to
sacrifice, with a few of his soldiers. He also overthrew
the altar, and cried out, “If,” said he, “any one be zealous for the laws of his country, and for the worship of
God, let him follow me.”
‘So Mattathias got a great army about him, and
overthrew their idol altars, and slew those that broke
the laws, even all that he could get under his power.’
Ibid., ch.vi, p.307.”
“Although the father died within a year, the sons,
led by one named Judas, carried on the struggle. The
Jews fought furiously for national survival and cast
the Syrians out of their country. In 165 BC Judas
removed the pagan emblems from the temple and,
after rededicating it, caused the normal services, which

had ceased for three years, to be resumed. In 161 BC
Judas sent ambassadors to Rome and entered into a
league of friendship and protection with them. Judas was slain in battle with the Syrians the same year.
“Jonathan, brother of Judas became the new Maccabean leader. Then a scheming claimant to the throne
of Syria offered to make Jonathan high priest in return
for his support. It was not beneath Jonathan to indulge
in this piece of political expediency, so he was installed
as high priest in 153 BC. About ten years later he was
treacherously slain as a reward for becoming involved
in Syrian politics.
“Jonathan’s brother, Simon, was then installed by
the people with the title, High Priest and General and
Ethnarch (Ruler of the People) of God. Simon was
murdered in 135 BC, and his son John Hyrcanus, succeeded him.
“John Hyrcanus carried on a religious persecution
against the Edomites. The family which was at first a
champion of freedom against religious persecution,
ended by forcing religion on others.
“Alexander, a son of Hyrcanus, finally took the title of King as well as High Priest. It would be tedious
to relate all the instances of violence, intrigue, assassinations, scheming ambitions and religious intolerance
that marked the house of the Maccabeans.” Hiddekel, 32-35.
To Establish the Vision.—
“What vision or prophecy is being established or
filled by this recitation of the angel Gabriel? It must
be the original vision recorded in the eighth chapter
of which the eleventh is a fuller interpretation.” Bunch,
BOD, 170.
“Josephus reflects the Maccabean aspirations
when he connects the Maccabean’s resistance with ‘the
prophecy of Daniel’—obviously referring to the
cleansing of the temple at the end of the 2300 days.
(See The SDA Bible Commentary, vol.5, p.30.) The
Maccabeans, and those who supported them, saw
themselves as fulfilling the prophecies of Daniel
concerning the restoration of the kingdom, king,
sanctuary and people. Judas’ rededication of the
temple and the resumption of the daily services in
165 BC were supposed to have fulfilled Daniel 8:14.
A little later, this ruling house actually established a
priest-kingdom, a thing which God never permitted in
the days of the kings of Israel and Judah. Even to this
day, most Protestant commentators have accepted
the utterly erroneous idea that the house of Maccabees did cleanse the sanctuary according to the
prophecy of Daniel 8:14. They have not rightly considered that the restoration of God’s eternal kingdom,
the restoration of Christ to the throne of David, the
restoration of the sanctuary, and the restoration of
God’s people from Gentile oppression are inseparable
events which take place at the end of history.
“Daniel 11:14 places the Maccabean uprising in

417

GEMS FROM DANIEL
right perspective. They were ‘the children of the violent’ among the Jews, who exalted ‘themselves to establish the vision’—that is, they attempted to bring
to pass only what Christ can bring to pass. [The
rendering of the Authorized Version, ‘the robbers of
thy people,’ also fits the Maccabeans in that they had
neither divine right to their usurped authority, nor divine blessing upon their heathen alliance, which
brought woe upon God’s people.] As they became
famous in Israel, not a few dreamed that the hour
had dawned to restore the kingdom of Israel and
the throne of David. But the measure of national independence gained under the leadership of the Maccabeans was short-lived. Rome soon put an end to their
ill-timed efforts to become both the civil and religious
rulers of God’s people. Prophecy had said, ‘They shall
fall’ (‘They shall fail’—R.S.V.). They failed because
they were working on wrong principles. They failed
because they united church and state and brought
on religious tyranny. They failed because they attempted to bring about the deliverance of God’s
people by carnal means. They failed because God’s
people were in a desperately low spiritual condition.
They failed because God’s people must be delivered
from Satan’s power within before they can be delivered from Satan’s power without. God’s plan for the
restoration of Israel will eventually be realized when
His people humble themselves before the sanctuary.
“The Maccabean uprising has nothing to do with
the fulfillment of Daniel 8:14. It was not even a type
and forerunner of the cleansing of the sanctuary as
brought to view in Daniel 8:14. It was an ill-timed,
human counterfeit of Daniel 8:14 and Daniel 12:1.
And as the prophecy of Daniel 11:14 says, it utterly
failed. God’s people were not ready for deliverance.
Having escaped from the persecutions of Ptolemy, and
having survived the savagery of Epiphanes, they delivered themselves into the hands of the Romans.” Hiddekel, 35-36.

Despite a recent warning from Rome, Antiochus IV
purposed to defeat the plans of Eulaeus and lenaeus by
launching a ‘first-strike’ invasion of Egypt.
…Antiochus moved with such speed that he actually
met the Egyptian army before they even crossed the
desert area into southern Syria.” Swearingen, TOOTN,
111,112.
Arms of the South Shall Not Withstand, Neither His
Chosen People.—
“Because the ‘arms of the south’ would not have
‘any strength to withstand’ him, Antiochus IV crushed
the Egyptian army so convincingly that he marched
unopposed into Egypt and occupied the city of Memphis. Satisfied, …Antiochus IV withdrew and returned
home to Syria (169 BC). …The next year (168 BC)
…he met with no resistance, marching into both Memphis and Alexandria.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 112.
THE SIX SYRIAN WARS
INTERPRETATION
King of South—Ptolemaic Egypt
Ptolemy 1 Soter (323-282 BC)
King of North—Seleucid Syria
Seleucus I Nicator (312-280 BC)
Verses 6-9
First Syrian War (276-271 BC)
Ptolemy II Philadelphus vs.
Antiochus I Soter
Second Syrian War (261-252 BC)
Antiochus II Theos vs.
Ptolemy II Philadelphus
Third Syrian War (246-240 BC)
Ptolemy III Euergetes vs.
Seleucus II Callinicus
Verses 10-12 Fourth Syrian War (219-217 BC)
Antiochus III Magnus vs.
Ptolemy IV Philopater
Verse 13
Fifty Syrian War (202-199 BC)
Antiochus III Magnus vs.
Ptolemy V Epiphanes
Verse 15
Sixth Syrian War (170-168 BC)
Antiochus IV Epiphanes vs.
Ptolemy VI Philometor
From: Swearingen, TOOTN, 113,114.
DANIEL 11
Verse 5

DANIEL 11:15
So the king of the north shall come,
and cast up a mount, and take the most
fenced cities: and the arms of the south
shall not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shall there be any strength to
withstand.

Neither His Chosen People.—
“The Jewish people could not resist the Syrian
occupation of Judea.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 251.
“Antiochus would also eventually pass a royal
edict to ban Judaism and implement a policy of forced
Hellenism, erecting pagan altars and instituting sacrifices in the process (167 BC). In essence, he desired
the total eradication of the Jewish culture and religion, but this desire would ultimately backfire. By
sending his army back into Judea with the intention of
committing genocide, Antiochus had actually provoked
a Jewish revolt that would arise under the leadership of

So the King of the North Shall Come and Take the
Most Fenced Cities.—The Sixth Syrian War.—
“Ptolemy VI Philometor (reign, 181-145 BC),
would ascend to the throne at a very young age. This
young king would be under the guardianship of two
ministers of state, Eulaeus and Lenaeus, who began to
plan another invasion of Coele Syria (170 BC) in revenge for the Egyptian defeat at the Battle of Panium.

418

DANIEL 11
Judas Maccabaeus. This revolt would eventually result
in the complete removal of the Seleucid presence from
Judea altogether (141 BC).” Swearingen, TOOTN,
113.

He That Cometh Against Him.-“Although Egypt had not been able to stand before Antiochus Magnus, the king of the north, Antiochus Asiaticus could not stand before the Romans, who
came against him. No kingdom could resist this rising
power. Syria was conquered, and added to the Roman Empire, when Pompey in 65 BC deprived Antiochus Asiaticus of his possessions and reduced
Syria to a Roman province.” Smith, DR, 245,246.

Rome Intervenes.—
“Having defeated King Perseus of Macedonia
with a victory at Pydna (168 BC), Rome was now in a
position to intervene in behalf of Egypt.” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 112.
“Having mentioned the Maccabean resistance at
the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, the prophecy returns
to describe the final end of the Egyptian and Syrian
kingdoms. While Rome was engaged in a war with
Philip of Macedonia, Epiphanes calculated that it
would be an excellent opportunity to conquer Egypt.
Egypt was on the point of being entirely subjected to
Syria when Rome intervened.” Hiddekel, 37.

“This verse can apply to no other power but
Rome, as will presently be seen. If it be wondered why
no clearer break is made between Grecian rule and
Roman, it should be remembered that Daniel 11 is an
expansion of Daniel 8. In the prophecy of Daniel 8,
Rome is represented as a horn which grows out of Alexander’s empire. Since the horn exists till the end of
time, the goat (Grecia) exists till the end of time.
George McCready Price points out that Rome was
originally a Greek colony. More significantly, historians all agree that Rome borrowed its culture and
government from the Greeks. Roman civilization
was Greek civilization. When Paul spoke of the civilized world of his day, he divided mankind into
Jews and Greeks (Romans 1:16). The last conflict
between God’s people and the world is said to be a
battle between the sons of Zion and the sons of Greece
(Zechariah 9:13; cf. Joel 3:6).
“The Grecian goat of Daniel 8 lives on in the little
horn of Daniel 8 until it is broken without hand. This
point is vital to a correct understanding of the last verses of Daniel 11.” Hiddekel, 39,40.

“Antiochus carried his conquests into the very
heart of Egypt, which again appealed to Rome for help.
Before assistance arrived, Antiochus had conquered all
of Egypt except the city of Alexandria. Ptolemy was
helpless and in answer to a frantic appeal Rome sent
Popilius Laenas to the rescue of their Egyptian ward.
Antiochus was about to begin the siege of Alexandria
when Popilius Laenas delivered to him the decree of
the Roman senate asking him to refrain from attacking
the allies of the roman Republic. Antiochus answered
that he would give his reply after consulting with his
officers. Laenas took his staff and drew a circle in
the sand around Antiochus and demanded an answer before he left the circle. Antiochus after a few
moments yielded to the ultimatum of the new power
from the west that was henceforth to occupy the
stage of history and hence of prophecy. This happened in 168 BC, the date of the true beginning of
Roman rule.” Bunch, BOD, 171.

He Shall Do According to His Own Will.—
“In defeating Philip of Macedon in the Battle of
Pydna, 168 BC, the power of the Roman Empire was
fully established. A few days after this victory, a Roman ambassador ordered Antiochus Epiphanes out of
Egypt. Without a word of protest, he quickly complied with the Roman demand.”
“The expression ‘do according to his own will’
indicates supreme authority and universal dominion. Similar words are used in describing Alexander: ‘And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule
with great dominion, and do according to his will.’—
Daniel 11:3. Therefore none but Rome could fulfill the
specifications of verse 16.” Hiddekel, 40.

Why Egypt and Syria Would Fall to Rome.—
“Daniel 8:23 says, ‘When the transgressors are
come to the full, a king of fierce countenance …shall
stand up.’ Ptolemy’s persecution of the Jews was the
signal for the downfall of his empire. Antiochus
Epiphanes’ efforts to wipe out Judaism filled up the
cup of the Syrian dynasty. But even the ruling house
among God’s people were little better than their persecutors. The hour had struck for the dominion to
pass from Greeks to the Romans.” Hiddekel, 37.

None Shall Stand Before Him.—
“The verse under consideration describes the invasion and conquest of the territory of the king of the
north by the Roman armies under Pompey. After conquering Syria and making it a Roman province,
Pompey invaded Palestine designated as ‘the glorious land,’ or ‘the goodly land.’—Margin.” Bunch,
BOD, 172.

DANIEL 11:16
But he that cometh against him shall
do according to his own will, and none shall
stand before him: and he shall stand in the
glorious land, which by his hand shall be
consumed.

He Shall Stand in the Glorious Land.—

419

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“The same power was also to stand in the Holy
Land, and consume it. The Romans became connected with the people of God, the Jews, by alliance in
161 BC. From this date Rome held a prominent place
in the prophetic calendar. It did not, however, acquire jurisdiction over Judea by actual conquest
until 63 BC.
“On Pompey’s return from his expedition against
Mithridates Eupator, king of Pontus, two competitors,
sons of the high priest of the Jews in Palestine, Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, were struggling for the crown of
Judea. Their cause came before Pompey, who soon
perceived the injustice of the claims of Aristobulus, but
he wished to defer decision in the matter until after his
long-desired expedition into Arabia. He promised then
to return, and settle their affairs as should seem just and
proper. Aristobulus, fathoming Pompey’s real sentiments, hastened back to Judea, armed his subjects, and
prepared for a vigorous defense, determined at all hazards to keep the crown which he foresaw would be
adjudicated to another. After his Arabian campaign
against King Aretas, Pompey learned of these warlike
preparations and marched on Judea. As he approached
Jerusalem, Aristobulus, beginning to repent of his
course, came out to meet Pompey, and endeavored to
arrange matters by promising entire submission and
large sums of money. Accepting this offer, Pompey
sent Gabinius at the head of a detachment of soldiers,
to receive the money. But when that lieutenant arrived
at Jerusalem, he found the gates shut against him, and
was told from the top of the walls that the city would
not stand by the agreement.
“Not to be deceived in this way with impunity,
Pompey put Aristobulus in irons, and immediately
marched against Jerusalem with his whole army. The
partisans of Aristobulus were for defending the city;
those of Hyrcanus, for opening the gates. The latter,
however, being in the majority, prevailed, and Pompey
was given free entrance into the city. Whereupon the
adherents of Aristobulus retired to the temple fortress,
as fully determined to defend that place as Pompey was
to reduce it. At the end of three months a breach was
made in the wall sufficient for an assault, and the place
was carried at the point of the sword. In the terrible
slaughter that ensued, twelve thousand persons were
slain. It was an affecting sight, observes the historian,
to see the priests, engaged at the time in divine service,
with calm hand and steady purpose pursue their accustomed work, apparently unconscious of the wild tumult, until their own blood was mingled with that of
the sacrifices they were offering.
“After putting an end to the war, Pompey demolished the walls of Jerusalem, transferred several
cities from the jurisdiction of Judea to that of Syria,
and imposed tribute on the Jews. For the first time
Jerusalem was by conquest placed in the hands of
Rome, that power which was to hold the ‘glorious
land’ in its iron grasp till it had utterly consumed
it.” Smith, DR, 246,247.

“In Psalm 106:24 Palestine is called ‘the pleasant
land’ or ‘a land of desire.’—Margin. In Daniel 8:9 we
are told that Rome would wax exceeding great ‘toward
the pleasant land. …The language shows that this
chapter is a further interpretation of the previous
vision.” Bunch, BOD, 172,173..
“Palestine, the ‘pleasant’ or the ‘glorious’ land
fell into Roman hands in 63 BC when Pompey took
Jerusalem after a siege of three months. In 40 BC
there was a temporary setback at Jerusalem when Antigonus with Parthian aid established himself as king.
But in 37 BC Rome again took over control through
the vigorous efforts of a Jewish army led by Herod the
Great who had been given the title, ‘King of the Jews,’
by the senate at Rome. This placed Rome in power
in Palestine at the time of Christ. Rome was now
the king of the north.” Thiele, OSID, 134.
Which By His Hand Shall Be Consumed.—
“The Revised Standard Version says, ‘And all of
it shall be in his power.’ Whichever translation is accepted, Rome did hold all of Judea in its power until
the nation was totally destroyed.” Hiddekel, 40.

DANIEL 11:17
He shall also set his face to enter with
the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shall he do: and
he shall give him the daughter of women,
corrupting her: but she shall not stand on
his side, neither be for him.
He Shall Also.—
“It is a custom of Bible writers to bring their
readers down to an important part of their prophecy,
and then take time to give details by which the power
referred to may be identified before proceeding further.
Thus, having connected Rome with, and as, the king of
the north and ‘the glorious land,’ details are then given by which Rome may be definitely identified.
Three leading Roman personalities—Julius, Augustus, and Tiberius Caesar—and their outstanding
features are mentioned (Daniel 11:17-21), bringing
the reader down to the breaking …of ‘the Prince of the
Covenant’ (our Lord, in the nineteenth year of the reign
of Tiberius).” Were, KONAJ, 41.
And Upright Ones (Agreement) with Him.—
“This verse shows how Rome entered the glorious
land. Rome ‘set his face to enter [come in—LXX]
with the strength of his whole kingdom.’ However, it
was not accomplished by outward force. The text says
he brought ‘upright ones with him.’ In verse 6 the
same Hebrew word for ‘upright ones’ is translated

420

DANIEL 11
ing power of the defacto husband. The Jews came to
hate the Roman yoke, and longed for deliverance by
the hand of the long-looked-for Messiah.” Hiddekel,
42.
“Nicodemus had long felt that there was a want of
spirituality among the Jews; that bigotry, pride, and
worldly ambition guided their actions in a great measure. He had hoped for a better state of things when the
Messiah should come. But he was looking for a Saviour who would set up a temporal throne in Jerusalem, and who would gather the Jewish nation under
his standard, bringing the Roman power into subjection by force of arms.” Signs, 11/15/1883.

as ‘an agreement.’ In 161 BC the Jews concluded
an agreement or league of friendship with the Romans. The book of Maccabees records the event as
follows:
“ ‘So Judas chose Eupolemus the son of John, the
son of Jacob, and Jason the son of Eleazar, and he sent
them to Rome to make a league of amity and confederacy with them. And that they might take off from them
the yoke of the Grecians, for they saw that they oppressed the kingdom of Israel with servitude. And they
went to Rome, a very long journey, and they entered
into the senate house, and said: Judas Maccabeus, and
his brethren, and the people of the Jews have sent us to
you, to make alliance and peace with you, and that we
may be registered your confederates and friends. And
the proposal was pleasing in their sight.’—1 Maccabees 8:17-21.
“The Jews did not have an Isaiah among them to
declare, “Say ye not, A confederacy.’—Isaiah 8:12.
But had they followed the warnings of the prophets,
they would not have entered an alliance with a heathen power. Their leaders were not free from political
expediency. They had more faith in carnal help than in
divine aid. The league with the Romans was a serious
breach of their covenant relationship with God.” Hiddekel, 41.

“The priests and rulers were prepared to place
themselves in a false position in order to sustain their
charges against Christ. The Jews were bitter opponents of the Roman power, they hated Caesar’s rule
and supremacy; but to gain their end, they professed to be his loyal subjects. They had no conscience, no pure principles. When it was safe for them
to be so, they were most tyrannical in their church requirements: when they aimed to bring about some purpose of cruelty, they exalted the power of Caesar. The
world was gone after Christ, they declared, and all men
would believe in him if he was permitted to live.”
Youth Instructor, 2/1/1900.

He Shall Give Him the Daughter of Women.—
“ ‘Daughter of women’ is a peculiar Hebrew expression signifying a woman of eminence or, as the
footnote of the Douay Version says, ‘a most beautiful
woman.’ Commentators have generally applied this to
Cleopatra, a corrupt Egyptian heiress who was renowned for her seductive beauty. The problem is that
it would not be accurate to say that Caesar corrupted
her, for the voluptuous queen made it her business to
seduce and corrupt a number of rulers. It is not likely
that a woman like this would be given such a place in
divine prophecy. Further, the context is dealing with
Rome entering the glorious land by way of an equitable agreement.
“Jeremiah says, ‘I have likened the daughter of
Zion to a comely and delicate woman.’—Jeremiah
6:2. In Solomon’s love song, the bride, representing
God’s people, is addressed as the ‘fairest among
women,’ ‘the only one of her mother.’—Song of Solomon 6:1,9. The prophets repeatedly refer to Israel as
‘the daughter of Zion,’ ‘the daughter of Jerusalem,’ or
‘the daughter of my people.’ This is the ‘beautiful
woman’ which was given to Rome in a union and an
alliance that Heaven could never approve. The very
family which led the Jews to a measure of freedom
from the Grecian yoke actually led them into this corrupting alliance with a heathen power.” Hiddekel,
41,42.

DANIEL 11:18
After this shall he turn his face unto
the isles, and shall take many: but a prince
for his own behalf shall cause the reproach
offered by him to cease; without his own
reproach he shall cause it to turn upon
him.
He Shall Turn His Face to the Isles, & Take Many.—
“This verse briefly covers the extension of the
empire and the downfall of the republic. After Rome’s
subjection of Palestine, the armies of the republic extended the empire to ‘the isles,’ or coastlands of Africa,
Asia Minor and Europe. In the Hebrew idiom, ‘isles’
also contained the idea of far-off places. Money
from all these conquests poured into Rome. With
wealth came luxury, and with luxury came vice. A
historian says:
“ ‘Foreign wealth extinguished in that city a love
for the ancient poverty. Luxury, which in a manner
entered Rome in triumph with the superb spoils of
Asia, brought with her train irregularities and crimes of
every kind, made greater havoc in the cities than the
mightiest armies could have done, and in that manner
avenged the conquered globe.’—Rollins, Ancient History, bk. xix, ch. k.
“Great wealth and power became concentrated in
the hands of a few. The poor Romans sold their votes
to those who were grasping for power. Bread and cir-

She Shall Not Stand on His Side, Nor Be For Him.-“Given over to a sort of marriage with the Romans, the Jewish nation soon began to feel the oppress-

421

GEMS FROM DANIEL
cuses kept the multitude feasted and amused while corrupt politicians destroyed the republican system. Thus
the way was thoroughly prepared for dictatorship.
When the Romans lost the power to rule themselves,
they had to be ruled. Aspirants were not wanting, but
Caesar quickly emerged from the sordid play and counterplay of Roman politics to become the supreme ruler
of the empire.” Hiddekel, 42.

“Among the Romans the idea of becoming a king
was a reproach.” Hiddekel, 42.
“Marcus Antonius (Marc Antony), who would
protect Caesar’s political interests in Rome while he
was away on provincial commands. Serving as tribune
(49 BC), Antony had vetoed several legislative proposals designed to weaken Caesar’s political ambitions.
Because Caesar was not present in Rome personally,
Antony would often be the target of criticisms aimed at
Caesar during senatorial debates because of his personal loyalty to the famous general. In one specific instance, Caesar was issued a senatorial ultimatum to
either disband his troops and return to Rome as a private citizen, or be declared an outlaw of the state. Antony promptly vetoed this decree, which then led the
senate to illegally suspend his tribunal power and take
legal action against him. He would later flee to Caesar
and serve under him in the civil war. Thus, Antony
would ‘cause’ Caesar’s ‘reproach’ to fall upon himself….
“Later,… with unfailing loyalty to his deceased
friend, Antony would exact revenge for Caesar,
causing his ‘reproach to cease’ by hunting down his
assassins. He would eventually win two decisive battles against Brutus and Cassius at Philippi in Macedonia, which later led both of these men to commit suicide in the year 42 BC.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 121.

“After his success in the ‘Alexandrian War’ (47
BC), Caesar would win military victories at Zela (47
BC), Thapsus (46 BC), and Munda (45 BC), thus removing all opposition to his authority, standing unrivaled as the greatest military commander of his
age.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 120,121.
“Julius Caesar was …gifted with extraordinary
capacity for hard work; he abused his talent at times
with military butchery in order to achieve personal
ambition. Once he launched a foreign war ‘deliberately, gratuitously and illegally’ for his own personal aggrandizement, during which he claimed, ‘with some,
but not total exaggeration,’ that his army had killed
430,000 Germans in one day. His ‘insolent’ attempt
to replace the Roman republican form of government
with a personal dictatorship led directly to his death—
which was predicted twice for emphasis in verses 18
and 19.” Maxwell, 1GC, 283.
“Julius Caesar was against the Pompeian or Senatorial party on the coastlands of Africa and the Mediterranean. He conquered Pharnaces, king of Pontus, in
a war of five days. In the great battle of Thapsus he
met and defeated Scipio, Varus, Juba, and Cato, the last
of the Republican leaders with their armies, and became ‘the Lord of the Roman world.’ All of the North
coast of Africa submitted and Caesar returned in triumph to Rome having fought and won 500 battles and
captured 1000 cities, and slain 1,192,000 men.”
Bunch, BOD, 174.

DANIEL 11:19
Then he shall turn his face toward the
fort of his own land: but he shall stumble
and fall, and not be found.
He Shall Turn His Face Toward His Own Land.—
“After his conquest of Asia Minor, Caesar defeated the last remaining fragments of Pompey’s party,
Cato and Scipio in Africa, and Labienus and Varus in
Spain. Returning to Rome, the ‘fort of his own
land,’ he was made dictator for life. Other powers
and honors were granted him which made him in fact
the absolute sovereign of the empire. But the prophet
had said that he should stumble and fall. The language
implies that his overthrow would be sudden and unexpected, like a person accidentally stumbling in his
walk. So this man, who it is said had fought and won
fifty battles, taken one thousand cities, and slain one
million one hundred ninety-two thousand men, fell, not
in the din of battle and the hour of strife, but when he
thought his pathway was smooth and danger far away.”
Smith, DR, 252.

“Leaving Egypt, Caesar passed along the coast of
Palestine and Asia Minor, receiving the submission of
all peoples with such rapidity that he sent the famous
dispatch to Rome, ‘I came, I saw, I conquered.’ (Veni, Vidi, Vici).
“He returned to Rome, where he altered laws,
strengthened the senate, settled disturbances in the army, and later brought western Africa, which had revolted, into submission. Caesar was an organizer as
well as a warrior, and displayed greater liberality and
breadth of ideas than any previous ruler. Roman franchise was granted to the citizens of many cities hitherto
excluded, and all scientific men, of whatever nationality, were equally honored. Still greater plans for Roman
improvement were found among his papers after
death.” Haskell, SDP, 212-213.

He Shall Stumble and Fall.—
“ ‘On the evening before the Ides, Caesar dined
with Lepidus, and as the guests sat at their wine someone asked the question, “What is the best death to die?”
Caesar who was busy signing letters said, “A sudden

A Prince Shall Cause the Reproach to Cease.—

422

DANIEL 11
one.” By noon the next day, despite dreams and
omens, he sat in his chair in the Senate House, surrounded by men he had cared for, had promoted or
spared, and was struck down, struggling, till he fell
dead at the foot of Pompey’s statue.’ [The Cambridge
Ancient History, Vol. IX, p. 738.] Thus he suddenly
stumbled and fell, and was not found, in 44 BC.”
Smith, DR, 252.

this temple had been closed but twice previously. At
this auspicious hour our Lord was born in Bethlehem
of Judea.” Smith, DR, 252,253.
“Octavian defeated all other opponents and became the supreme ruler of the Roman world, with the
title of Augustus Caesar. He named one of the
months of the year after himself. Augustus is designated as ‘a raiser of taxes’ or ‘an imposer of taxes.’—
Fenton. See Luke 2:1. After placing the world under
tribute, Augustus spent enormous sums of money in
vast building enterprises. The world was at peace for
the first time in two centuries. The temple of Janus,
which was closed only in time of peace, was closed
during the reign of Augustus for the first time since
235 BC, and one of the three times in Roman history.”
Bunch, BOD, 174.

“Having been declared dictator for life, commander in-chief of the army, and a sacred person, Caesar returned to Rome—‘the fort of his own land’—to
enjoy the fruits of acquired power. As Alexander was
cut down as he stood on the threshold of worldly glory,
so Caesar fell in the Roman Senate, murdered by
those who had hypocritically honored him.” Hiddekel, 43.

“It was the year 44 BC when the plans of Julius
Caesar were cut short by his untimely death. Republicanism was so far gone that the government fell into
the hands of the strongest men, those who had military
support. Lepidus, one of the second triumvirates, soon
died; Antony, a second member, enamored by Cleopatra, entrapped in the net of Egyptian darkness, cast himself upon his own sword and died; Octavius, an adopted son of Julius Caesar, alone remained.
‘…Every barrier of the Roman constitution had
been leveled by the ambition of Octavius, called Caesar
Augustus. Furthermore, the provinces had so long
been oppressed by the scheming ministers of the republic that they gladly welcomed a one-man power. Augustus restored the senate to its former dignity, it is
true, but ‘the principles of a free constitution are irrevocably lost when the legislative power is nominated by
the executive.’ So Octavius was proclaimed emperor
of Rome by the unanimous vote of that same servile
senate.
“Thus was Caesar Augustus, the raiser of taxes,
brought to the head of the fourth kingdom. After centuries of strife and turmoil, wars, bloodshed, and oppression, the world lay passive at the feet of the Roman
emperor. One government encircled the Mediterranean; from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean one
power bore sway. It would seem that earthly government had achieved its highest ambition. Satan exulted
and rested in the hope that at last victory was his. But
the moment of his quiet resting was the calm preceding
his greatest struggles. So quiet were the nations that
the lifting of a hand in rebellion in any of its most distant parts would send a throb to the center, which
would be answered by the return of the legions.
“Then it was that in the little town of Bethlehem Ephrata, where Mary and Joseph, peasants of
the hill town of Nazareth, had gone to be taxed in
obedience to the command of this same Augustus,
was born a Saviour, even Christ the Lord. The very
condition which caused Satan to exult were the conditions most favorable to Christ when he came to taber-

DANIEL 11:20
Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but
within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.
Augustus, the Raiser of Taxes, Stands Up.—
“Octavius succeeded his uncle, Julius, by whom
he had been adopted. He publicly announced his adoption by his uncle, and took his name. He joined Mark
Antony and Lepidus to avenge the death of Julius Caesar. The three formed what is called the triumvirate
form of government. After [13 yrs.] Octavius was
firmly established in the empire, the senate conferred
upon him the title ‘Augustus,’ and the other members
of the triumvirate now being dead, he became supreme
ruler.
“He was emphatically a raiser of taxes. Luke,
speaking of events that took place at the time when
Christ was born, says: ‘It came to pass in those days,
that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus,
that all the world should be taxed.’ Luke 2: 1. That
taxing which embraced all the world was an event worthy of notice, for the person who enforced it has certainly a claim above every other competitor to the title
of ‘a raiser of taxes.’ During the reign of Augustus
‘fresh taxation was imposed, one quarter of the annual
income from all citizens and a capital levy of one
eighth on all freedmen.’ [The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. X, pp. 96, 97.]” Smith, DR, 252,253.
He Stood Up In the Glory of the Kingdom.—
“Rome reached the pinnacle of its greatness
and power during the ‘Augustan Age.’ The empire
never saw a brighter hour. Peace was promoted, justice
maintained, luxury curbed, discipline established, and
learning encouraged. During his reign, the temple of
Janus was shut three times, signifying that all the world
was at peace. Since the founding of the Roman Empire

423

GEMS FROM DANIEL
nacle among men. He whom Satan had opposed since
the rebellion in heaven; he, the Prince of the worlds
throughout space, ‘was made in the likeness of man,’
and came into the world a helpless babe. The simple
shepherds on the hillside near Bethlehem, tending their
sheep where David had often tended his flocks, heard
the angel choir proclaim the birth of the world’s Redeemer. Wise men in the eastern limits of the vast empire of Augustus, having read the prophecies, were
watching for his star, and they, too, beheld a shining
company of angels, and knew that God dwelt with
men. But the rest of the empire slept on unconscious of his nearness.” Haskell, SDP, 213-215.

DANIEL 11:21
And in his estate shall stand up a vile
person, to whom they shall not give the
honour of the kingdom: but he shall come
in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by
flatteries.
In His Estate Shall Stand Up a Vile Person.—
“In these two verses (21,22) we have the history
of Tiberius Caesar, who was the successor of Octavius
Caesar in the Roman empire; and was one of the most
vile, profligate, bloody tyrants that ever sat upon the
Roman throne. History gives us the same account, that
he obtained by flatteries the kingdom, and afterwards
ruled it by tyranny.” Miller, Evidence, 91.

“As in old time Cyrus was called to the throne of
the world’s empire that he might set free the captives
of the Lord, so Caesar Augustus is made the agent for
the fulfillment of God’s purpose in bringing the mother
of Jesus to Bethlehem.” Desire of Ages, 44.

“Tiberius Caesar followed Augustus on the Roman throne. He was raised to the consulate at the age
of twenty-nine. It is recorded that as Augustus was
about to nominate his successor, his wife, Livia, besought him to nominate Tiberius, her son by a former
husband. But the emperor said, ‘Your son is too vile
to wear the purple of Rome.’ Instead, the nomination
was given to Agrippa, a virtuous and much-respected
Roman citizen. But the prophecy had foreseen that a
vile person should succeed Augustus. Agrippa died;
and Augustus was again under the necessity of choosing a successor. Livia renewed her intercessions for
Tiberius, and Augustus, weakened by age and sickness,
was more easily flattered, and finally he consented to
nominate that ‘vile’ young man as his colleague and
successor. But the citizens never gave him the love,
respect, and ‘honor the kingdom’ due to an upright
and faithful sovereign.
“How clear a fulfillment is this of the prediction
that they should not give him the honor of the kingdom. But he was to come in peaceably, and obtain the
kingdom by flatteries. A paragraph from the Encyclopaedia Americana shows how this was fulfilled:
“ ‘During the remainder of the life of Augustus,
he [Tiberius] behaved with great prudence and ability,
concluding a war with the Germans in such a manner
as to merit a triumph. After the defeat of Varus and his
legions, he was sent to check the progress of the victorious Germans, and acted in that war with equal spirit
and prudence. On the death of Augustus, he succeeded
(AD 14), without opposition, to the sovereignty of the
empire; which, however, with his characteristic dissimulation, he affected to decline, until repeatedly solicited by the servile senate.’ [Encyclopaedia Americana, 1849 ed., Vol. XII, p. 251.]
“Dissimulation on his part, flattery on the part of
the ‘servile senate,’ and a possession of the kingdom
without opposition were the circumstances attending
his accession to the throne, thus fulfilling the words of
the prophecy.

Within Few Days, He Shall Be Destroyed, Not in Anger, Nor in Battle.—
“In a little less than eighteen years after the taxing
brought to view, seeming but a ‘few days’ to distant
gaze of the prophet, Augustus died in AD 14, in the
seventy-sixth year of his age. His life ended not in
anger or battle, but peacefully in his bed, at Nola,
whither he had gone to seek repose and health.” Smith,
DR, 253.
“Augustus died a natural death and not as had
his predecessor. …On his death-bed Augustus asked
his friends: ‘Do you think that I have acted my part in
life well?’ His last words were addressed to his wife:
‘Livia, live mindful of our marriage, and farewell.’
The historian says: ‘He died a very easy death such as
he himself had always wished for.’ …Though his reign
lasted forty-three years, from the viewpoint of the angel in the light of eternity and even of the history of
Rome, it was but ‘few days.’” Bunch, BOD, 175.
“Man that is born of a woman is of few days
and full of trouble.” Job 14:1.
“As for man, his days are as grass. …For the
wind passeth over it, and it is gone.” Psalm
103:15,16.
“In AD 14 Augustus died peacefully in bed at the
age of seventy-six. For a ruler to die so peacefully was
so unusual amid the turbulent stream of history that the
angel made special mention of it. The history covered
in Daniel 11 presents the spectacle of a long, weary
road, filled with the din of battle and stained with the
blood of millions. But for one brief moment a peaceful
benediction hovers over the nations as if to salute the
mysterious Babe of Bethlehem. Not long, however, for
history seems to quietly pause only momentarily before
rushing on toward her final end.” Hiddekel, 43,44.

424

DANIEL 11
“The person brought to view in the text is called
‘a vile person.’ Was such the character sustained by
Tiberius? Let another paragraph from the Encyclopaedia Americana answer:
“ ‘Tacitus records the events of this reign, including the suspicious death of Germanicus, the detestable
administration of Sejanus, the poisoning of Drusus,
with all the extraordinary mixture of tyranny with occasional wisdom and good sense which distinguished
the conduct of Tiberius, until his infamous and dissolute retirement (AD 26), to the isle of Capreae, in the
bay of Naples, never to return to Rome.... The remainder of the reign of this tyrant is little more than a disgusting narrative of servility on the one hand, and of
despotic ferocity on the other. That he himself endured
as much misery as he inflicted, is evident from the following commencement of one of his letters to the senate: “What I shall write to you, conscript fathers, or
what I shall not write, or why I should write at all, may
the gods and goddesses plague me more than I feel
daily that they are doing, if I can tell.” “What mental
torture,” observes Tacitus, in reference to this passage,
'which could extort such a confession!”’ [Ibid.]
“Tyranny, hypocrisy, debauchery, and uninterrupted intoxication—if these traits and practices show a
man to be vile, Tiberius exhibited that character to perfection.” Smith, DR, 255,256.

reader [of Daniel] understand.’ ‘Understand’ is a key
word in the book of Daniel.
“Jesus was present when the angel gave Daniel
the contents of chapter 11. The fact that He considered
the Antiochus Epiphanes interpretation to be inadequate is significant.
“There is no doubt that the interpretation which
applies verses 21-39 to Antiochus Epiphanes is very
old. But is this a good recommendation for it? At the
close of the vision the angel told Daniel to ‘shut up the
words, and seal the book, until the time of the end.’
Then another angel commented, ‘The wise will understand.’ In other words, old interpretations are bound to
be inadequate. Only interpretations made in relatively
recent years have any chance of getting the real issues
straight. The vision was sealed until the time of the
end.” Maxwell, 1GC, 269,270.

DANIEL 11:22
And with the arms of a flood shall they
be overflown from before him, and shall be
broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant.
With Arms of a Flood Shall They Be Overflown.—
“Once in power, Tiberius overthrew all that
were suspected of endangering his crown. He filled
the empire with armies of paid informers. The Jewish
leaders knew the strength of their threat to Pilate, ‘If
thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar’s friend.’ The
priests only had to imply that they would become Caesar’s informers, and this was sufficient to have Jesus
delivered to be crucified. Thousands fell as victims to
the emperor’s jealousy and suspicion—‘with the
arms of a flood’ they were ‘overflown from before
him’—including the Prince of the covenant.” Hiddekel, 44,45.

“Tiberius …was so wicked and cruel that the
whole nation, and especially the residents of the city of
Rome, greatly rejoiced at his death. ‘Upon the first
news of it, they ran up and down the city, some crying
out, “Away with Tiberius to the Tiber.” …As soon as
his corpse began to move from Misenum (the villa of
Lusulla where he died), many cried out for its being
carried to Attella and broiled there in the amphitheatre.
It was, however, brought to Rome and burned with the
usual ceremony.’—Historian’s History of the World,
vol6, p.157.” Bunch, BOD, 175.
“He was indeed a ‘vile person’ (RSV, ‘contemptible person’). Seneca declared that Tiberius was intoxicated only once in his life, and that was all the
time!” Anderson, UDP, 141.

“The phrase above would describe and confirm
Tiberius’ ruthless executions of many suspected conspirators. …The execution of the praetorian prefect
Sejanus, seen by some historians as somewhat justifiable, is one particular example of the swift judgment and merciless brutality of Tiberius toward
those he suspected of sedition.
“As a leader of the Praetorian Guard and protector
of the emperor, Lucius Aelius Sejanus grew to become
a close personal friend of Tiberius. Having the social
status of a mere knight, he would boldly request a marriage alliance with the niece of Tiberius, Julia Livilla,
an aristocrat; yet, the fear of senatorial reprisal from a
marriage alliance between two distinct social classes
moved Tiberius to reject this request. Even so, Sejanus
would continue to consolidate his power by manipulating Tiberius’ constant fear of sedition; he would use his
influence with the emperor to eliminate most of his
political opponents.

Not Antiochus Epiphanes.—
“The most popular interpretation has always been
that the heart of the chapter (11:29-39) deals with Antiochus Epiphanes, of whom we have heard before (see
pages 183-185). Josephus, the famous Jewish historian, held this interpretation in the first century AD. It is
possible that Christ’s disciples did also.
“If the disciples did hold this view, they must
have been very surprised to hear Jesus say that the
‘abomination that makes desolate’ (translated ‘desolating sacrilege’ in Matthew 24:15) that was ‘spoken’
of by Daniel the prophet (in Daniel 8:13 and 11:31)
was still to be fulfilled in the future. Their surprise
must have grown when they heard Jesus add, ‘Let the

425

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“After holding the consulate in concert with Tiberius in AD 31, Sejanus would later receive, from the
emperor himself, both supreme authority over the military and permission to enter into the marriage alliance
with Julia Livilla that he had formerly requested. Yet,
because he was but a mere knight in social status, these
specific appointments provoked the senate to action
against Sejanus, as they would not tolerate being governed by one of a lesser social class. Accusing Sejanus
of an actual plot against the emperor himself, several
powerful people warned Tiberius that he must be eliminated immediately.
“Convinced that Sejanus was plotting against his
throne, Tiberius secretly transferred control of the
Praetorian Guard to Quintus Marco so that the Praetorian Guard could not be used by Sejanus to defend
himself. The emperor dictated an urgent letter condemning Sejanus, which was read to the senate body
without delay. After hearing the letter, the senate rallied behind the emperor’s accusations, conducting the
efficient and merciless execution of Sejanus and his
family without a trial. Many of his friends and former
associates were also brutally executed.” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 124,125.

“Daniel 9:25-27 calls Jesus ‘Messiah the
Prince,’ who ‘shall confirm the covenant with many
for one week.’ Malachi calls Him the Messenger [or
Angel] of the Covenant. Rome sentenced Him to
death. Roman soldiers nailed Him to the cross. A
Roman guard was stationed at His tomb.” Hiddekel,
45.
“The Word existed as a divine being, even as the
eternal Son of God, in union and oneness with His Father. From everlasting He was the Mediator of the
covenant, the one in whom all nations of the earth,
both Jews and Gentiles, if they accepted Him, were to
be blessed. ‘The Word was with God, and the Word
was God.’ Before men or angels were created, the
Word was with God, and was God.” R&H, 4/5/1906.
The Prince of the Covenant Broken.—
“The prophecy declares that Christ, ‘the prince of
the covenant’ would be broken or crucified during the
reign of Tiberius. See Dan. 8:25; 9:25,26. According
the Luke 3:1-2, Jesus was baptized in the fifteenth year
of the reign of Tiberius. This reckoning is from the
time Augustus placed Tiberius on his throne as a jointruler in AD 12. Jesus was crucified by the decree of
Pontius Pilate, procurator of Judea and personal representative of Tiberius. See John 19:7-18. Jesus was
crucified in AD 31, and six years later Tiberius was
murdered.” Bunch, BOD, 176.

Prince of the Covenant.—
“According to 11:22 ‘the king of the north’ was to
break the prince of the covenant. The word used for
‘prince’ in this verse is not the common word (sar)
employed elsewhere in the Hebrew of Daniel. Instead
it is the word of nagid. Nagid occurs in only one other
passage in Daniel—in 9:25-27. There a nagid-prince is
referred to who would make a strong covenant with
many.
“The nagid-prince in 9:25-27 would not only
make a strong covenant but He would also be cut off
(vs. 26). Since a nagid-prince of the covenant was
also to be broken here in 11:22, these two figures
(referred to with the same phraseology in these two
passages) should be identified as the same individual. In our previous discussion of chapter 9 we have
identified that prince as Jesus Christ the Messiah. He
should also, therefore, be identified as the prince in
11:22. The king of the north who was to break Him
should therefore be identified, corporately, as Imperial Rome. This provides a specific link between
chapters 9 and 11, at verse 22 of the latter.” BRI,
2SOD, 246.

“After taking us down to the death of Tiberius,
the prophet now mentions an event to take place during
his reign which is so important that it should not be
passed over. It is the cutting off of the ‘Prince of the
covenant,’ or the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, ‘the
Messiah the Prince,’ who was to confirm the covenant’
one week with His people. (Daniel 9: 25-27.)
“According to the Scripture, Christ’s death took
place in the reign of Tiberius. Luke informs us that in
the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, John
the Baptist began his ministry. (Luke 3: 1-3.) According to Prideaux, Dr. Hales, and others, the reign of Tiberius is to be reckoned from his elevation to the
throne to reign jointly with Augustus, his stepfather, in
August, AD 12. His fifteenth year would therefore be
from August, AD 26, to August, AD 27. Christ was six
months younger than John, and is supposed to have
begun His ministry six months later, both, according to
the law of the priesthood, entering upon their work
when they were thirty years of age. If John began in
the spring, in the latter part of the fifteenth year of Tiberius, it would bring the beginning of Christ’s ministry in the autumn of AD 27. Right here the best
authorities place the baptism of Christ, the exact point
where the 483 years from 457 BC, which were to extend to the Messiah the Prince, terminated. Christ
then went forth proclaiming that the time was fulfilled. From this point we go forward three years and a
half to find the date of the crucifixion, for Christ at-

“The title, Prince (nagid ), is the special title for
the Messiah in chapter 9 (9:25-26). When the use of
this title in Hebrew is compared with chapter 11, it can
be seen that the nagid of the covenant, or Christ, appears in 11:22. This correlation provides us with a
chronologically fixed point when enables us to interpret the prophetic history of chapter 11.” Ferrell, BD,
46.

426

DANIEL 11
tended but four Passovers, and was crucified at the last
one. Three and a half years from the autumn of AD
27 brings us to the spring of AD 31. The death of
Tiberius is placed but six years later, in AD 37.”
Smith, DR, 257-258.

thee understand what shall befall thy people in the
latter days.’ See our text. This, then, is the key that
unlocks the whole subject, and explains two important
points in the vision. First, it touches who are the subjects of this vision; and secondly, when and how the
Roman kingdom became connected with the vision. If
I am thus far correct, then the angel has reference to the
league made with the Romans 158 years BC, when the
Grecian general Bachides withdrew his army from before Jerusalem, and never returned to vex the Jews any
more, as says 1 Maccabees 9:72. For the history of this
league, you can read 1 Maccabees 8 and Josephus B.
12, chap.10, sec. 6. This league was the first ever
made between the Romans and the Jews, according to
Josephus. It took effect 158 years BC, when the
Grecian kingdom, at the command of the Romans,
ceased to trouble the Jews, and the Romans began
to work deceitfully. Then began the Pagan beast to
exercise his influence over the people of God.” Miller, Evidence, 91,92.

“During the reign of Tiberius our Lord was
crucified. Pilate owed his governorship of Judea
only to the favor of Tiberius, the uncle of his wife.
So, when someone in the crowd called out, ‘If thou let
this man go, thou art not Caesar’s friend’ (John 19:12),
he gave in to the demands of the Jewish leaders. This
settled the verdict, Pilate, the vacillating princeling
who knew that Jesus was innocent, gave the order for
Him to be scourged and crucified.” Anderson, UDP,
142.
SUMMARY OF DANIEL 11:16-22
DANIEL 11
INTERPRETATION
“He that cometh against Pagan Rome subjugates
him” vs. 16.
Syria, becoming the new
‘king of the north.”
“Stand in the glorious Pompey the Great, 63 BC.
land.” vs. 16.
“Enter the whole king- Julius Caesar in Egypt.
dom.” vs.17a
“Daughter of women… Jewish people
shall not stand on his
side.” vs. 17b.
“Stumble and fall” vs. 19. Caesar’s assassination
“Raiser of taxes” vs. 20.
Caesar Augustus
“Vile person” vs. 21.
Tiberius Caesar
“Prince of the Covenant Crucifixion of
broken.” vs. 22.
Jesus Christ.
From: Swearingen, TOOTN, 126 [except vs. 17b].

“The ‘him’ with whom the league is made, must
be the same power which has been the subject of the
prophecy from the 14th verse, the Roman Empire.
That this is true has been shown in the fulfillment of
the prophecy in the three individuals who successively
ruled over the empire—Julius, Augustus, and Tiberius
Caesar.
“Now that the prophet has taken us through the
secular events of the Roman Empire to the end of the
seventy weeks of Daniel 9: 24, he takes us back to
the time when the Romans became directly connected with the people of God by the Jewish league in
161 BC. From this point we are then taken through a
direct line of events to the final triumph of the church
and the setting up of God’s everlasting kingdom.
Grievously oppressed by the Syrian kings, the Jews
sent an embassy to Rome to solicit the aid of the Romans and to join themselves in ‘a league of amity and
confederacy with them.’ [See 1 Maccabees 8; Humphrey Prideaux, The Old and New Testament Connected
in the History of the Jews, Vol. II, p. 166.] The Romans listened to the request of the Jews, and granted
them a decree couched in these words:
“ ‘The decree of the senate concerning a league
of assistance and friendship with the nation of the
Jews. It shall not be lawful for any that are subject to
the Romans to make war with the nation of the Jews,
nor to assist those that do so, either by sending them
corn, or ships, or money; and if any attack be made
upon the Jews, the Romans shall assist them, as far as
they are able; and again, if any attack be made upon the
Romans, the Jews shall assist them. And if the Jews
have a mind to add to, or to take away anything from,
this league of assistance, that shall be done with the
common consent of the Romans. And whatsoever addition shall thus be made, it shall be of force.’ This
decree was ‘written by Eupolemus, the son of John,
and by Jason, the son of Eleazer, when Judas was high

DANIEL 11:23
And after the league made with him he
shall work deceitfully: for he shall come
up, and shall become strong with a small
people.
After the League Made With Him.—
“Between whom is this league made? The Romans must be one of the contracting parties, from the
fact that the angel is talking about that government
before and afterwards, and that the fourth or Roman
kingdom was to work deceitfully, ‘and through his
policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand.’
See Dan. 8:25….
“But who was the other contracting party in this
league? I answer, It must have been some people
whom the angel had in view; and he, Daniel, had the
same in view, or he would have given some mark by
which Daniel or the reader could have come to a just
conclusion. Yes, this was the case; for he had told
Daniel in the very outset, ‘Now I am come to make

427

GEMS FROM DANIEL
priest of the nation, and Simon, his brother, was general of the army. And this was the first league that the
Romans made with the Jews, and was managed after
this manner.’ [Flavius Josephus, ‘Antiquities of the
Jews,’ book 12, chap.10, sec. 6, The Works of Flavius
Josephus, p. 374].” Smith, DR, 258,259.

among them the prey, and spoil, and riches: yea, and he shall forecast his devices
against the strong holds, even for a time.
He Shall Enter Peaceably Upon the Fattest Places.—
“Pagan Rome would use this Jewish alliance to
further its own political interests in the eastern Mediterranean basin, growing stronger over time to eventually assume control of the ‘fattest places of the province,’ i.e., the areas that would contain the most abundant wealth and natural resources. This would especially be true in the case of Egypt, as this region contained vast amounts of wealth. In fact… when Octavian (Caesar Augustus) finally confiscated the Ptolemaic
treasure at Alexandria after his defeat of Mark Antony
(31-30 BC), he would personally become wealthier
than the entire Roman state itself. [Michael Grant,
History of Rome, p. 245.]” Swearingen, TOOTN, 130.

He Shall Work Deceitfully.—
“Rome’s dealings with the Jews were a pattern of
its dealings with other nations. The Septuagint and
Douay versions translate ‘league’ into the plural. The
Revised Standard Version gives the same sense by
eliminating the definite article. This indicates that the
prophecy may not be specifying any particular league,
but is showing the manner in which Rome worked.
First it would make a league of friendship or protection with a nation, and then having gained a foothold, it would work deceitfully. The Roman Senate
pursued the policy of coming to the aid of oppressed
peoples. It promised friendship and protection to all
who placed themselves under the umbrella of Roman
law. By preying on the hopes of oppressed nations,
Rome rapidly gained recognition as the arbiter of universal justice.” Hiddekel, 45.

“Daniel 8:25 says, ‘Through his policy also he
shall cause craft to prosper in his hand …and by peace
shall destroy many.’ By leagues of friendship and
peaceful alliances, Rome secured control of the richest
provinces of the world. Dying kings left their kingdoms under the guardianship of Rome. In 133 BC,
Attalus III, king of Pergamum, bequeathed his
kingdom to the Roman Senate. Pergamum was one
of the four divisions of Alexander’s empire and was
the world’s capital in the religion of sun worship.
The old Babylonian system of sun worship had been
transferred there in the early days of the Persian Empire. Attalus not only bequeathed his civil powers to
Rome, but the whole Babylonian religious system
was transferred to the new world power.” Hiddekel, 46.

He Shall Come Up & Become Strong.—
“Having identified the first three Caesars, the
prophetic narrative obviously returns to describe how
Rome grew from a small city-state to a world empire.
In going back to the rise of Rome, Daniel 11 follows
the presentation in Daniel 8. After describing how
‘exceeding great’ Rome became, Daniel 8 goes back in
history to describe the secret of Rome’s growth.” Hiddekel, 45.
He Shall Become Strong With a Small People.—
“Rome was in itself a mere city-state, but by its
profound policy it became ‘strong with a small people.’
In Daniel 8:9 Rome is symbolized by ‘a little horn,
which waxed exceeding great.’ The angel said to Daniel, ‘His power shall be mighty, but not by his own
power.’—Daniel 8:24.” Hiddekel, 45.

“The loyalty of Roman soldiers, officers, governors, senators, and others was purchased by the permission to plunder the provinces ruled. The allegiance
of kingdoms was also purchased by the gift of added
territory taken by force from dangerous foes.” Bunch,
BOD, 177.
He shall Do that which His Fathers have not Done.—
“Before the days of Rome, nations entered upon
valuable provinces and rich territory by war and conquest. Rome was now to do what had not been done by
the fathers of the fathers’ fathers, namely, receive these
acquisitions through peaceful means. The custom was
now inaugurated of kings’ leaving their kingdoms to
the Romans by legacy. Rome came into possession of
large provinces in this manner.
“Those who thus came under the dominion of
Rome derived no small advantage. They were treated
with kindness and leniency. It was like having the prey
and spoil distributed among them. They were protected from their enemies, and they rested in peace and
safety under the aegis of the Roman power.” Smith,
DR, 259,260.

“The Romans were only a small people and yet
through craft, policy, organization, wise rulership, and
their ability to form leagues with various nations pledging their assistance, they became ‘strong’ and ruled the
whole world. ‘Shall ascend and master them with few
people.’—Theodotion. ‘And after friendship with him,
he shall work fraud, and shall go up and conquer with a
small number.’—Vulgate.” Bunch, BOD, 176.

DANIEL 11:24
He shall enter peaceably even upon the
fattest places of the province; and he shall
do that which his fathers have not done,
nor his fathers’ fathers; he shall scatter
428

DANIEL 11
capital from Rome to Constantinople by Constantine in AD 330, was exactly 360 years or a prophetic
‘time.’ Constantine died in AD 337 and the empire
was divided into three divisions after which it was never again united. Therefore, from the time Rome was
united under its first emperor and began its career
as a universal empire, to the division of the empire
into three parts, was a prophetic year. Also at the
close of this period a new order of things was introduced because of the professed conversion of Constantine to Christianity and the union of the church and
state which developed into the Papacy.” Bunch, BOD,
177.

“Daniel 8:25 portrays the cruel irony of Rome in
four words: ‘by peace …destroy many.’ It entered as
a lamb, but soon revealed itself as that ‘fourth beast,
dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly,’ which
‘devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue
with the feet of it.’—Daniel 7:7.” Hiddekel, 46.
“Rome bought more nations by riches and intrigue than she conquered in war; and she compelled
the Jews to submit for about two centuries to that
which no nation before had been able ever to do, viz.,
to be ruled by kings, governors, and high priests,
appointed by the Romans, and not chosen by themselves.” Miller, Evidence, 93.

“It is a fact worth noting that the city [of Constantinople] was founded in the year 330 AD, exactly
three hundred and sixty years, ‘a time,’ after the
victory of Octavius over Antony at Actium, which
placed him as sole ruler on the Roman throne.”
Haskell, SDP, 227,228.

“He indeed performed that which neither his father nor his father’s fathers had performed. He left to
his heirs ‘a new capital, a new policy, and a new religion.’ No one had before dared to think that Rome
could be quitted. Constantine selected the site of Constantinople with more than human wisdom. It is
formed by nature to be the center and capital of a great
monarchy. It has been the contested point among the
nations of Europe since the continent has had nations to
contend, and according to the prophecy of Daniel, it
will be the bone of contention to the end of time….
“The new policy was the outworking of a union
of church and state. The kingdoms of the past had followed a policy somewhat similar to one another. Government was with them the central object. This was
seen in its strongest light in pagan Rome, but with
Constantine the policy changed. Paganism as paganism was laid low, and the ‘mystery of iniquity’ was
enthroned. The world was given Christianity, not as it
came from the life of Him whose name it bore, but as it
was corrupted and polluted by human and satanic
minds. Gibbon says that hereafter the historian will
describe ‘political institutions’ before relating wars,
and that ‘he will adopt the division unknown to the
ancients of civil and ecclesiastical affairs.’ That is,
future history must deal with church and state, not with
kingdoms such as Babylon, Medo-Persia, and Greece.”
Haskell, SDP, 227,228.

DANIEL 11:25
And he shall stir up his power and his
courage against the king of the south with a
great army; and the king of the south shall
be stirred up to battle with a very great
and mighty army; but he shall not stand:
for they shall forecast devices against him.
Rome Contends With the King of the South.—
“The angel now goes back to the beginning of
Roman supremacy to establish the beginning of this
time period of Rome’s imperial and universal rule. In
BC 32, Augustus by the authority of the senate, declared war on Cleopatra and Egypt and this meant war
also with Mark Anthony who was under the bewitching
influence of her charms. Anthony and Cleopatra collected a large army and numerous ships of war for the
impending struggle. The officers became so disgusted
with the conduct of Anthony with Cleopatra that they
began to desert him in such numbers that he felt he
could not trust any of them. Urged by Cleopatra he
abandoned his army and decided to risk all on a naval
engagement. They set sail with a large fleet on August
28, AD 31, and on the second of September met the
war ships of Octavian in the great naval battle of Actium in which they were ingloriously defeated.” Bunch,
BOD, 177.

Against Strong Holds.—
“To the latter part of this verse, Thomas Newton
gives the thought of forecasting devices from strongholds, instead of against them. This the Romans did
from the strong fortress of their seven-hilled city.”
Smith, DR, 260.

“The verse now before us brings to view a vigorous campaign against the king of the south, Egypt, and
a notable battle between mighty armies. Did such
events as these take place in the history of Rome about
this time?—They did. The war was the war between
Egypt and Rome, and the battle was the battle of Actium. Let us consider briefly the circumstances leading
to this conflict.

He Shall Forecast His Devices …Even For a Time.—
“A time is a year of 360 prophetic days or literal
years. This would cover the crest of Roman supremacy
as an empire. …It is a fact that from the battle of
Actium in 31 BC when the Roman Republic came to
an end and Augustus became the first Roman emperor with supreme power, to the removal of the

429

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Mark Antony, Augustus Caesar, and Lepidus
constituted the triumvirate which had sworn to avenge
the death of Julius Caesar. Antony became the brotherin-law of Augustus by marrying his sister Octavia.
Antony was sent into Egypt on government business,
but fell a victim to the charms of Cleopatra, Egypt’s
dissolute queen. So strong was the passion he conceived for her that he finally espoused the Egyptian
interest, rejected his wife Octavia to please Cleopatra,
and bestowed province after province upon her. He
celebrated triumphs at Alexandria instead of at Rome,
and otherwise so affronted the Roman people that Augustus had no difficulty in leading them to engage
heartily in a war against Egypt. This was ostensibly
against Egypt and Cleopatra, but it was really against
Antony, who now stood at the head of Egyptian affairs.
The true cause of their controversy, says Prideaux, was
that neither of them could be content with only half of
the Roman Empire. Lepidus had been deposed from
the triumvirate, and the rule of the empire now lay between the other two. Each being determined to possess
the whole, they cast the die of war for its possession.
“Antony assembled his fleet at Samos. Five hundred ships of war of extraordinary size and structure,
having several decks one above another, with towers
upon the head and stern, made an imposing and formidable array. These ships carried about one hundred
twenty-five thousand soldiers. The kings of Libya,
Cilicia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Comagena, and
Thrace were there in person, and those of Pontus, Judea, Lycaonia, Galatia, and Media, had sent their
troops. A more splendid military spectacle than this
fleet of war ships as they spread their sails and moved
out to sea, the world has rarely seen. Surpassing all in
magnificence came the galley of Cleopatra, floating
like a palace of gold beneath a cloud of purple sails. Its
flags and streamers fluttered in the wind, and trumpets
and other musical instruments of war made the heavens
resound with notes of joy and triumph. Antony followed close behind her in a galley of almost equal
magnificence.
“Augustus, on the other hand, displayed less
pomp but more utility. He had but half as many ships
as Antony, and only eighty thousand foot soldiers. But
all his troops were chosen men, and on board his fleet
were none but experienced seamen; whereas Antony,
not finding sufficient mariners, had been obliged to
man his vessels with artisans of every class, men inexperienced and better calculated to cause trouble than to
do real service in time of battle. The season being far
consumed in these preparations, Augustus made his
rendezvous at Brundusium, and Antony at Corcyra, till
the following year.
“…The battle was fought September 2, 31 BC, at
the mouth of the gulf of Ambracia, near the city of Actium. The world was the stake for which these stern
warriors, Antony and Augustus, now played. The contest, long doubtful, was at length decided by the course
which Cleopatra pursued. Frightened at the din of bat-

tle, she took to flight when there was no danger, and
drew after her the Egyptian squadron numbering sixty
ships. Antony, beholding this movement, and lost to
everything but his blind passion for her, precipitately
followed, and yielded a victory to Augustus, which,
had his Egyptian forces proved true to him, and had he
proved true to his own manhood, he might had gained.
“This battle doubtless makes the beginning of the
‘time’ mentioned in verse 24. As during this ‘time’
devices were to be forecast from the stronghold, or
Rome, we should conclude that at the end of that period western supremacy would cease, or such a change
take place in the empire that that city would no longer
be considered the seat of government. From 31 BC, a
prophetic ‘time,’ or 360 years, would bring us to AD
330. Hence it becomes a noteworthy fact that the
seat of empire was removed from Rome to Constantinople by Constantine the Great in that very year.
[Encyclopaedia Americana, 11th ed., Vol. VII, p. 3.]”
Smith, DR, 260-262.

DANIEL 11:26
Yea, they that feed of the portion of his
meat shall destroy him, and his army shall
overflow: and many shall fall down slain.
Marc Antony Destroyed.—
“Antony was deserted by his allies and friends,
those that fed ‘of the portion of his meat.’ Cleopatra as
already described suddenly withdrew from the battle,
taking sixty ships of the line with her. The land army,
disgusted with the infatuation of Antony, went over to
Augustus, who received the soldiers with open arms.
When Antony arrived at Libya, he found that the forces
which he had left there under Scarpus to guard the
frontier, had declared for Augustus, and in Egypt his
forces surrendered. In rage and despair, Antony then
took his own life.” Smith, DR, 263.
And Many Shall Fall Down Slain.—
“Egypt was completely subjected to Rome and
made a province of Rome. The battle of Actium
marked the end of the Republic and the beginning
of the line of absolute rulers which continued for
360 years till the capital was moved and the empire
divided. … ‘At this time such vast riches were
brought to Rome from Egypt on the reducing of that
country, and the return of Octavius (Caesar) and his
army from hence, that the value of money fell one half,
and the price of provisions and all vendible wares was
doubled thereon.’—Connections of the History of the
Old and New Testament,’ Prideaux, Vol. 2, p. 556.
…So successful was Augustus in his Egyptian campaign that on his return to Rome he was given a three
days’ triumph.” Bunch, BOD, 178.

430

DANIEL 11
Prideaux, The Old and New Testament Connected in
the History of the Jews, Vol.II, p.380.]
“Augustus celebrated his victories in a three-days’
triumph—a triumph which Cleopatra herself would
have graced as one of the royal captives, had she not
artfully caused herself to be bitten fatally by an asp.”
Smith, DR, 263,264.

DANIEL 11:27
And both of these kings’ hearts shall
be to do mischief, and they shall speak lies
at one table; but it shall not prosper: for
yet the end shall be at the time appointed.
They Shall Speak Lies At One Table.—
“Antony and Augustus were formerly in alliance.
Yet under the garb of friendship, they were both aspiring and intriguing for universal dominion. Their protestations of friendship for each other were the utterances of hypocrites. They spoke lies at one table.
Octavia, the wife of Antony and sister of Augustus,
declared to the people of Rome at the time Antony divorced her, that she had consented to marry him solely
with the hope that it would prove a pledge of union
between Augustus and Antony. But that counsel did
not prosper. The rupture came, and in the conflict that
ensued Augustus was entirely victorious.” Smith, DR,
263.

“The Battle of Actium in 31 BC sealed Rome’s title to undisputed supremacy. After this, there was no
serious challenge to the seven-hilled city, and the socalled golden era of the Roman Empire began.” Hiddekel, 48.
His Heart Shall Be Against the Holy Covenant.—
“And the LORD spake unto you out of the midst
of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no
similitude; only ye heard a voice. And he declared
unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to
perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them
upon two tables of stone.” Deuteronomy 4:12.

“Octavius and Antony became brothers-in-law.
But as Shakespeare said, ‘The near in blood, the nearer
bloody.’ They professed friendship, but planned war.
Their alliance, sealed by Antony’s marriage with Octavius’ sister, did ‘not prosper.’” Hiddekel, 47,48.

“‘The Holy Covenant’ here mentioned must be
the same as in verse 30. In Ex. 34:28 the ten commandments are called ‘the words of the covenant,’
…Warfare against the covenant would doubtless include warfare against the people of the covenant. As
the Jews were no longer God’s covenant people, this
must represent the efforts of the Pagan Roman emperors to destroy Christianity and its adherents
during the ten bloody persecutions of the second
and third centuries beginning with Nero and ending
with Diocletian. It was during this time that the catacombs were filled with the martyred dead. Christianity
was outlawed as form of treason against Rome, the
word of God was proscribed, and millions of saints
sealed their faith with their blood. Surely these bloody
persecutions would not be overlooked in this great detailed prophecy. Verse 28 describes the persecutions of
Pagan Rome against ‘the holy covenant’ and verse 30
those of papal Rome. Both waged warfare against the
church and word of God.” Bunch, BOD, 178,179.

The End Shall Be at the Time Appointed.—
“The Pagan Roman supremacy in its imperial
form would continue for a prophetic ‘time’ or 360
years and end with the removal of the seat of empire
from Rome to Constantinople. ‘At the time appointed’
the event took place that closed the career of Rome in
its Pagan and imperial form.’” Bunch, BOD, 179.

DANIEL 11:28
Then shall he return into his land with
great riches; and his heart shall be against
the holy covenant; and he shall do exploits,
and return to his own land.

“The prophecy now comes down into the early
Christian era. Some have taken this passage to refer to
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in AD 70,
but by this time the Jewish nation was no longer
within the holy covenant. The covenant is the plan of
redemption, and only God’s people are embraced by
the holy covenant. The scripture must therefore apply
to Rome’s war against the early church. For 250 years
the early Christians were subjected to severe persecution. They were sewn in the skins of wild animals
and exposed to the fury of the dogs. Others were set
alight as human torches to illuminated the arenas where
thousands gathered to watch the sport of Christians
being thrown to the lions.” Hiddekel. 48.

Then Shall He Return With Great Riches.—
“Two returnings from foreign conquest are here
brought to view. The first was after the events narrated
in verses 26, 27, and the second, after this power had
had indignation against the holy covenant, and had
performed exploits. The first was fulfilled in the return of Augustus after his expedition against Egypt
and Antony. He arrived in Rome with abundant
honor and riches, for ‘at this time such vast riches
were brought to Rome from Egypt on the reducing of
that country, and on the return of Octavianus [Augustus] and his army from thence, that the value of money fell one half, and the prices of provisions and all
vendible wares were doubled thereon.’ [Humphrey

431

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“It is significant that when the prophecy passes
from literal to spiritual Rome the covenant is referred
to three times as ‘the holy covenant’—see Daniel 11:
28, 30. There is no change in the covenant, but there
is a change from literal to spiritual Israel. Literal
Rome co-operated with spiritual Rome in attacking
‘the holy covenant’ between God and His people.
Daniel 11: 30. From these verses onwards (31-45) the
prophecy must be interpreted in relation to spiritual
Rome and her spiritual foes-the true Israel of God
who are faithful to the covenant, Daniel 11: 32. The
conflict described in the closing verses of this chapter,
even though couched in a Palestinian setting, must be
interpreted in relation to the spiritual conflict over the
Law of God. In Daniel 12: 1, those designated ‘thy
people’ are spiritual Israelites, even though the wording does not indicate it. In previous parts of Daniel
that term applied to literal Israel, but here it refers to
spiritual Israelites because the New Testament has laid
down the principle that all that belonged to national
Israel now belongs to the church. Similarly, the New
Testament teaching is that the enemies of Israel and all
prophecies which have a Palestinian setting (and they
all do in principle) have their world-wide fulfillment in
relation to the church. This is the principle that must
guide in the understanding of Daniel 11:40-45. To interpret these verses in relation to nations engaging in
literal conflict in Palestine, is to forget the clear light
that shines from the pages of the New Testament and to
misinterpret these grand revelations concerning the
spiritual conflict as if the Old Covenant concerning
national Israel and her ‘land’ (Deuteronomy 15:4; etc.)
were still functioning.” Were, KONAJ, 53,54.

moon, and stars. This company seemed to be very
fierce and angry. I was then shown another company
bearing a pure white banner, upon which was written,
‘Purity and holiness unto the Lord.’ Their countenances were marked with firmness and heavenly resignation. I saw the heathen idolaters approach them, and
there was a great slaughter. The Christians melted
away before them; and yet the Christian company
pressed the more closely together, and held the banner
more firmly. As many fell, others rallied around the
banner and filled their places.
“‘I saw the company of idolaters consulting together. Failing to make the Christians yield, they
agreed to another plan.’—Early Writings, pp. 210212.
“This other plan of attack against the holy covenant is described in the succeeding verses of Daniel
11.” Hiddekel, 48,49.

DANIEL 11:29
At the time appointed he shall return,
and come toward the south; but it shall not
be as the former, or as the latter.
He Shall Return and Come Toward the South.—
“Daniel 11 makes no clear-cut distinction between Pagan Rome and Papal Rome. Daniel 8 makes
no distinction at all. This is a great insight into history,
for it reveals that Rome merely assumed another
garb in order to more effectively oppose the true people of God. Daniel 11:29-31 portrays how the chameleon laid off the pagan garb and donned the cloak of
Christianity.
“Uriah Smith and others have interpreted this
[verse] as referring to Constantine shifting the capital
of the empire from Rome to Constantinople in AD 330.
But this move was not southward—it was eastward
from Rome, or northward from Jerusalem. The Revised Standard Version is even more definite: ‘He
shall return and come into the south.’ Every other
place were ‘south’ is mentioned in Daniel 11 applies
to Egypt. Why have not commentators recognized that
the text must refer to Egypt? Because they freely admit that they can find no instance in history that would
fulfill the prophecy. But they have ignored an important statement about the south (Egypt) in this very
text. The R.S.V. makes it even plainer: ‘He shall return and come into the south [Egypt]; but it shall not be
this time as it was before.’
“Not just his coming into Egypt would be different, but Egypt itself ‘shall not be …as it was before.’
What does the angel mean by saying that the Egypt of
prophecy is not ‘as it was before’?” Hiddekel, 51.

And He Shall Do Exploits.—
“ ‘Exploits’ is a supplied word, although it is
quite consistent with the intent of the passage. The
passage means that not only was Rome’s heart against
the holy covenant, but he was given opportunity to do
what was in his heart.” Hiddekel, 48.
And Return to His Own Land.—
“This same expression is used in verse 9. It signifies a cessation of active hostilities. Rome prevailed
nothing by warring against the early church. By shedding the blood of Christians, she sowed the seed of the
gospel. Satan saw that he was gaining nothing by this
mode of attack. Inspiration gives us the true insight
into the reason for the sudden end of persecution:
“ ‘Although thousands were slain, yet others were
springing up to supply their places. Satan saw that he
was losing his subjects; for although they suffered persecution and death, yet they were secured to Jesus
Christ, to be the subjects of His kingdom. Satan therefore laid plans to fight more successfully against the
government of God and overthrow the church…
“ ‘It was presented before me in the following
manner: A large company of heathen idolaters bore a
black banner, upon which were figures of the sun,

Former, Latter.—

432

DANIEL 11
“The terms ‘former,’ and ‘latter,’ are the same
Hebrews words translated as ‘first,’ and ‘last,’ in the
verse below.
“‘Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my
called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last.
Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth,
and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I
call unto them, they stand up together.’ Isaiah 48:12.
“Thus Daniel 11:29 could be translated, ‘It shall
not be as “the first and the last.”’ This time of change
from Pagan Rome to Papal Rome would not be as the
“First and the Last”—indicating that Pagan Rome was
changing into a religious phase—a church united to the
state with the Pope pretending to take the place of
Christ as the head of the church. This Roman religious
system, although it would not be as Pagan Rome,
would not be modeled after the First and the Last, the
word of God, either.” PJ.

“Verse 29 even points to the time when Satan also
ceases to use a nation as his main weapon in the great
struggle against God’s people, and certainly not any
nation in the Middle East. If God could successfully
use a church instead of national Israel to be His
weapon of war, then Satan could also use a church.
“The books of Revelation provides the key to an
understanding of Biblical terminology in the Christian
dispensation. Israel is the church, not a people who
live in Palestine. Babylon is the great apostate
church of Christendom, no longer a city that sends
armies from the north against the Jews in Palestine.
Likewise, there is an Egypt, a king of the south, in
the Christian dispensation—‘that great city which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt.’—Rev. 11:8.
“Ellen G. White gives the most succinct definition of the Egypt of the New Testament dispensation
when she says, ‘This is atheism.’—The Great Controversy, p. 269. Antichristian intellectualism, philosophy
and vain deceit, the wisdom of the world which leads
to unbelief—all are embraced by the spiritual land of
Egypt.
“In the prophecies of Daniel, the conflict is localized around Palestine during the first periods of history.
But when the prophecy comes down to the New Testament age, the conflict takes on a world-wide scope.
God still has an Israel, but it is not in Palestine.
Satan still has a king of the north and a king of the
south to make war on the Israel of God, but these powers are no longer the old nations on the frontiers of
Palestine.
“Somewhere the prophecy must change from the
Palestinian setting to the world-wide stage. Verse 29
identifies the change—‘it shall not be this time as it
was before.’
“Why would Rome come into the land of Egypt?
It must be borne in the mind that the context is describing Satan’s war on the church. In verse 28 Rome was
brought to view as a power that made war on the
holy covenant—Christ and His church. But he
failed because paganism was losing its hold upon the
people. It was no match for virile Christianity. Therefore did he ‘return to his own land.’ A new strategy
was formulated and executed by Satan.” Hiddekel, 5153.

But it Shall Not Be as the Former, or as the Latter.—
“In the light from the New Testament we see the
principle of understanding the book of Daniel: the
principle of type and antitype. When passing over
into the Christian era there is an automatic transition from literal to spiritual Babylon; from literal to
spiritual Jerusalem; from the literal lands of Israel
and Babylon to their spiritual antitypes. What literal
Babylon did to the literal Jews, Jerusalem and the temple, is also done, in a spiritual sense, by spiritual Babylon in her spiritual ‘war’ against spiritual Israel.”
Were, KONAJ, 73.
“In the book of Romans, written after the cross,
Paul explains that a Jew is not someone who is such
merely by birth, but a Jew is the person who is circumcised or renewed in heart. This is the born-again Christian. He or she has become a spiritual Jew. The term
Jew under this dispensation now has a spiritual,
worldwide application, as does the city Jerusalem,
which is now interpreted and understood to be the
Christian Church.
“So it is with Babylon. After the cross, Babylon
is no longer understood and confined in a literal, local,
geographical location. No, Babylon, like the Jew and
Jerusalem, is understood as spiritual, worldwide
Babylon. And the same Biblica hermeneutical principle applies to the King of the South as well as to the
King of the North. Before the cross: literal, local.
After the cross: spiritual, worldwide.” Heiks, KON,
5.

At the Time Appointed He Shall Return.—
“‘Return’ to what? ‘Return’ to his warfare
against God’s people! But why did he come into
Egypt? The next verse provides the answer.” Hiddekel, 53.

“Verse 29 is dealing with the events of the Christian dispensation. God no longer has a nation in Palestine who are called the Israel of God, for the Christian
church is now the chosen people, the glorious land, the
object of Christ’s supreme regard (Galatians 3:29).
The archenemy of the church is no longer a nation on
the northern frontier of Palestine, for Palestine has
ceased to be the locale of the great conflict.

DANIEL 11:30
For the ships of Chittim shall come
against him: therefore he shall be grieved,
and return, and have indignation against
the holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall
433

GEMS FROM DANIEL
emerged as the leader of the Visigoths in that same
year; he decided to invade Italy when Honorius denied
him a military command, but was eventually repelled
by the famous general Flavius Stilicho at Pollentia,
Italy (AD 403). As it turned out, Stilicho would enter
into a peace treaty with Alaric, also offering to enlist
Visigothic soldiers into the imperial army. Yet,
Honorius, who had fled to the city of Ravenna from
Rome at the approach of Alaric, viewed this peace treaty by Stilicho as treason, and had him executed in AD
408.
“Honorius promptly outlawed any barbarian involvement in the imperial army, which led Alaric to
take military action against him; he resumed an invasion of Italy, and, on August 24, AD 410, Alaric
sacked and plundered the city of Rome. This sacking
of Rome, which had not taken place in nearly 800
years, horrified the Roman world and exposed the
weakening power of the western empire. The Visigoths would later settle in Gaul and be defeated by the
Frankish king Clovis at Voulon (AD 507-508); they
would later migrate to Toledo in Spain and settle there
until the arrival of the Muslim Saracens (AD 711).
[SECOND TRUMPET] “The notorious Huns
were a nomadic people from central Asia who caused
desolation and destruction all along the Roman frontier
territories. Their famous leader Attila, who called himself the ‘scourge of God,’ would lead them on a series
of devastating raids against the empire from AD 441450, until he was finally stopped by the famous general
Aetius at the Battle of Chalons (AD 451). Attila
would later launch an invasion into Italy, capturing
Aquileia and Milan (AD 453), and would have also
sacked Rome if it weren’t for the diplomacy of Pope
Leo the Great, who met the famous warrior and offered a marriage alliance with a large sum of money in
exchange for a retreat. Attila accepted the offer and
turned back his advance on Rome; he later died of a
hemorrhage after drinking excessively at his marriage
celebration. As for the Huns themselves, some retreated out of Italy altogether, while others remained and
intermarried with the local populations.
[THIRD TRUMPET] “The Germanic Vandals,
who contributed more to the collapse of the western
empire than any other tribe, were able to cross the
undefended Rhine frontier when the Roman armies
were occupied with Alaric and the Visigoths (AD 406).
They would eventually invade North Africa (Ad 425329), and, under their famous king Gaiseric (reign,
AD 428-477), sacked the city of Carthage in Ad 439.
Having made this famous city their capital, the Vandal
tribe would grow into a powerful naval empire, thus
especially fulfilling the phrase ‘ships of Chittim.’
The devastation inflicted by this pirate state became so
notorious that the term ‘vandalism’ would originate
from their legacy of destruction.
“The Vandals would later become directly involved in Roman affairs after the murder of the emperor Valentinian III (reign, AD 427-455); his murderer,

even return, and have intelligence with
them that forsake the holy covenant.
Against Him.—
“The prophetic narrative still has reference to the
power which has been the subject of the prophecy from
the sixteenth verse; namely, Rome.” Smith, DR, 267.
The Ships of Chittim.—
“That which precipitated Rome’s new form of
war against the church was ‘the ships of Chittim.’
Originally, Chittim, or Kittim, referred to Cyprus and
its inhabitants. But the expression also came to take on
a wider meaning. ‘…it came to apply in general to
foreign oppressors.’ Balaam prophesied that ‘ships
shall come from the coast of Chittim, and shall afflict
Asshur [Assyria].’—Numbers 24:24. If ‘ships of Chittim’ are taken to designate foreign oppressors and other
factors that arose to afflict the Roman Empire, the
prophecy refers to conditions that hastened the
downfall of Pagan Rome and the rise of Papal
Rome.” Hiddekel, 53.
The Ships of Chittim Shall Come Against Him.—The
First Four Trumpets.—
“As a symbol of foreign oppression, the phrase
‘ships of Chittim’ can symbolize ‘invaders and destroyers from any quarter,’ and, as we apply this phrase
to Rome in the context of Daniel 11:30, it offers a perfect description of ‘the barbarian hordes’ that ‘invaded
and broke up the western Roman Empire.’ History will
clearly demonstrate that four tribal groups, the Visigoths, the Huns, the Vandals, and the Heruli, each
made significant contributions to the final collapse of
the political infrastructure of western Rome.
[FIRST TRUMPET] “The Visigoths (‘west’
Goths) had originally settled just north of the Danube
River on the Roman frontier; yet, by AD 376, they
would appeal to Rome for permission to cross the Danube into Roman territory because of a series of devastating raids from the migrating Asian Huns. Having
been converted to Arian Christianity by Bishop Ulfilas
in AD 340-341, they were granted entrance into the
empire by the emperor Valens (reign, AD 364-378),
and would later rise in rebellion against Roman authority under their chieftain Fritigern because of certain
injustices perpetrated by Roman officials. Valens
moved to suppress this revolt, but met with a violent
death after his army was crushed by the Visigothic
army at Adrianople on August 9, AD 378. The ‘friend
of the Goths,’ Theodosius (reign, AD 378-395),
would succeed Valens and make peace with the Visigoths in AD 382; he also granted them land for settlement in exchange for service in the imperial army.
“After Theodosius died in AD 395, he was succeeded by his two sons, Arcadius in the east (reign, AD
395-408) and Honorius in the west (reign, AD 395423). A formidable warrior named Alaric had also

434

DANIEL 11
Petronius Maximus, had assassinated him because of
his execution of the famous general Aetius (who had
defeated Attila at Chalons). Eudoxia, the widow of
Valentinian, appealed to Gaiseric for revenge, who
responded by invading Italy with such speed that Maximus was stoned by his own people after fleeing for his
life (AD 455). Gaiseric also sacked the city of Rome
in the same year, spending two whole weeks stripping
the city of all its wealth; he would even capture the
treasures taken from the temple at Jerusalem that
Titus had confiscated in AD 70.” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 144-146.

north were harassing and weakening the empire.
The army was disorganized. The economy was precarious. But worst of all, its people were demoralized and
spiritually bankrupt….
“Constantine sought desperately to find a panacea
for the social, moral, and spiritual ills of society. He
realized that the empire needed some unifying factor,
some rallying cause for the people, who seemed hopelessly divided. As he surveyed the whole scene with
political acumen, he discerned that while paganism was
dying, the Christian church was growing vigorously,
gaining the esteem of thinking men everywhere. He
became satisfied that Christianity was the wave of the
future. After granting full religious freedom to
Christianity in AD 313, he issued a series of decrees
favoring the church. Finally the full support of the
empire was thrown behind the church, and Christianity
became the official religion of the Roman Empire.
The first Sunday law was passed in AD 321.
“America today faces similar problems as the
Roman Empire faced in the days of Constantine.
Prophecy declares that she will apply the same remedy.
(See Revelation 13:11-17.)” Hiddekel, 53,54.

“From this time [the sack of Rome, 455 AD] for
a period of eight years, the Vandals became the terror of the Mediterranean. The coast of all the countries from Gibraltar to Egypt were assailed by the piratical craft of Genseric.’—History of the World, Ridpath,
Vol.3, pp.429,430. …Thus was imperial Rome attacked and humiliated by ships of Chittim.” Bunch,
BOD, 180.
[FOURTH TRUMPET] “The last tribal people,
the Arian Heruli, would settle in Italy and actually
complete the collapse of the western empire. By the
mid-fifth century, this group would be at the mercy of
two notable Germanic military leaders, Ricimer and
Orestes, who had controlled the throne of Rome from
AD 455 to AD 476. During this period, they had
placed nine different emperors on the throne of the
west; eventually, in AD 473, Orestes would place the
young Romulus Augustulus on the throne. His rule
would not last long, however, because Orestes refused
the distribution of land to the veteran soldiers of Italy,
which led to an armed rebellion by the Heruli, under
the famous Germanic military commander Odoacer
(reign, AD 476-493). He would move against Orestes
and kill him in a siege at Pavia, but would later spare
the life of Romulus in a famous act of clemency after
laying siege to the city of Ravenna where the emperor
had fled. Romulus decided to abdicate the throne
peacefully in favor of Odoacer, who then proclaimed
himself king of Italy with the reluctant endorsement
of the eastern emperor Zeno (AD 476). Thus, Odoacer’s ascension to the throne as the first barbarian king
of Italy would signify the complete political collapse of
the west (AD 476).” Swearingen, TOOTN, 147.

“Constantine intended the church to be an instrument in the hands of the Roman Empire. It is
certain that when he bestowed power and special privileges upon the church, he did not foresee the results.
Union with the church did not strengthen the empire,
but the corrupting influence of the church in government brought about the speedy dissolution of the
empire. The barbarians poured across the borders
of the Western Roman Empire, and by AD 476 the
imperial structure had vanished. Yet strangely the
most powerful figure in the city of Rome remained—
the bishop.” Hiddekel, 57.
Indignation against the holy covenant.—
“Constantine’s so-called conversion to Christianity must be recognized for what it was—a new form of
warfare against the holy covenant. Satan had tried unsuccessfully to wipe out the church by open force.
Then he adopted a bold, new strategy. He joined the
church, bringing in the whole world with all the
might, wealth and influence of the empire. This was
indeed a war on the holy covenant—that union of
Christ and His church. Working through the Roman
Empire, Satan pursued a scheme of competing with
God. He tempted the church to commit fornication by
offering her the arm of the state. He made that arm
extremely attractive, holding out all the inducements of
power, money, influence and acceptance. This was
indeed ‘indignation against the holy covenant’!
“ ‘Now the church was in fearful peril. Prison,
torture, fire, and sword were blessings in comparison
with this.’—The Great Controversy, p. 42.” Hiddekel,
54,55.

He Shall Be Grieved.—
“Dominion was given into the hand of the Roman
Empire for an ‘appointed time.’ During that period
Rome’s subjection of the nations under its authority
was thorough. But the Roman Empire filled up her
cup. Rome’s own abominations—pride, avarice, luxury and usurpation of the right to rule the conscience—
were its own undoing.
“By the time Constantine assumed the purple of
Rome in AD 311, the Roman Empire was in an advanced state of disintegration. Barbarians from the

435

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“This doubtless refers to attempts to destroy
God’s covenant by attacking the Holy Scriptures, the
book of the covenant. A revolution of this nature was
accomplished in Rome. The Heruli, Goths, and Vandals, who conquered Rome, embraced the Arian faith,
and became enemies of the Catholic Church. It was
especially for the purpose of exterminating this heresy
that Justinian decreed the pope to be the head of the
church and the corrector of heretics. The Bible soon
came to be regarded as a dangerous book that
should not be read by the common people, but all
questions in dispute were to be submitted to the pope.
Thus was indignity heaped upon God’s word.
“Says the historian, in commenting upon the attitude of the Catholic Church toward the Scriptures:
“ ‘One would have thought that the Church of
Rome had removed her people to a safe distance from
the Scriptures. She has placed the gulf of tradition
between them and the Word of God. She has removed
them still farther from the sphere of danger, by providing an infallible interpreter, whose duty it is to take
care that the Bible shall express no sense hostile to
Rome. But, as if this were not enough, she has labored by all means in her power to prevent the
Scriptures coming in any shape into the hands of
her people. Before the Reformation she kept the bible
locked up in a dead language, and severe laws were
enacted against the reading of it. The Reformation
unsealed the precious volume. Tyndale and Luther, the
one from his retreat at Vildorfe in the Low Countries,
and the other from amid the deep shades of the Thuringian forest, sent forth the Bible to the nations in the
vernacular tongues of England and Germany. A thirst
was thus awakened for the Scriptures, which the
Church of Rome deemed it imprudent openly to oppose. The Council of Trent enacted ten rules regarding
prohibited books, which, while they appeared to gratify, were insidiously framed to check, the growing desire for the Word of God. In the fourth rule, the Council prohibits any one from reading the Bible without a
license from his bishop or inquisitor; that license to be
founded on a certificate from his confessor that he is in
no danger of receiving injury from so doing. The
Council adds these emphatic words: ‘That if any one
shall dare to read or keep in his possession that book,
without such a license, he shall not receive absolution
till he has given it up to his ordinary.’ These rules are
followed by the bull of Pius IV, in which he declares
that those who shall violate them shall be held guilty of
mortal sin. Thus did the Church of Rome attempt to
regulate what she found it impossible wholly to prevent. The fact that no Papist is allowed to read the
Bible without a license does not appear in the catechisms and other books in common use among Roman
Catholics in this country; but it is incontrovertible that
it forms the law of that Church. And, in accordance
therewith, we find that the uniform practice of the
priests of Rome, from the popes downwards, is to prevent the circulation of the Bible—to prevent it wholly

in those countries, such as Italy and Spain, where they
have the power, and in other countries, such as our
own, to all the extent to which their power enables
them. Their uniform policy is to discourage the reading of the Scriptures in every possible way; and when
they dare not employ force to effect this object, they
scruple not to press into their service the ghostly power
of their Church, by declaring that those who presume
to contravene the will of Rome in this matter are guilty
of mortal sin.’ [J. A. Wylie, The Papacy, pp. 180,181.]
“The emperors of Rome, the eastern division of
which still continued, had intelligence, or connived,
with the church of Rome, which had forsaken the
covenant and constituted the great apostasy, for the
purpose of putting down ‘heresy.’ The man of sin
was raised to his presumptuous throne by the defeat of
the Arian Goths, who then held possession of Rome, in
AD 538.” Smith, DR, 267-270.
ROME’S SECOND ENTRANCE INTO THE GLORIOUS LAND: He Shall Return and Have Intelligence With Them That Forsake the Holy Covenant.—
“Constantine wanted to have a state Church, with
Christian clergy acting as civil servants. He called himself a Bishop. He said that he was the interpreter of the
Word of God, and the voice which declares what is true
and godly. According to historian Paul Johnson, Constantine saw himself as being an important agent of
salvation, on a par with the apostles. Bishop Eusebius
(Constantine’s eulogist) relates that Constantine built
the Church of the Apostles with the intention of having
his body be kept there along with the bodies of the
apostles. Constantine’s coffin was to be in the center (the place of honor), with six apostles on each
side of him. He expected that devotions honoring the
apostles would be performed in the church, and he expected to share the title and honor of the apostles.
[Paul Johnson, A History of Christianity, (AthenumNew York, 1979), 68.]
“ ‘Constantine told Bishop Miltiades that he
wanted to build two Christian basilicas, one dedicated
to the Apostle Peter and one dedicated to the Apostle
Paul. He offered a large, magnificent palace for the use
of Miltiades and his successors. Miltiades refused.
He could not accept the idea of having Christianity
be promoted by [the civil and military power of] the
Roman Empire. [Malachi Martin, The Decline and
Fall of the Roman Church, 33-34.]
“ ‘Constantine rode off to war. By the time that he
returned in 314 AD, Miltiades had died. Bishop Sylvester was Miltiades’ successor. Sylvester was eager
to have the Church be spread using Roman roads,
Roman wealth, Roman law, Roman power, and
Roman military might. Constantine officially approved of Sylvester as the successor of Miltiades. Then
he had a coronation ceremony for Sylvester and
crowned him like a worldly prince. No bishop had ever
been crowned before. [Ibid., 34-35]. Constantine’s

436

DANIEL 11
actions give the impression that he believed that he had
authority over the Church.
“ ‘Before Constantine’s “conversion,” Christians
were persecuted. Now, instead of facing persecution,
Bishop Sylvester lived in the lap of luxury. He had a
beautiful palace, with the finest furniture and art. He
wore silk brocade robes. He had servants to wait on
him. Near his palace was a basilica which served as
his cathedral. This luxurious building had seven altars
made of gold, a canopy of solid silver above the main
altar, and 50 chandeliers. The imperial mail system and
transportation system were placed at Sylvester’s disposal. It was now possible to have worldwide church
councils. [James G. McCarthy, The Gospel According
to Rome, 231-232.]
“Sylvester lived in luxury, with servants waiting
on him. Constantine confessed his sins to Sylvester and
asked for his advice. Sylvester presided over worldwide Church councils. He had a splendid palace and a
sumptuous cathedral. He had power, prestige, wealth,
pomp, and the favor of the Emperor.
“Churchmen wore purple robes, reflecting the
purple of Constantine’s court. That was an external
change. The most important change was an internal
one. The Church took on the mentality of Rome.
Under Sylvester, the internal structure of the
Church took on the form and practice and pomp of
Rome.
“Sylvester died in December, 335 AD. He died
peacefully, in a clean, comfortable bed, in the Roman
Lateran Palace. He died surrounded by well-dressed
bishops and priests, and attended by Roman guards.
His body was dressed in ceremonial robes, put in an
elegant casket, and carried through the streets of Rome
in a solemn procession. He was buried with honor and
ceremony, attended by the cream of Roman society and
by the Roman people.
“It is understandable that many Christians would
have preferred an officially approved status for the
Church. But what was the result?
“Before Constantine, the church was a band of
heroic men and women who were so committed to
serve the Lord Jesus Christ that they would endure any
hardship. After 314 AD, the Church became infiltrated by opportunists who were seeking power and
political advancement. Church leaders were no longer
in danger of persecution. Rather, they enjoyed all the
trappings of power and luxury. [Paul Johnson, A History of Christianity, (Athenum-New York, 1979), 69.]
“…Sylvester takes the first step toward a genuinely universal church. He accepts an alliance between
church and empire, so that the church can spread everywhere.
“The 232 successors to Sylvester will never modify or deviate from that fateful step. From that day to
this their spiritual power will be entangled in temporal alliances. Essentially, obstinately, blindly, they
will stand in Sylvester’s shoes down to the late twentieth century.” [Malachi Martin, The Decline and Fall of

the Roman Church (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons,
1981), 33-35.]
“…But he [Sylvester] commanded to call the
Sabbath by the ancient term of the law, and [to call]
the first feria ‘Lord’s day,’ because that on it the
Lord rose [from the dead]. Moreover the same
pope [Sylvester, in 316 AD] decreed that the Sabbath rest should be transferred to the Lord’s Day,
in order that on that day we should rest from earthly
works to the praising of God. [Rabanus Maurus, De
Clericorum Institutione, book 2, chap. 46, in J. P.
Migne, Patrologia Latina, Vol. 107, col. 361, author’s
translation….]
“The transfer of the Sabbath to Sunday [was] officially established by the Catholic church through
Pope Sylvester I…. The first legislative act of the state
enforcing the Venerable Day of the Sun was the law
enacted by Constantine …on March 7, 321 AD.
“…Catholicism became the legalized religion of
the empire on February 28, 380.” Heiks, AD538, 230239, 249,250, 252.
“In the early part of the fourth century the emperor Constantine issued a decree [March 7, 321] making
Sunday a public festival throughout the Roman Empire. The day of the sun was reverenced by his pagan
subjects and was honored by Christians; it was the
emperor’s policy to unite the conflicting interests of
heathenism and Christianity. He was urged to do
this by the bishops of the church, who, inspired by
ambition and thirst for power, perceived that if the
same day was observed by both Christians and heathen,
it would promote the nominal acceptance of Christianity by pagans and thus advance the power and glory of
the church.” Great Controversy, 53.
“In this critical hour when Satan sought to corrupt
the church by the favor of the world, God’s true people
‘stood firm, declaring that they could make no compromise.’—Ibid., pp. 42,43. Rome did not unite with
these. Never! But she did ‘have intelligence’—that is,
she did reach an understanding with those who forsook
the holy covenant.
“By the time of Constantine, the large body of
professed Christians had forsaken the holy covenant. The church, once pure, had gradually departed
from the uncorrupted simplicity of the gospel of Jesus
Christ. Some of the church fathers, such as Justin Martyr and Origen, proposed that the Christian church
needed the wisdom of philosophy and science to defend its faith before the world’s great men. At that
time the world’s center of philosophy was in Egypt,
in the city of Alexandria. From Alexandria the
church began to receive its greatest teachers.
“Origen was born in AD 185 in Alexandria, and
became the greatest Christian teacher of his time. He
applied himself to the study of Platonic philosophy,
being convinced that it was necessary to win the
world’s great men to the Christian faith. Mosheim

437

GEMS FROM DANIEL
says: ‘As this most ingenious man could see no possible method of vindicating all that is said in the Scriptures against the cavils of the heretics and the enemies
of Christianity, provided he interpreted the language of
the Bible literally, he concluded that he must expound
the sacred volume in way in which the Platonists were
accustomed to explain the history of their gods.’—
Church History, Murdock’s trans., cent. 3, pt.2, ch.3,
par.5.
“Professor Harnack writes in Encyclopedia Britannica: ‘By proclaiming the reconciliation of science
with the Christian faith, of the highest culture with the
gospel, Origen did more than any other man to win the
Old World to the Christian religion.’
“In his book, living Fountains or Broken Cisterns,
Dr. E.A. Sutherland shows that the Papacy had its
foundation in Platonic philosophy, imported from
Egypt by the fathers of the church and incorporated. It
was this corruption of the church that led to the union
of church and state. Unless the leaders of the church
had abandoned Jesus Christ for the wisdom of Plato, there could never have been a Papal system or a
medieval church whose educational system was
wholly based on Plato and Aristotle.
“Rome could enter no alliance with those who
maintained the faith of Jesus. But the angel said, ‘He
shall …have intelligence with them that forsake the
holy covenant.’ Many had forsaken Christ, their Leader, and had turned back to Egypt. In the times of Isaiah
and Jeremiah, Israel’s faith in her God was so weak
that, instead of seeking divine support in the crises of
threatened invasions by Assyria and Babylon, she repeatedly turned to Egypt for succor. So also, when the
early church lost faith in her divine Helper, she turned
to Egypt to obtain weapons in the battle for the minds
of men. In his book, Fathers of the Catholic Church,
E.J. Waggoner shows how the church fathers, enamored and captivated by the learning of Alexandria,
led a large segment of the church into Egypt. It is interesting to observe that at that time Alexandria
was both literally and spiritually in Egypt.
“To summarize the subtle turn of events brought
to view in Daniel 11:29,30: Rome returned in her conflict against the holy covenant, but in so doing she
came down into the south, into Egypt. There she
found those who had forsaken the holy covenant.
Here, before the altar of Plato and Aristotle, Pagan
Rome and so-called Christianity were united in unholy wedlock. Rome united with the institutionalized
church because ‘the ships of Chittim’—the manifold
afflictions of the empire—were causing its dissolution.
Constantine saw Christianity as the wave of the future,
the one factor that gave promise of unifying the divided
peoples of the empire.” Hiddekel, 55,56.

more solemn and mysterious; the prayers were more
studied and rhetorical, symbols and symbolic acts were
multiplied; and secondly, there was an increased tendency to meet halfway the polytheistic leanings which
swayed the Christian masses. This is indicated on the
one hand by the constantly increasing importance
attached to ‘intercessors’ (angels, saints and martyrs) both in public worship and in private life; and, on
the other, by the ‘naturalization’ and differentiation
of religious rites after the manner of pagan ceremonials…. Nearly the wholly pagan system of worship
could be dragged into the church.’
“It was during this period that Paul’s prophecy of
the ‘falling away’ was fulfilled and ‘the man of sin’
entered the temple or church of God and dethroned the
Holy Spirit and set himself up ‘as God’ to receive the
worship and adoration that belongs alone to God. The
Papacy has been correctly called ‘baptized paganism.’
The same author continues: ‘Chapels were dedicated
to angels, saints, and martyrs and decorated on their
festivals; a habit grew up of sleeping in their churches
or chapels in expectation of holy dreams or miraculous
cures; holidays were multiplied and differentiated more
and more; superstitious ceremonies, usually associated
with the holy cross or consecrated bread, were woven
into the tenor of ordinary life; nor were charms in the
name of Jesus or of holy men, nor even amulets wanting; wakes and banquets for the dead were celebrated;
the relics of saints were collected and adored, etc.
What more was lacking to complete the analogy with
heathen cults?’—Historian’s History of the World,
Vol.6, p.639,640.” Bunch, BOD, 181.
Repeat of Verse 30 in Our Day.—
“Much of the history that has taken place in
fulfillment of this prophecy will be repeated. In the
thirtieth verse a power is spoken of that ‘shall be
grieved, and return, and have indignation against the
holy covenant [the Ten Commandments]: so shall he
do; he shall even return, and have intelligence with
them that forsake the holy covenant.’ [Verses 31-36,
quoted.] Scenes similar to those described in these
words will take place. We see evidence that Satan is
fast obtaining the control of human minds that have not
the fear of God before them.” 13MR, 394.
“ ‘Having intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant’ means that there will be
dialogue with those that forsake the ten commandments. We covenant with God at baptism.
It is reasonable to conclude that those with whom
the “king of the north” (the papacy) has “intelligence,”
are those among God’s denominated people who have
“forsaken the holy covenant,” that is, quit demonstrating allegiance to God and Him only, by their disregard of His counsels, His will, and finally, His law!
“Daniel’s prophecy suggests that this is a twofold attack against God’s denominated people—from
without and from within. The “King of the north” (the

Paganism Changes Garb.—
“ ‘With regard to public worship we note the following changes during the sixty years before the time
of Constantine. In the first place the ritual became

438

DANIEL 11
Papacy) having “intelligence” with those who forsake
the Holy covenant, these in turn “employ their powers
to deceive” others among God’s people.
“According to inspiration, God’s people should
not have ‘intelligence’ with Rome of her daughters.
Regrettably, there are ‘forsakers of the holy covenant’
who go ahead and encourage this ‘intelligence.’ This
is seen in the various ecumenical dialogues that the
General Conference of SDA has held with the Catholic
Church system and other fallen Protestant church systems.
“For instance, in 1998 the SDA church made an
agreement after four years of dialogue with the Lutheran church system (which has rejected the 4th commandment) on Justification by Faith. The next year
(1999) the Lutheran Church made a similar agreement
with Roman Catholic Church system (the Mother of
harlots, Rev. 17:5) on Justification by Faith. The rule
in algebra is: If A = B, and B = C, then A = C.
(See more on Dan. 11: 41 where the ‘king of the
north’ enters into the ‘glorious land.’)” PJ.

ing the lives of men: the civil and the ecclesiastical,
the ‘royal’ and the ‘sacred.’ One will note the ambitious symbolism for the church: not a shepherd’s staff,
but a conqueror’s sword. Apostolic servanthood was
set aside for equivalency with a king—no, more than
equivalency:
“Of the two ‘swords,’ the pope wrote, the ‘responsibility of the bishops is more weighty [than the
king’s] insofar as they will answer also for the kings of
men themselves at divine judgment.’ In other words,
as author J. Michael Miller wrote, ‘the two swords
theory maintained that secular leaders were subject
to the pope’s spiritual authority.’
“The ‘two swords’ view and the presumptuous
title ‘Vicar of Christ’ were a proclamation of the
papal intention to be ‘king of kings’—ruler over all
other earthly crowned heads. Indeed, the Triple
Crown worn by the popes exemplified the papal claim
to superior status. It would be only a matter of time
and patient insinuation in matters of state until the way
would be opened for the church to exercise her assumed responsibility in the affairs of state.” Handwork, Jean, The Significance of Clovis: Christ’s Mediation Replaced, Cornerstone Newsletter,

DANIEL 11:31
And arms shall stand on his part, and
they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength,
and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and
they shall place the abomination that
maketh desolate.

“In order for the ‘arms’ of a civil entity (in this
case of Clovis) to ‘stand’ or to have allied itself on
behalf of another (that of Catholicism) is only done
through the legal process. Therefore legal documentation will reveal that just such legislation will be
found in the books of the legal code of the day. This
documentation will cement the accuracy of the scriptures and the union of church and state that ‘they’ have
so cordially ‘set up’ in the year AD 508:
“…We have established that the Breviary law
code, an extensive and complex code of law established in 506, was an important development for the
regulation of civil life of Gallo-Romans in Gaul as well
as of the Franks. Its merits caused long and widespread use in maintaining social order and civil peace.
It is also acknowledged from the academic community that Clovis adopted the Lex Romana Visigothorum law code immediately after the battle of the
Visigoths at Vougle in AD 507 (508)….
“After Clovis received the titles and dignity of Roman Patricius and consul from the Greek Emperor Anastasius, the diadem and purple robe in the
Church of St. Martin, and baptism at Rheims in 508, he
was then on his way to Paris to his royal residence and
capital. Henceforth, from his coronation in 508, it
was the Breviary law code that was in place and
implemented as the official law code in the provinces of the Gallo-Romans and also in those provinces
that were conquered by the Franks. That same law
code remained in use until the twelfth century as already established by legal historians.
“Thus, there is indisputable historical confirmation and legislative documentation that ‘the one and
true Catholic faith’ was indeed being ‘set up’ or estab-

Arms Shall Stand on His Part.—
“Not only would the state ‘have indignation
against the holy covenant’ or genuine Christianity, but
the ruler of Rome would unite with or ‘have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant,’ that
is, with the apostate church. The union of church and
state here described made the sword of Caesar the
weapon of the church. The ‘arms’ of the state were
wielded in behalf of the Papal hierarchy. ‘Arms
here stand as the symbol of physical power generally.
It means that he will set physical forces in motion’
(Pulpit Commentary) in behalf of the Papacy. The
papal church has always defended the right to use
the sword of the state to further her ends.” Bunch,
BOD, 182
“The position of the Roman Catholic Church
would also be strengthened in the political arena
through the military ‘arms’ of Christian emperors who
would ‘stand’ on its ‘part.’ Beginning with supportive
emperors like Constantine (reign, AD 312-337) and
Theodosius (reign, AD 378-395), the subsequent Christian emperors who followed after them would also
make their respective contributions to the elevation of
the papal power.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 154.
“In AD 494, Pope Gelasius I had presented to the
Roman emperor the papal view of world governance.
That view involved two ‘swords,’ or two powers, rul-

439

GEMS FROM DANIEL
lished as prophesied. With ‘Catholic law’ commanded
to be ‘preserved unimpaired,’ Clovis had become the
first Catholic king of the ten symbolic horns of the
Western Roman Empire dating from AD 476. His ascension to the throne in 508 brought in its train the
first instituted ‘National’ religion. All other faiths
were outlawed. Then began the long chain reaction in
prophetic history until every European nation accepted
the one and true Catholic faith and was led to follow
the example of the Franks in using the civil power to
enforce the church’s dogmas!
“It is not without great significance that Gregory
of Tours likens Clovis, the first King that ever embraced the Catholic Religion in the new world, to that
of Constantine, the first Emperor that ever recognized
the Catholic Religion in the old world:
“ ‘Like a new Constantine, he moved forward to
the water, to blot out the former leprosy, to wash away
in this new stream the foul stains borne from old
days.... Of his army were baptized more than three
thousand.’ [Gregory of Tours’ The History of the
Franks, trans. O. M. Dalton (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1927), 2:22(31), pgs. 69-70.]
“However, a most significant point needs to be
understood here. When Clovis adopted the Lex Romana Visigothorum or also called the Breviary of Alaric
law code for his Roman subjects, it was not established
under the same premise as a Constantinian Christianity
under the Theodosian law code of the pagan Roman
Empire:
“ ‘Clovis bowed to laws developed by others and
reinforced them through his own authority. He founded anew a State of law, even if he practiced unity in
diversity and recognized the Church’s sovereignty in
the spiritual domain. In each text, he found the means
to reinforce the autonomy of the State and the rights of
each people all the while refusing a Constantinian
Christianity. Obviously, religious unity was the
most important for him: it allowed him in particular
to make Arianism disappear, to condemn incestuous
marriages, and to distinguish the non-religious from the
priests.’ [Rouche, Michel. Clovis. Fayard, France,
1996, 346.]” Heiks, AD508, 58-63.

(Brussels: Albert Dewit Library, 1923), 2:173-5.]
“Kurth now quotes part of a letter from the Bishop St. Remi, however, we include the entire primary
document translated from the Latin [(I) M.G.H., Epistoloe Merovingici et Karolini oevi, p. 114]:
“ ‘Bishop Remegius to the truly holy and very
blessed in Christ by merits lords brothers Heraclius,
Leo and Theodosius. I made Claudius presbyter, not
because I was corrupted by reward, but the testimony
of the very excellent king, who was not only a preacher
of the catholic faith, but also a defender.’” Heiks,
AD508, 64,65.
“In the Frank kingdom there is a fusion so harmonious and so profound that every distinction between the materials that compose the whole disappear
in its absolute unity.… This, not an ordinary situation,
at once elevated the Frankish kingdom so high above
all those of its time, permitting only it to stand up over
centuries, while around it new nationalities crumbled
even before being built. This situation reposed on two
principles that were poorly understood everywhere
outside of the Merovingian dynasty, which it made as
its fundamental law of relations between the two races
over which it reigned: the principle of religious unity
and political equality.” [Kurth, Godefroid. Clovis,
3rd ed., 2 bks. (Brussels: Albert Dewit Library, 1923),
2:241-252.]
“Professor Michel Rouche finds himself in total
agreement with Godefroid Kurth:
“Godefroid Kurth was therefore right in 1896
when he concluded that Clovis’s action rested on a
two-fold benefit, “the principle of religious unity and
that of political equality” (Clovis, op. cit., p. 572), for
one did not go without the other. Romanity could only
be Christian for the Roman law and Catholicism, both
claiming universalism, mutually comforted each other....’ Rouche, Michel. Clovis, (Fayard: France, 1996),
380.” Heiks, AD508, 56,57,58
“The Catholic Encyclopedia …confirms Clovis’s
role in establishing a ‘National’ church among the Gallo–Romans in the new world:
“Beyond encouraging individual bishops to play
a vital role in his kingdom, Clovis sought to use their
collective presence as a force to shape a ‘National’
church that would serve under royal direction to institute a common religious life throughout his realm....
His entire religious policy played an important role in
bringing the Christian establishment into support for
the new regime…. At the same time Clovis played a
significant role in establishing a political and religious order which provided a framework in which
the Germanic and Roman worlds could join hands
in shaping a new civilization in Western Europe.”
[New Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. “Clovis” (ThomsonGale, 2003), 4:809-11. In association with Catholic
University, Washington, D.C.]” Heiks, AD508, 55.

“[Clovis’ biographer] Godefroid Kurth acknowledges how Clovis used his ‘arms’ to enforce and protect the dogmas of the Catholic Church:
“ ‘There it is, the position conquered by the king
[Clovis] in the life of the Frank people. The one he
holds in the Church is of a special nature; he exerts an
influence equaled by anyone else. Undoubtedly, he is
neither, like the emperor, above it to dominate it, nor
outside of it to fight against it like the Arian kings did.
He belongs to it both as a simple faithful man and as a
sovereign; faithful, he obeys to its laws, he believes in
its doctrine; king, and Catholic king, he listens to the
advices of its prelates, he protects it with his forces,
he has an action and an authority over which it does not
fight….’ [Kurth, Godefroid. Clovis, 3rd ed., 2 bks.

440

DANIEL 11
“Among those who adopted the religion of the
Roman Catholic Church was the most powerful barbarian leader, Clovis, king of the Franks. By his support
the priesthood of the Roman Church was fully established in AD 508. While the union of church and
state under Constantine led to the gradual formation of
the Papacy, it was the support of Clovis which established the power of the Roman priesthood in AD 508.
“Justinian, the emperor of the Eastern Roman
Empire, established the civil power of the Papacy in
AD 538.
“The word rendered ‘arms’ is from the Hebrew
word zeroa (singular), which properly means ‘the
arm’—especially the lower arm below the elbow. The
word is used repeatedly to denote strength, might,
power. In verse 15 it means military forces. The text
undoubtedly refers to the Roman Church being
invested with the power of the state—the arm of
civil government.” Hiddekel, 57.

creed of Athanasius was recognized as orthodox, and
Arius and his followers were pronounced heretics.
“But announcing a creed is one thing, and having
it adopted is another. The orthodox creed was published to the world, and then began the fight. In this
strife armies fought and much blood was shed. But in
spite of the fact that Arianism was heresy, the doctrine
spread. It was popular among the barbarian tribes who
invaded the western division of the Roman empire.
“The Vandals, who settled in Africa, were among
the followers of Arius, and so also were the Heruli and
Ostrogoths who settled in Italy. But while Arianism
spread through Africa, Sardinia, and Spain, and was
present at times in Italy, the recognized religion of the
Roman emperor and the empire itself, the northern
kingdom, which now had its seat at Constantinople,
was the Catholic faith, as proclaimed at Nice. As
Constantinople was the representative of this northern
division in his day, so later, between 527 and 565,
Justinian became champion of the Catholic cause.
According to the vision of Daniel 7, the Roman
kingdom would be divided into ten parts, represented
by the ten horns of the fourth beast, and three of these
kingdoms should be plucked up by another power. It is
this part of the history of the fourth kingdom which is
related in Daniel 11, beginning with verse twenty-five.
Justinian’s reign was the most brilliant period of Byzantine history after the death of Constantine, and historians agree that among his greatest military achievements must be classed his exploits against the south.
The success of Justinian was due to the services,
throughout the greater part of his reign, of the celebrated general Belisarius. He was the tool in the hands of
the emperor for crushing out heresy.
“The Vandals were Arians, but Hilderis, the
grandson of their chief warrior, the noted Genseric,
favored the Catholic faith. The disaffection of his subjects made it possible for Hilderis to be dethroned by
Gelimer, who had some title to the Vandal throne.
Under pretense of protecting the dethroned Hilderis,
the emperor Justinian prepared for a war in Africa.
While still undecided as to the advisability of making
the attack because of the weakness of the Roman army,
and the cost of the undertaking, his purpose was confirmed by the words of a Catholic bishop. Said he in
prophetic tones, ‘It is the will of Heaven, O emperor,
that you should not abandon your holy enterprise for
the deliverance of the African church. The God of battles will march before your standard, and disperse your
enemies, who are the enemies of his Son.’ This was
sufficient, and the holy war for the extermination of
Arianism was undertaken.
“A force of Romans, the largest Belisarius could
command from the weakened empire, aided by recruits
front the east, landed in Africa. The Vandal army
numbered 160,000 fighting men. Belisarius was hastened in his march toward Carthage by enemies of
Gelimer and friends of the Catholic creed. The armies
met near the city, and victory came to the Romans

“With confidence we can say that it was the
‘arms’ of Clovis, the state’s military and political
strength, that allied itself with Catholicism.” Heiks,
TDSB, 103.

“The acts of Constantine started a series of
movements which developed rapidly into the antichrist
of the Dark Ages.
“...The Christian world was torn asunder by theological factions. Alexandria, the center of all philosophical study, was also the center of theological activity. Here is where the Greek influence was most forcibly felt. Athanasius, the leader of one faction, was
archdeacon, and afterward bishop of Alexandria, and
his opponent, Arius, was presbyter in the same city.
…In Alexandria, …Christian and pagan schools stood
side by side. Here it was that such men as Origen
and Clement, recognized Fathers of the church,
adopted the philosophy of the Greeks, and applied
to the study of the Bible the same methods which
were common in the study of Homer and other
Greek writers. Higher criticism had its birth in
Alexandria. It was the result of a mingling of the
truths taught by Christ and the false philosophy of
the Greeks. It was an attempt to interpret divine
writings by the human intellect, a revival of the philosophy of Plato. These teachers, by introducing
Greek philosophy into the schools which were nominally Christian, opened the avenue for the theological controversies which shook the Roman world,
and finally established the mystery of iniquity.
“So from this false teaching of the Word in Alexandria came two leaders–Athanasius and Arius. Each
had his following, and yet no man could clearly define
the disputed point over which they wrangled. So great
was the controversy that the Council of Nice was called
to settle the dispute, and deliver to the church an orthodox creed. The emperor Constantine called the council, and was present in person. At this council the
441

GEMS FROM DANIEL
through the folly and rashness of the brother of the
Vandal king. Gelimer fled, and Carthage opened her
gates, and admitted Belisarius and his army. ‘The Arians, conscious that their reign had expired, resigned the
temple to the Catholics, who rescued their saint from
profane hands, performed the holy rites, and loudly
proclaimed the creed of Athanasius and Justinian.’ The
Catholic faith had triumphed. Arianism fell, and Sardinia and Corsica surrendered, and other islands of the
Mediterranean yielded to the arms and creed of Justinian.
“In the autumn of 534 Justinian granted a triumph
to Belisarius. Gibbon thus described the scene: ‘From
the palace of Belisarius the procession was conducted
through the streets to the hippodrome... The wealth of
nations was displayed, the trophies of martial or effeminate luxury; rich armor; golden thrones, and the chariots of state which had been used by the Vandal queen;
the massive furniture of the royal banquet, the splendor
of precious stones, the elegant forms of statues and
vases, the more substantial treasures of gold, and the
holy vessels of the Jewish temple, which, after their
long peregrination, were respectfully deposited in
the Christian church of Jerusalem. A long train of
the noblest Vandals reluctantly exposed their lofty stature and manly countenance.’
“The Arians deplored the ruin of their church triumphant above a century in Africa; and they were justly provoked by the laws of the conqueror, which interdicted the baptism of their children, and the exercise of
all religious worship.’ It is not much to be wondered at
that those who remained plotted against the government and the general who represented Justinian. The
loss of life was terrible in those wars for the supremacy
of one creed above another, and the path to the papal
crown was bloodstained. It is stated that five million Africans were consumed by the wars and government of the emperor Justinian. For the sake of
brevity, the wars between the Catholic empire and the
Vandals may be taken as an illustration of the extermination of the other two kingdoms–that of the
Heruli and the Ostrogoths. Justinian was the reigning emperor; and most of the work was done by Belisarius, this same general, between the years 533 and 538.
The last contest with paganism was in 508 when the
Britons accepted Christianity; the “daily” spoken of in
Daniel had been taken away. By 538 the way was
clear for the papacy to sit enthroned in Rome. The new
capital established by Constantine left Rome that it
might be occupied by the head of the church. The new
religion–Christianity–we have seen mingled with paganism, which it crushed, and gave birth to the papacy.
The new policy, a union of church and state, gave
civil aid to that paganized Christianity called the
papacy. The harvest of the seed sown in the days of
Constantine was reaped in the reign of Justinian,
whose military and civil power supported ‘the
abomination that maketh desolate.’” Haskell, SDP,
229-233.

Arms to Uproot Arian Horns.—
“The religion that did not have the ‘arms’ of Clovis backing it was destined to be nothing but a memory
of history. The government of the Catholic Church, as
we have witnessed, was established on the principal of
force. The government of the Arian Christians in
religious matters was established on the principal of
freedom of choice, religious liberty. With Clovis, the
Merovingian dynasty coming into power and ascending
to the Catholic Faith, Theodoric the Great, the Arian
King of the West decreed between the years 507-511 a
most remarkable decree. This decree was honored by
the Arians but was diametrically opposed to the principals and government of the Catholic Church:
“…We cannot order a religion, because no one
is forced to believe against his will. [Cassiodorus,
Magnus Aurelius, Hodgkin, Thomas, The Letters of
Cassiodorus. London: Henry Frowde, 1886, 185-6.]”
Heiks, AD508, 77.
The Sanctuary of Strength.—
“Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.”
Psalm 96:6.
“The “sanctuary” as we have already witnessed is
the sanctuary of Christ. “Of strength” should read
“The Rock” (masculine singular future tense), as it is
rightly translated in the Hebrew. “The Rock,” of
course, is none other than Jesus Christ (1 Cor. 10:4),
so the phrase ‘sanctuary of strength’ can be interpreted
“the sanctuary of Christ.’ Ironically, those who say
this is a pagan sanctuary have never been able to explain how one ‘pollutes’ a pagan sanctuary.” Heiks,
AD508, 47.
“The word sanctuary comes from the Latin ‘sanctus’ which means ‘sacred.’ Sanctuarium means ‘a sacred place.’ This word cannot properly be used and is
never used in the Scriptures of a common or profane
place. The term ‘sanctuary of strength’ cannot possibly
refer to Pagan Rome for how could that which was the
most corrupt and vile of all earthly organizations be
polluted? Rome was the very symbol of moral and
spiritual weakness and decay, and at the time of this
prophecy was not even strong from a physical viewpoint, but was being overrun and broken to pieces by
the barbarians from the north. Only sacred things and
places can be polluted and profaned. See Mal.
1:7,12; 2:11. The heavenly sanctuary is the place and
source of strength. The Psalmist declared: ‘Thy way,
O God, is in the sanctuary,’ and the Lord send ‘thee
help from the sanctuary, and strengthens thee out of
Zion,’ because ‘strength and beauty are in His sanctuary.’ See Psalm 77:13; 20:2; 96:6. The heavenly sanctuary where God dwells and Christ ministers can alone
be ‘the sanctuary of strength.’” Bunch, BOD, 183.
“ ‘And they’ (Clovis and Catholicism) ‘shall pol-

442

DANIEL 11
lute’ (symbiosis of church and state) ‘the sanctuary of
strength.’ ‘Of strength’ should read ‘the Rock’ (masculine singular future tense), as it is rightly translated
in the Hebrew. ‘The Rock,’ of course, in none other
than Jesus Christ, so the phrase ‘sanctuary of strength’
can be interpreted ‘the sanctuary of Christ.’ Ironically,
those who say this is a pagan sanctuary have never
been able to explain how one ‘pollutes’ a pagan sanctuary.” Heiks, TDSB, 103.

tions in the house which is called by my name, to pollute it.” Jeremiah 7:30.
Ezekiel 7:21 And I will give it into the hands of
the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth
for a spoil; and they shall pollute it. My face will I
turn also from them, and they shall pollute my secret
place: for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it.”
Ezekiel 7:21, 22.
“And will ye pollute me among my people for
handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the
souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive
that should not live, by your lying to my people that
hear your lies?” Ezekiel 13:19.
“For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your
sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves
with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be
enquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith
the Lord GOD, I will not be enquired of by you.”
Ezekiel 20:31
“As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord
GOD; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me: but pollute ye
my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your
idols.” Ezekiel 20:39.
“In that ye have brought into my sanctuary
strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it,
even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the
blood, and they have broken my covenant because of
all your abominations.” Ezekiel 44:7.

“Since the prophecy is now well down in the
Christian dispensation, the text must mean the sanctuary of the new covenant—the temple of God in
heaven (Rev. 11:19). Into this sanctuary Christ entered after His ascension to carry forward His continual
mediation, which was the antitype of the daily ministration of the earthly temple.
“ ‘Sanctuary of strength’ literally reads ‘sanctuary, the strength.’ The words are in apposition. (See
The SDA Bible Commentary, vol.4, p.873.) The word
‘strength’ is from the Hebrew word maoz, which is
used repeatedly in Daniel 11, and is translated as ‘fortress,’ ‘fort,’ ‘forces’ and strong holds.’ (See verses 7,
10, 19, 38,39.) The heavenly sanctuary is the fort,
the strong hold, the refuge, the fortress of the saints.
They enter, worship and dwell there by faith. (See
Hebrews 10:19; Revelation 11:1; 13:6).” Hiddekel,
57,58.
They Shall Pollute the Sanctuary of Strength.—
“The following texts will reveal the primary
meaning of pollute’ used in the context of Daniel 11:31
is synonymous with pollute or to defile:
“Revelation 13:6: “And he opened his mouth in
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.”
“Psalms 74:7: ‘They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground.’
“Leviticus 20:3: ‘And I will set my face against
that man, and will cut him off from among his people;
because he hath given of his seed unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.”
“His name and His sanctuary are synonymous. If
you defile one, you pollute the other:
“Hebrews 10:29 “Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted
the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified,
an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit
of grace?”
“If we as individuals may be found to have ‘trodden underfoot the Son of God’ spiritually, then how
much more is the distinct reality that a system of either
a civil or a religious nature may yet be capable of the
same?” Heiks, AD508, 45.

“As trials and persecution came upon His followers, those only who were willing to forsake all for the
truth’s sake desired to become His disciples. Thus, as
long as persecution continued, the church remained
comparatively pure. But as it ceased, converts were
added who were less sincere and devoted, and the way
was open for Satan to obtain a foothold.
“But there is no union between the Prince of light
and the prince of darkness, and there can be no union
between their followers. When Christians consented
to unite with those who were but half converted
from paganism, they entered upon a path which led
further and further from the truth..
“…As the followers of Christ united with idolaters, the Christian religion became corrupted, and
the church lost her purity and power.” Great Controversy, 44-45, 43.
“The very fact that the sanctuary here mentioned
was polluted and defiled indicates that it was once pure
and clean, and therefore it cannot possibly represent
paganism which was always unclean and polluted.
The ‘sanctuary of strength’ [the heavenly sanctuary]
was polluted by the taking away of the ‘daily ministration’ and the putting in its place of the false and
counterfeit papal system called ‘the abomination
that maketh desolate.’ The very purpose of the
prophecy of Dan. 8:10-12 is to picture the profanation

“For the children of Judah have done evil in my
sight, saith the LORD: they have set their abomina-

443

GEMS FROM DANIEL
and pollution of the heavenly sanctuary and its services
by the desolating papal abomination. In Rev. 13:6 another prophet gives a similar description of the papal
profanation of God’s tabernacle or sanctuary.
“The question is asked as to how it would be possible for an earthly power to pollute or defile the heavenly sanctuary and its services? In the same way that
holy things and persons and places on earth are defiled.
This defiling does not necessarily affect the character
of that which is profaned. The Revelator declared that
the papacy would blaspheme the ‘name’ or character of
God. (Rev. 13:6). To Israel the Lord said: ‘But ye
turned and polluted my name.’ (Jer. 34:16). This was
done in violation of the command: ‘Neither shalt thou
profane the name of thy God.’ (Lev. 19:12). The following verses show that we profane and pollute
God’s name when we sin. Yet no one would think for
a moment that by thus polluting God’s name, His character is actually made less holy or perfect.
“By profaning God’s ‘holy things’ including His
holy Sabbath, God Himself is profaned. Eze. 22:26. A
number of times in Eze. 20 the Lord said of Israel:
‘They have polluted My Sabbaths’ or ‘My Sabbaths
they greatly polluted.’ The method by which this pollution took place is described in verse 16: ‘Because
they despised my judgments, and walked not in my
statutes, but polluted by Sabbaths: for their heart went
after their idols.’ In Neh. 13:15-18 are enumerated the
things that ‘profane the Sabbath day.’ In Isa. 56:1,2, a
blessing is pronounced upon the man ‘that keepeth the
Sabbath from polluting it,; and this is done by keeping
‘his hand from doing any evil.’ Sin or evil defiles
God’s name, pollutes His Sabbath, and even profanes
God Himself. Yet their true character remains unchanged.” Bunch, BOD, 121,122.

luted.” Ezekiel 20:13.
“Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no difference
between the holy and profane, neither have they
shewed difference between the unclean and the clean,
and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am
profaned among them.” Ezekiel 22:26.
“The Lord declared that no Israelite should ‘profane the sanctuary of his God’ or ‘profane the holy
things of the children of Israel, which they offer unto
the Lord.’ (Lev. 21:12; 22:15). Jer. 7:30 tells us how
God’s earthly sanctuary was polluted by heathen
‘abominations’ being brought into it. It is against the
Priest of the heavenly sanctuary and His continual mediatorial ministration that Satan has centered his attacks. He knows that there is salvation only in Christ
and that He is the one Priest and Mediator between
God and man. 1 Tim. 2:5,6; Heb. 3:1,2. It is for this
reason that Satan instituted the counterfeit papal
mediatorial system which for more than a millennium defiled and polluted the true by covering it up
and hiding it from the people.” Bunch, BOD, 122.
“The text under consideration says that Papal
Rome would ‘pollute the sanctuary.’ In Daniel 8:11, it
says that Rome would cast down the place of Christ’s
sanctuary. Some may wonder how the heavenly sanctuary can be defiled or polluted by Rome. According
to the typical sanctuary which was erected by Moses,
God’s people were the only ones who defiled the sanctuary (Patriarchs and Prophets, pp. 354-357). But
there is no disharmony between type and antitype.
When God’s church of the Thyatira period suffered
‘that woman Jezebel [the Roman Catholic Church]
…to teach and seduce’ God’s servants ‘to commit fornication [union with the state],’ then God’s temple was
defiled by the spirit of Romanism which permeated His
church. (See Revelation 2:20.) In short, Rome polluted the sanctuary by polluting the church. Since
the heavenly sanctuary is the dwelling place of God’s
people, it is polluted by all their sins.” Hiddekel, 58.

“When the papal ‘abomination of desolation’ or
‘mystery of lawlessness’ entered and took possession
of God’s church-temple on earth and trampled it underfoot and polluted it for 1260 years, it actually entered
and defiled a part of the heavenly sanctuary. By defiling and polluting the court and placing in it a false
priesthood, a counterfeit sacrifice and a substitute
mediatorial system, the papacy interfered with the
service in the holy place of the sanctuary in heaven.
Christ’s ministry in heaven depends on His ministry in
the church on earth. When confessions to God cease in
the church on earth because they are being made to
human priests, Christ cannot minister His blood to
wash away the sins. Thus the entire daily or continual
ministration of Christ in the court and holy place of the
heavenly sanctuary were virtually taken away and
made void for 42 prophetic months.” Bunch, BOD,
126.

And Shall Take Away the Daily.—
“Gelasius was setting the ground work for a paradigm shift in church and state relationships for the new
world. Gelasius was to become Pope Gelasius I in 492.
Pope Gelasius I had promoted the clear separation between kingship and priesthood but demanded the protection of the faith from the state with the force of its
arms. [Thiel, Andreas, ed. Epistolae Romanorum pontificum
genuinae, bk. 1. Brunsbergae In Aedibus Eduardi Peter, 1868,
Ep. 12, 349-358.]

“…In A.D. 494 Pope Gelasius I wrote to Emperor
Anastasius, declaring the theory of the two swords,
or two powers, governing the world:
“‘There are two ... by which the world is chiefly
ruled: the sacred authority (auctoritas) of bishops and
the royal power (potestas). Of those the responsibility

“But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the
wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they
despised my judgments, which if a man do, he shall
even live in them; and my sabbaths they greatly pol-

444

DANIEL 11
of bishops is more weighty insofar as they will answer
also for the kings of men themselves at divine judgment.’ The popes did not claim to wield the temporal
sword but to direct its proper use.... Gelasius conceived church governance as analogous to that exercised by temporal rulers. This juridical understanding
of the papacy guided papal theory and practice in subsequent centuries. The two swords theory maintained that secular leaders were subject to the
pope’s spiritual authority.’ [J. Michael Miller, The

neck before them, he must subordinate himself to
them in matters of religion, but not rule over them.
If the priesthood recognized that the imperium, the
secular rulership, was conferred on Caesar by God, and
if they in accordance with this obeyed his laws in matters of secular order, how much more zealously should
Caesar thus prove obedience to those to whom administration of ecclesiastical means of mercy was given.
[Cf. on this letter the explanations of Caspar, Papsttum II p.
64 ff.] In the sense of that older teaching on the separation of the two powers, it is also here recognized without reserve that the secular power has been conferred
on Caesar by God and that the priesthood, too, owes
him obedience in earthly matters. In questions of religion, however, the Caesar is not to rule, but to obey
the priesthood. Thus each of the two powers is to have
its separate sphere of activity, inside which the highest
authority is granted to it.
“But this does not mean that Pope Gelasius also
valued these two powers as equal. It is certainly not
without meaning that he said in that tractate that Christ
separated the two powers from each other such that the
Caesars need (indigerent) the bishops for eternal life,
the bishops, on the other hand, use (uterentur) Caesarian orders in secular matters; and it should also be
noticed that the Pope, in his letter to Caesar, described
only the authority of the bishops, but not the kingly
power as “sanctified.” Gelasius actually spoke entirely
explicitly in his letter to Caesar of the greater “weightiness” of the bearers of the priestly power, bearers
who were to give God an account even of the kings.
“…Gelasius I had expressed in that letter to Caesar Anastasius where he treated of the separation of
the two powers, that it was the duty of conscience of
the Caesar to lead the people to the true reverence for
God. Thus even these Popes claimed the help of
Caesar for the fight against heresy, but which was
the true faith was to be decided by the church and not
Caesar. Pope Gelasius expresses in the sharpest way
that Caesar had mixed himself up in questions of faith
with his Henotikon: A Caesar is not a sanctified bishop. Caesar should protect and promote the church, but
not desire to rule over it.” [Voigt, Karl. Staat und Kirche:

Shepherd and the Rock: Origins, Development, and Mission
of the Papacy (Huntington, IN: Our Sunday Visitor Publishing, 1995), 94-5. Imprimatur.]

“Pope Gelasius I was working hard to move the
papacy away from a Constantinian Christianity under
the Theodosian law code of the pagan Roman Empire
in order to further distance the civil power from any
internal interference in church procedures and
dogmas. Continuing on, Karl Voigt addresses the intermingling of Caesar in the affairs of the church as he
outlines the course taken by Pope, Gelasius I:
“The next Pope, Gelasius I, [A.D. 492-496] occupied himself in an even more thoroughgoing manner
with these questions. …The old-testament kingpriesthood, as already mentioned, offered an important
example for the unification of secular and spiritual
powers in one hand; Gelasius nevertheless rejected
completely such a state of things for Christian times.
Before the appearance of Christ, one and the same person had been king and priest, as Melchisedek, even the
heathen Caesars had been simultaneously pontifices
maximi, and Christus was true king and priest. But then
Christus separated the offices and the spheres of activity of the two powers on account of human weakness in
such a way that the Christian Caesars needed the bishops for eternal life and bishops used Caesarian commands in secular affairs, so that the priesthood could
remain far away from secular affairs, and so that a person saturated in worldly things would not have the
directing hand in matter of religion. [Caspar (Papsttum II
p. 68) points out that the opposition and mutual delimitations
of the functions of the two powers which are to be found in
the tractate stood in a certain contradiction to the ideas of
Augustine, whose ideas were, so Caspar directed solely to the
common task of regnum and sacerdotium.] These explana-

Von Konstantin dem Grossen Bis Zum Ende der Karolingerzeit. Aalen. [State and Church from Constantine the Great
to the End of the Carolingian Period.] New printing of
Stuttgart ed., 1936. N.p.: Scientia Verlag Aalen, 1965, 99102.]

tions are particularly important because according to
them the separation of the two power is traceable to
Christ himself, and thus is to be regarded as desired by
God—a teaching which appears that much more meaningful when we take account of the fact that only a few
decades before this the general Council of Chalcedon
had described the Caesar as ‘priest and Caesar’ and as
‘teacher of the faith.’ …Gelasius differentiates two
powers from which the world is ruled most highly, the
holy authority of the bishops (auctoritas sacrata pontificum) and the kingly power (regalis potestas). Between
them, the priestly power is that much the more
weighty [‘In quibus tanto gravius est pondus sacerdotum.’]
since the priests have to give account even over the
kings in the divine court. Even the Caesar bows his

“…AD 501 (Pope Symmachus, AD 498-514)
The church council in Rome pronounced sentence on
October 23, 501, that no human court could judge
the pope; God alone could do that. Thus the pope
was officially exalted above every other man:
“ ‘Thus it was that men acknowledged that they
had no power to judge the Pope. St. Avitus, Bishop of
Vienne, had declared before the opening of the council:
To question the authority of the Pope of Rome is to
overthrow not one bishop alone, but the whole Episcopate.’174 Heiks, AD508, 68-72.

445

GEMS FROM DANIEL
looked to the pope, and to the priests and prelates to
whom he delegated authority. They were taught that
the pope was their earthly mediator and that none
could approach God except through him; and, further, that he stood in the place of God to them and
was therefore to be implicitly obeyed. A deviation
from his requirements was sufficient cause for the severest punishment to be visited upon the bodies and
souls of the offenders. Thus the minds of the people
were turned away from God to fallible, erring, and
cruel men, nay, more, to the prince of darkness
himself, who exercised his power through them. Sin
was disguised in a garb of sanctity. When the Scriptures are suppressed, and man comes to regard himself
as supreme, we need look only for fraud, deception,
and debasing iniquity. With the elevation of human
laws and traditions was manifest the corruption that
ever results from setting aside the law of God.
“Those were days of peril for the church of
Christ. The faithful standard-bearers were few indeed.
Though the truth was not left without witnesses, yet at
times it seemed that error and superstition would wholly prevail, and true religion would be banished from
the earth. The gospel was lost sight of, but the forms
of religion were multiplied, and the people were
burdened with rigorous exactions.
“They were taught not only to look to the pope
as their mediator, but to trust to works of their own
to atone for sin. Long pilgrimages, acts of penance,
the worship of relics, the erection of churches, shrines,
and altars, the payment of large sums to the church—
these and many similar acts were enjoined to appease
the wrath of God or to secure His favor; as if God were
like men, to be angered at trifles, or pacified by gifts or
acts of penance!
“Notwithstanding that vice prevailed, even among
the leaders of the Roman Church, her influence seemed
steadily to increase. About the close of the eighth century, papists put forth the claim that in the first ages of
the church the bishops of Rome had possessed the
same spiritual power which they now assumed. To
establish this claim, some means must be employed to
give it a show of authority; and this was readily suggested by the father of lies. Ancient writings were
forged by monks. Decrees of councils before unheard
of were discovered, establishing the universal supremacy of the pope from the earliest times. And a
church that had rejected the truth greedily accepted
these deceptions.” Great Controversy, 55,56.

“The facts reveal [as the Bible states] that the
‘abomination’ (or sin) that ‘desolates’ was ‘set up’
(Daniel 12:11). What had taken place was the amalgamation or union of church and state. The two swords
theory proposed by Pope Gelasius 1 was to become
accepted church and state policy, which in turn brought
literal desolation to the Christian church. Simultaneously, the ‘daily’ was ‘taken away’ (Daniel 12:11)
when the false gospel of the papal mediatorial system was established as the ‘one and true Catholic
faith.’
“It is important to note that those from whom understanding of Christ’s heavenly mediation was ‘taken
away’ were the true people of God, spiritual Israel.
When the false mediatorial system was imposed, free
exercise of non-Catholic faiths was proscribed and
compulsion of Sunday worship was next to be instituted. As error and superstition grew dominant, confusion increased in God’s faithful waiting ones. Over
time they became so completely oblivious to the ongoing work in the heavenly sanctuary that, by 1844,
God’s people actually believed the sanctuary to be
cleansed was the earth! They simply had no awareness of Jesus’ ministration in the heavenly sanctuary
until specific light was given to reestablish that understanding. To say, then, that the ‘daily,’ meaning
Christ’s first-apartment mediation, was not intentionally removed, taken away or obscured from human mindfulness is a denial of some of the most obvious facts of
history.
“The ‘one and true Catholic faith’ having been
legislatively established, then, it was enforced by the
state as the law of the land. All other faiths were prohibited.
“Thus Satan succeeded in turning the people
away from Christ (heavenward) to man (earthward),
nay, more, to the prince of darkness himself, which
indeed brought spiritual desolation to millions of true
Christians. Now it can be seen that the one was being taken away at the same time that the other one
was being set up. Both find their prophetic commencement in AD 508 (Dan. 11:31; 12:11 and 8:11).
The warning that Paul had given the church in II Thessalonians 2:3-12 regarding the mystery of iniquity then
began to take on real meaning. And in reference to
spiritual devastation, Ellen White adds this particular:
“ ‘This degrading confession of man to man is
the secret spring from which has flowed much of the
evil that is defiling the world and fitting it for the
final destruction.’ Great Controversy, 567.” Heiks,
TDSB, 110,111.

The Importance of Clovis.—
“The alleged conversion of Clovis to Roman
Catholicism is significant for the following five reasons: (1) he was the first barbarian king ever converted
to Roman Catholicism; (2) he unified a majority of
Gaul under one single authority loyal to the papacy; (3)
he liberated the local Roman Catholic populations in
Gaul from Arian [Visigothic] rule; (4) he set up a model church-state government in Paris that would have

“The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her power
increased, the darkness deepened. Faith was transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope
of Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God for
forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the people

446

DANIEL 11
close ties to papal Rome and serve as a model for later
church-state relationships; and (5) as a ‘son’ of Rome
and honorary consul, he would give the Roman Catholic Church his ‘arm’ of political and military support to
further papal interests in Europe. Since all these significant events were accomplished by the year AD 508,
this year should be viewed as a pivotal date in the ‘setting up’ of the papal power; therefore, in this very year,
Clovis would emerge as the political champion of the
Roman Catholic Church.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 160.

enmity with God?’
“3. By the union of church and state. [Rev.
17:1,2: ‘Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters:
With whom the kings of the earth have committed
fornication.’]
“By illicit or forbidden union, the church commits
spiritual adultery. In Scripture, the spiritual husband of
the church is Jesus Christ. If a church unites with or
receives favors from one who is not her husband,
she commits spiritual adultery or spiritual fornication. That unlawful union occurs when the kings,
rulers or civil powers of the state unite with the
church and/or support the church’s interests and
aims. It occurs when the church forsakes its dependence upon divine grace and power, preferring instead
earthly power, usually as expressed in legislative decrees. She thus devotes her energies and priorities to a
mutual relationship with someone or something other
than the One who deserves such attention. It is spiritual unfaithfulness, spiritual adultery, in the sight of God.
Her unlawful act is a form of idolatry.
“In sum, the ‘abomination’ or ‘sin’ of idolatry
that is spoken of in Daniel 11:31 and 12:11 refers to the
amalgamation or union of church and state. That is the
specific sin referred to in those verses of Daniel’s prophetic vision. The church had committed spiritual
adultery and had married herself to one other than her
spiritual husband, Jesus Christ. It can be documented
that not long after the demise of the Roman Empire in
AD 476, two popes requested the strong arm of the
state for the protection of the faith.” Heiks, TDSB,
107, 108.

The Abomination.—
“ ‘Abomination,’ when used prophetically applies
to both pagan and papal Rome. It is employed three
times in the book of Daniel:
“Dan. 9:27 (this refers to the pagan Romans with
their idolatrous standards in the siege, capture and destruction of Jerusalem. This is the Old Testament
source to which Jesus referred in Matthew 24:15);
“Dan. 11:31 (This refers to papal Rome);
“Dan. 12:11 (this is a repetition and enlargement
of Daniel 11:31, and also refers to papal Rome). Each
usage in Daniel is #8251 in concordances and lexicons.
It is defined as something that is ‘abhorrent or blasphemous,’ or even a ‘blasphemous activity. Most often
it is used as a synonym for an idol or idolatry.’ Baker
and Carpenter, Complete Word Study Dictionary: Old
Testament, 1193.
“…Twice in the New Testament, ‘abomination’ is
specifically applied to pagan Rome and twice to papal
Rome. In each case, its meaning is defined as something detestable—specifically, as idolatry or idolatrous
worship (Strong’s #946).
“And in the book of Daniel, that same meaning is
once applied to pagan Rome and twice to papal Rome.
Idolatry is rejection of God, defection from His law
and His principles, a preference for another ruler—
even self—whose influence, power and values are preferred above God’s. This is the significance and application of the term ‘abomination,’ the particular ‘sin’
referred to in these prophetic Scriptures.
“Exactly how this idolatry manifested itself in the
‘abomination’ of prophecy, within the documented
historical context of a counterfeit worship system and
the growing symbiosis of church and state, can be seen
in an investigation of a related term of equal significance—that of spiritual fornication or spiritual adultery. A church can be guilty of the sin of spiritual fornication or spiritual adultery in three ways.
“1. By the worship of idolatrous images, which is
spiritual unfaithfulness to Christ. Eze. 16:17: ‘Thou
has made to thyself images of men [idols] and did
commit whoredom [fornication] with them.’ By worshiping images, ancient Israel was unfaithful to God;
Jer. 3:6,9: ‘She committed adultery with sticks and
stones.’
“2. By the church becoming friendly with the degenerate world. James 4:4: ‘Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is

Shall Place the Abomination that Maketh Desolate.—
“In developing the identity of the “abomination,”
Daniel 11:31 describes its distinctive action: ‘...that
maketh desolate.’ When church and state amalgamate, the fruit of that union will always be one of
force. To confirm this, all one has to do is read the
four verses after Daniel 11:31. All too well, history
confirms that Rome physically desolated Christ’s true
church for nearly 1260 long years. By the acts of Clovis and Catholicism, the union of church and state
had been conceived in AD 508:
“ ‘The mingling of church craft and statecraft
is represented by the iron and the clay. This union is
weakening all the power of the churches. This investing the church with the power of the state will
bring evil results. Men have almost passed the point of
God’s forbearance. They have invested their strength in
politics, and have united with the papacy. But the time
will come when God will punish those who have made
void His law, and their evil work will recoil upon
themselves.’ [Ellen White, Manuscript 63, 1899; Manuscript Releases, 1:12–13.]
“Once again, the scriptures and Ellen White rightly direct us to the foundational issue, the uniting of
church and state after the passing of AD 476. The

447

GEMS FROM DANIEL
4. The issue of religious liberty, two completely
different ideologies or governments warring against
each other, will be illustrated to be the real theme and
premise of the prophetic periods of Daniel thus fully
establishing the above written directive of the Bible
and Ellen White. This will be shown to have been the
best kept secret of the Dark Ages:
“Some have erroneously concluded that the Visigoths were pagans and that, therefore, the conflict in
the West was over paganism. In fact, though, the Visigoths were Arian Christians. Similarly, a few decades
later, the issue in the East between the Vandals and
Ostrogoths (also Arian Christians) and Justinian was
not about paganism, nor was it solely a political conflict. It was a religious war as well that would ultimately decide the dominance of the Catholic or Arian faith
in Eastern Europe.” Heiks, AD508, 72-75.

bride of Christ (the church) cannot unite with the
state in any degree, for to do so is to practice idolatry and commit spiritual adultery. Thus the church
separates herself from Christ.
“The facts have revealed that the “abomination”
or (sin) that “desolates” was “set up” and established
(Daniel 12:11). What had taken place was the amalgamation or union of church and state. The two
swords theory proposed by Pope Gelasius I was to become accepted church and state policy, which in turn
brought literal desolation to the Christian church. Simultaneously, the ‘daily’ was ‘taken away’ when the
false gospel of the papal mediatorial system was
established as the ‘one and true Catholic faith’ which
in turn brought spiritual desolation to the Christian
church as verified from the Lex Romana Visigothorum
law code. It is important to note that those from whom
understanding of Christ’s heavenly mediation was
‘taken away’ were the true people of God, spiritual
Israel, as we have here before demonstrated. When the
false mediatorial system was imposed, free exercise
of non–Catholic faiths was proscribed by law and
compulsion of Sunday worship was next to be instituted….
“As error and superstition grew dominant, confusion increased in God’s faithful waiting ones. Over
time they became so completely oblivious to the ongoing work in the heavenly sanctuary that by 1844 God’s
people actually believed the sanctuary to be cleansed
was the earth! They simply had no awareness of Jesus’
priestly ministration in the heavenly sanctuary until
specific light was given to reestablish that understanding. To say, then, as we have beforehand shown, that
the “daily,” meaning Christ’s first-apartment mediation, was not intentionally removed, taken away or
obscured from human mindfulness, is a denial of some
of the most obvious facts of history and from the plain
writings of Ellen White. [Ellen White, Great Controversy, 55.]
“The ‘one and true Catholic faith’ having been
legislatively established, then, it was methodically enforced by the state as the law of the land. All other
faiths were prohibited. Thus Satan succeeded in turning
the people away from Christ (heavenward) to man
(earthward), nay, more, to the prince of darkness himself, which indeed brought desolation to millions of
true Christians. Now it can be seen that the one was
being taken away at the same time that the other
one was being set up. Both find their prophetic
commencement in AD 508 (Daniel 11:31; 12:11 and
8:11). The warning that Paul had given the church in
II Thessalonians 2:3–12 regarding the mystery of iniquity then began to take on real meaning. And in reference to spiritual desolation, Ellen White adds this particular:
“This degrading confession of man to man is
the secret spring from which has flowed much of the
evil that is defiling the world and fitting it for the final
destruction.” [Ellen White, Great Controversy, 567.]

Abomination of Desolation Set up by 538 AD.—
“When Justinian subdued the Ostrogoths in
Rome on March 1, 538, Italy then came immediately under his civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, including his Sunday law. On May 1, 538, Justinian
prohibited ‘the practice of unlawful religious rites,’
meaning, of course, that one the ‘one and true Catholic
faith’ was to be recognized. Freedom of choice and
religious liberty were then totally denied and legislated
out of existence. Religious liberty was not to be experienced for another 1260 years.’
“…All that remained of the then-known world of
Christendom that was not under Justinian’s civil and
ecclesiastical jurisdiction was the vast territory of Gaul.
However, on May 7, 538, Gaul came under an ecclesiastical Sunday law, as well [at the] Third Synod of
Orleans, AD 538.” Heiks, TDSB, 118.
“But ‘the noon of the papacy was the midnight
of the world.’—J. A. Wylie, The History of Protestantism, b. 1, ch. 4. The Holy Scriptures were almost unknown, not only to the people, but to the priests. Like
the Pharisees of old, the papal leaders hated the light
which would reveal their sins. God’s law, the standard
of righteousness, having been removed, they exercised
power without limit, and practiced vice without restraint. Fraud, avarice, and profligacy prevailed. Men
shrank from no crime by which they could gain wealth
or position. The palaces of popes and prelates were
scenes of the vilest debauchery. Some of the reigning
pontiffs were guilty of crimes so revolting that secular
rulers endeavored to depose these dignitaries of the
church as monsters too vile to be tolerated. For centuries Europe had made no progress in learning, arts, or
civilization. A moral and intellectual paralysis had
fallen upon Christendom.” Great Controversy, 60.
[See Daniel 12:11 for more information.]
Not Antiochos Epiphanes.—
“It has been noted quite correctly that ‘the abomi-

448

DANIEL 11
nation of desolation’ referred to by Jesus Christ (Matt
24:15) was drawn from Daniel 11:31. The fact that its
desolating activity was still future for Jesus would
indicate that something other than Antiochus
Epiphanes was being described.” BRI, 2SOD, 160.

tion of Christ in the heavenly sanctuary. At His
ascension Christ commenced the first phase of His
ministration, which was the antitype of the daily service of the ancient sanctuary. (See Heb. 9:6.)” Hiddekel, 58.
PAPAL ROME
DANIEL 8
DANIEL 11
Daily taken away—v11.
Daily taken away—v31.
Sanctuary cast down— Sanctuary of strength
v11.
polluted—v31
Cast down truth to Shall work deceitfully—
ground—v12.
v23.
Practised and prospered— Shall prosper—v36.
v12.
Transgression of desola- Abomination
that
tion—v13.
maketh desolate—v31.
Time of the end—v17.
Time of the end—v35,40.
Transgressors come to Wicked shall do wickedfull—v23.
ly—12:10.
End of indignation—v19. Indignation accomplished
—v36.
End at time appointed— End at time appointed—
v19.
v27,35.
To become mighty but not Shall become strong with
by own power—v24.
a small people—v23.
Destroy
wonderfully— Great fury to destroy—
v24.
v14.
Destroy the holy people— Fall by sword and
v24.
flame—v33.
Cause craft to prosper— Shall corrupt by flatterv25.
ies—v32.
Magnify himself—v25.
Magnify himself—v25.
By peace destroy many— Many cleave to him with
v25
flatteries—v34.
Against the Prince of Against the God of
princes—v25
gods—v36.
To be broken without Come to his end and none
hand—v25.
shall help him—v45.

“When ye therefore shall see the abomination of
desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand
in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:)
Matt.24:15. ‘The abomination of desolation’ is Papal
Rome and not [just] Pagan Rome. When Pagan Rome
entered Jerusalem and destroyed the earthly temple or
sanctuary, it was no longer a ‘holy place’ (Matt. 23:3739). That this refers to the Papacy during the middle
ages is evident from verses 16, 20-22. The ‘great tribulation’ that was shortened for the ‘elect’ in AD 70.
This also shows that the Sabbath commandment
would still be binding during the middle ages when
the church had to flee to the mountains or wilderness. See Rev. 12:6,13,14. In Mark 13:14,19,20, we
are told that this persecution would come when ‘the
abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the
prophet,’ would be ‘standing where it ought not.’ Daniel declared that ‘the abomination that maketh desolate’
would enter, cast down, tread under foot, and pollute
God’s sanctuary called ‘the sanctuary of strength.’
The Papacy thus stood ‘in the holy place’ and
‘where it ought not.’” Bunch, BOD, 124.
“In the times of Daniel 11:31, it [‘the abomination
of desolation’] was the Church of Rome—that woman
which Revelation 17:5 titles ‘the mother of harlots and
abominations of the earth.’ The Papacy robbed God’s
church of the knowledge and faith of Jesus’ ministration in the heavenly sanctuary. In the place of a heavenly Priesthood, a heavenly Mediator and a heavenly
Sacrifice for repentant sinners, the Papacy directed
God’s people to a substitute priesthood offering mass
on the altars of Rome. The heavenly maoz (fortress)
was taken away from the church, and in its place
the worshippers were directed to another maoz—
the Church of Rome.” Hiddekel, 58,59.

DANIEL 11:32
And such as do wickedly against the
covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but
the people that do know their God shall be
strong, and do exploits.

Daniel 11:31 Parallel to Daniel 8:11-13 and 12:11.—
“The most specific connection between chapters 8
and 11 occurs in the taking away of the tamid or ‘daily,
continual,’ and the setting up of the abomination of
desolation. This is referred to in 11:31. The phraseology use is essentially equivalent to that found in
8:11-13. These passages should be interpreted as referring to the same actions of the same power at the
same time. In chapter 8 that power was identified as
the second or religious phase of Rome, so it should be
identified similarly at this point in 11:31.” BRI, 2SOD,
246.

Such As Do Wickedly Against the Covenant.—
“The ecclesiastical historians tell us that in the
beginning of the sixth century, about AD 538, a number of writers in that day undertook to prove that the
Papal chair, together with councils of his approval,
were infallible, and their laws were binding on the
whole church. These writers were highly honored and
flattered with promotion by the reigning powers.” Miller, Evidence, 96.

“From the context of Daniel 8:11 and Daniel
11:31, it is clear that the ‘daily’ is an appropriate Hebrew expression which denotes the continual media-

449

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Those who forsake the book of the covenant, the
Holy Scriptures, who think more of the decree of popes
and the decisions of councils than they do of the word
of God—these shall he, the pope, corrupt by flatteries.
That is, they shall be led on in their partisan zeal for
the pope by the bestowment of wealth, position, and
honors.” Smith, DR, 278.

ies, everyone who expected to enter the ministry being
required first to gain an experience as an evangelist.
Each was to serve three years in some mission field
before taking charge of a church at home. …With naked feet and in garments coarse and travel-stained as
were those of their Master, they passed through great
cities and penetrated to distant lands. Everywhere they
scattered the precious seed. Churches sprang up in
their path, and the blood of martyrs witnessed for
the truth.” Great Controversy, 64,70-72.

“The two pillars of Satan’s kingdom are flattery
and force. Flattery cannot overcome the soul who
preserves his covenant relation with God, for he says
with Christ, ‘I receive not honour from men.’ On the
other hand, those who lose the love of God in their
souls ‘receive honour one of another.’ (See John 5:4144.) The python snake lubricates his victim with saliva
before he swallows it whole.” Hiddekel, 59.

“As the Romish clergy saw their congregations
diminishing, they invoked the aid of the magistrates,
and by every means in their power endeavored to bring
back their hearers. But the people had found in the
new teachings that which supplied the wants of their
souls, and they turned away from those who had so
long fed them with the worthless husks of superstitious
rites and human traditions.
“When persecution was kindled against the teachers of the truth, they gave heed to the words of Christ:
‘When they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another.’ Matthew 10:23. The light penetrated everywhere. The fugitives would find somewhere a hospitable door opened to them, and there abiding, they would
preach Christ, sometimes in the church, or, if denied
that privilege, in private houses or in the open air.
Wherever they could obtain a hearing was a consecrated temple. The truth, proclaimed with such energy
and assurance, spread with irresistible power.”
Great Controversy, 196.

The People That Do Know Their God.—
“And this is life eternal, that they might know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou
hast sent.” John 17:3.
“Some continued to stand firm amid the prevailing apostasy. The steadfast faith and heroism of
groups like the Waldenses and Albigenses find a very
deserved place in prophecy. They were not only strong
in defence of the faith once delivered to the saints, but
they were aggressive missionaries. Also included
among those that did exploits were the early Reformers such as Wycliffe, Huss and Jerome. Added to
these stalwarts were the great Reformers such as Luther, Knox, Farel, and Calvin.” Hiddekel, 59,60.

“The city of Prague was filled with tumult. A
large class denounced Huss as the cause of all their
calamities and demanded that he be given up to the
vengeance of Rome. To quiet the storm, the Reformer
withdrew for a time to his native village. …Huss did
not cease his labors, but traveled through the surrounding country, preaching to eager crowds. Thus the
measures to which the pope resorted to suppress the
gospel were causing it to be the more widely extended.
‘We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.’
2 Corinthians 13:8.” Great Controversy, 101.

“At the same time a people shall exist who know
their God, and these shall be strong, and do exploits.
These were Christians who kept pure religion alive
in the earth during the Dark Ages of papal tyranny,
and performed marvelous acts of self-sacrifice and religious heroism in behalf of their faith. Prominent
among these stand the Waldenses, the Albigenses,
and the Huguenots.” Smith, DR, 278,279.
Be Strong, and Do Exploits.—
“On the other hand there were many who opposed
this power of the Pope and clergy, who were denounced as schismatics and Arians, and driven out of
the kingdoms under the control of the Romish church.”
Miller, Evidence, 97.

DANIEL 11:33
And they that understand among the
people shall instruct many: yet they shall
fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days.

“Knowledge of God gives strength for resistance
against evil and for the accomplishment of mighty
works in His name and by His power.” Thiele, OSID,
152.

They that Understand.—
“In Daniel 12:3 the word for ‘understanding’ is
translated as ‘teachers’ (margin). The same idea is
presented in verse 33 of Daniel 11.” Hiddekel, 61.

“Of those who resisted the encroachments of the
papal power, the Waldenses stood foremost. In the
very land where popery had fixed its seat, there its
falsehood and corruption were most steadfastly resisted. The Vaudois ministers were trained as missionar-

They that Understand Shall Instruct Many.—

450

DANIEL 11
“Those who instructed the common people, and
opposed the worshipping of images, the infallibility of
the Pope and councils, the canonizing of departed
saints, were persecuted by the civil power, (the
sword,) were burned by order of the ecclesiastical
courts established by the laws of Justinian, emperor; of
Constantinople, whose code of laws, published about
AD 534, gave unto the bishop of Rome power to establish courts for this purpose, and many in the sixth century and subsequent down to a late period, ‘many
days,’ suffered death, imprisonment, and confiscation
of goods, in consequence of a difference of opinion in
matters of religion, by the tyranny of this abomination,
‘the bloody city which has reigned over the kings of
the earth.’” Miller, Evidence, 97.

7.” Ferrell, BD, 46.
“Amid the gloom that settled upon the earth during the long period of papal supremacy, the light of
truth could not be wholly extinguished. In every age
there were witnesses for God—men who cherished
faith in Christ as the only mediator between God and
man, who held the Bible as the only rule of life, and
who hallowed the true Sabbath. How much the world
owes to these men, posterity will never know. They
were branded as heretics, their motives impugned,
their characters maligned, their writings suppressed, misrepresented, or mutilated. Yet they
stood firm, and from age to age maintained their faith
in its purity, as a sacred heritage for the generations to
come.” Great Controversy, 61.

“Whom Rome could not corrupt, she sought to
destroy. The noontide of the Papacy was the midnight
of the world, but the darker the night, the more brilliant
the stars. The Waldenses disguised themselves as traveling salesmen and taught the truth to hungering souls
even within the great fortresses of Catholicism.” Hiddekel, 59,60.

“No charge could be brought against the moral
character of this proscribed class. Even their enemies
declared them to be a peaceable, quiet, pious people.
Their grand offense was that they would not worship
God according to the will of the pope. For this crime
every humiliation, insult, and torture that men or
devils could invent was heaped upon them.” Great
Controversy, 153.

“ ‘They will deliver you up to councils,... yea and
before governors and kings shall ye be brought for My
sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles.’ Matthew 10:17,18, R.V. Persecution will spread the light.
The servants of Christ will be brought before the
great men of the world, who, but for this, might
never hear the gospel. The truth has been misrepresented to these men. They have listened to false charges concerning the faith of Christ’s disciples. Often
their only means of learning its real character is the
testimony of those who are brought to trial for their
faith. Under examination these are required to answer, and their judges to listen to the testimony
borne. God’s grace will be dispensed to His servants
to meet the emergency. ‘It shall be given you,’ says
Jesus, ‘in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it is
not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which
speaketh in you.’ As the Spirit of God illuminates the
minds of His servants, the truth will be presented in its
divine power and preciousness. Those who reject the
truth will stand to accuse and oppress the disciples.
But under loss and suffering, even unto death, the
Lord’s children are to reveal the meekness of their
divine Example. Thus will be seen the contrast between Satan’s agents and the representatives of Christ.
The Saviour will be lifted up before the rulers and the
people.” Desire of Ages, 354.

“In vain both ecclesiastical and civil authorities
were invoked to crush the heresy. In vain they resorted to imprisonment, torture, fire, and sword. Thousands of believers sealed their faith with their blood,
and yet the work went on. Persecution served only to
extend the truth, and the fanaticism which Satan endeavored to unite with it resulted in making more clear
the contrast between the work of Satan and the work of
God.” Great Controversy, 196.
“In southern France there were many adherents of
both the Albigenses and the Waldenses, especially in
the county of Toulouse. At the beginning of the thirteenth century there was in this region an open contempt for the Church and a bold defense of heretical
teachings even among the higher classes. Against the
people of this flourishing land Innocent III preached a
crusade in 1208. An army under Simon de Montfort
marched from northern France into the doomed region
and, after one of the most atrocious and bloody wars
upon record, suppressed the heresy by wholesale
slaughter….” Thiele, OSID, 149.
“Satan exulted over the fall of so many; and then
he stirred up the fallen church to force those who
would preserve the purity of their religion either to
yield to their ceremonies and image worship or be put
to death. The fires of persecution were again kindled
against the true church of Christ, and millions were
slain without mercy.” Early Writings, 211.

They Shall Fall by the Sword, Fire, Captivity.
“The activities of the little horn, as described in
chapter 8, do not appear in chapter 11 until verse 31, or
some historical time after Christ’s earthly ministry and
death. We can then see that the persecution of
11:32-34 is identified with the persecution conducted by the little horn, or Medieval Rome, in chapter

By Captivity.—
“Today the church of God is free to carry for-

451

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ward to completion the divine plan for the salvation of
a lost race. For many centuries God’s people suffered a restriction of their liberties. The preaching
of the gospel in its purity was prohibited, and the severest of penalties were visited upon those who dared
disobey the mandates of men. As a consequence, the
Lord’s great moral vineyard was almost wholly unoccupied. The people were deprived of the light of God’s
word. The darkness of error and superstition threatened to blot out a knowledge of true religion. God’s
church on earth was as verily in captivity during
this long period of relentless persecution as were the
children of Israel held captive in Babylon during
the period of the exile.
“But, thank God, His church is no longer in
bondage. To spiritual Israel have been restored the
privileges accorded the people of God at the time of
their deliverance from Babylon. In every part of the
earth, men and women are responding to the Heavensent message which John the revelator prophesied
would be proclaimed prior to the second coming of
Christ: ‘Fear God, and give glory to Him; for the hour
of His judgment is come.’ Revelation 14:7.
“No longer have the hosts of evil power to keep
the church captive; for ‘Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
that great city,’ which hath ‘made all nations drink
of the wine of the wrath of her fornication;’ and to
spiritual Israel is given the message, ‘Come out of
her, My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues.’ Verse 8;
18:4. As the captive exiles heeded the message, ‘Flee
out of the midst of Babylon’ (Jeremiah 51:6), and were
restored to the Land of Promise, so those who fear God
today are heeding the message to withdraw from spiritual Babylon, and soon they are to stand as trophies of
divine grace in the earth made new, the heavenly Canaan.” Prophets & Kings, 714,715.

by captivity and plunder, for some days. When they
shall fall, they shall receive a little help’ (vss. 33b-34a,
RSV).
“With the establishment of these relations the following equation can be set up: (1) the saints of the
Most High given into the hand of the little horn for
three and one-half times in 7:25 equals (2) the shattering of the power of the holy people in 12:7 equals (3)
the wise falling by flame, sword, and captivity in
11:32-34. This provides a specific link between chapters 7 and 11, at verses 32-34 of the latter.” BRI,
2SOD, 246,247.
“In the sixth century the papacy had become firmly established. Its seat of power was fixed in the imperial city, and the bishop of Rome was declared to be the
head over the entire church. Paganism had given place
to the papacy. The dragon had given to the beast ‘his
power, and his seat, and great authority.’ Revelation
13:2. And now began the 1260 years of papal oppression foretold in the prophecies of Daniel and the
Revelation. Daniel 7:25; Revelation 13:5-7. Christians were forced to choose either to yield their integrity and accept the papal ceremonies and worship, or to
wear away their lives in dungeons or suffer death by
the rack, the fagot, or the headsman’s ax. Now were
fulfilled the words of Jesus: ‘Ye shall be betrayed both
by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends;
and some of you shall they cause to be put to death.
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name's sake.’
Luke 21:16, 17. Persecution opened upon the faithful
with greater fury than ever before, and the world became a vast battlefield. For hundreds of years the
church of Christ found refuge in seclusion and obscurity. Thus says the prophet: ‘The woman fled into the
wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God,
that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred
and three-score days.’ Revelation 12:6.” Great Controversy, 54,55.

Many Days.—
“Establishing the link between chapters 7 and 11
is a little more indirect because it must be traced
through 12:7. Following the giving of the prophecy of
11:2-12:4 by Gabriel, the prophet inquired, ‘How long
shall it be till the end of these wonders? (12:7).’ The
answer was that the shattering of the power of the holy
people would terminate at the end of ‘a time, two
times, and half a time’ (RSV). This is the same prophetic time period referred to in the Aramaic of
7:25. There it was connected with the same kind of
activity: the persecution of the saints of the Most High
by the little horn.
“This question was asked by Daniel after he had
heard the prophecy of chapter 11 recited. Since that
question and its answer relates to what Daniel had just
heard, there should be some place in the prophecy of
chapter 11 where a shattering of the power of the holy
people is noted. The only passage in that prophecy
which mentions such a persecution is in 11:32-34,
‘though they [the wise] shall fall by sword and flame,

“The long period of papal persecution against
those who were struggling to maintain the truth and
instruct their fellow men in ways of righteousness, is
here brought to view. The number of the days during
which they were thus to fall is given in Daniel 7:25;
12:7; Revelation 12:6,14; 13:5. The period is called ‘a
time, and times, and the dividing of time;’ ‘a time,
times, and a half;’ ‘a thousand two hundred and threescore days;’ and ‘forty and two months.’ All these
expressions are various ways of denoting the same
1260 years of papal supremacy.” Smith, DR, 279.

DANIEL 11:34
Now when they shall fall, they shall be
holpen with a little help: but many shall
cleave to them with flatteries.
452

DANIEL 11
cy, and finally ‘speak as a dragon.’” Bunch, BOD,
185,186.

They Shall Be Holpen With a Little Help.—
“The first part of this text is too much like Revelation 12:16 to escape notice: “And the earth helped
the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his
mouth.’ The solitary regions of the earth often
served as a safe retreat from the fury of Rome. Later,
some of the German princes rallied to the cause of the
Reformers. Also, America became a new home for
the oppressed of Europe. Here they founded a government without a king, and a church without a pope.”
Hiddekel, 60.

“But the progress of the truth, even in the time of
the Reformation, was not free from grave hindrances
from within as well as from without. When some
princes and men of influence joined the Reformation,
many were led to espouse the Reformation doctrine
from unworthy motives. Satan corrupted the early
church by joining it. He corrupted the Reformation by
joining it—that is, by rushing great numbers of unconverted people into it. Satan seems to have devised a
method that will corrupt any good cause. He will eventually take over every movement except the one that
results in the sealing of the 144,000.” Hiddekel, 60.

“In Revelation 12, where this same papal persecution is brought to view, we read that the earth
helped the woman by opening her mouth and swallowing up the flood which the dragon cast out after
her.
“The Protestant Reformation let by Martin Luther
and his co-workers furnished the help here foretold.
The German states espoused the Protestant cause, protected the reformers, and restrained the work of persecution carried on by the papal church. But when the
Protestants were helped, and when their cause began to
be popular, many were to cleave unto them with flatteries, or embrace the faith from unworthy motives.”
Smith, DR, 279.

DANIEL 11:35
And some of them of understanding
shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to
make them white, even to the time of the
end: because it is yet for a time appointed.
Some of Them of Understanding.—
“In Daniel 12:3 the word for ‘understanding’ is
translated as ‘teachers’ (margin). The same idea is
presented in verse 33 of Daniel 11. Tyndale, Huss,
Jerome and Latimer are some of the well-known teachers of the gospel who sealed their testimony with their
blood.” Hiddekel, 61.

“The persecution of the church did not continue
throughout the entire period of the 1260 years. God in
mercy to His people cut short the time of their fiery
trial. In foretelling the ‘great tribulation’ to befall the
church, the Saviour said: ‘Except those days should
be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for
the elect's sake those days shall be shortened.’ Matthew 24:22. Through the influence of the Reformation
the persecution was brought to an end prior to 1798.”
Great Controversy, 266,267.

To Try Them, and to Purge, and Make White.—
“But who may abide the day of his coming? and
who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a
refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap: and he shall sit as
a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify
the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver,
that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.” Malachi 3:2, 3.

Many Shall Cleave to Them With Flatteries.—
“Many men of the world would cleave to them,
and professedly would flatter the true people of God
that they were friendly at least to them, and by these
means Satan carried on his wars against the children of
God.” Miller, Evidence, 97.

“The trials of life are God’s workmen, to remove
the impurities and roughness from our character. Their
hewing, squaring, and chiseling, their burnishing and
polishing, is a painful process; it is hard to be pressed
down to the grinding wheel. But the stone is brought
forth prepared to fill its place in the heavenly temple. Upon no useless material does the Master bestow
such careful, thorough work. Only His precious stones
are polished after the similitude of a palace.” Mount of
Blessing, 10.

“ ‘Many joined them under false pretenses.’—
Moffatt. The most dangerous period of any movement
is when its success is assured and the great and rich of
earth and the officials of the state together with the
masses rush into it because of its popularity. This was
what ruined the early church during the third and fourth
centuries when Christianity supplanted Paganism as the
religion of the Roman Empire, and emperors, senators,
and the officials of the state entered the church-fold.
The prophecy indicates that Protestantism would
succumb to popularity and cease to protest. It
would compromise with the world and with the Papa-

“And I will bring the third part through the fire,
and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try
them as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and
I will hear them: I will say, It is my people: and they
shall say, The LORD is my God.” Zech. 13:9.

453

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“A refining, purifying process is going on among
the people of God, and the Lord of hosts has set His
hand to this work. This process is most trying to the
soul, but it is necessary in order that defilement may be
removed. Trials are essential in order that we may
be brought close to our heavenly Father, in submission to His will, that we may offer unto the Lord an
offering in righteousness. God’s work of refining and
purifying the soul must go on until his servants are so
humbled, so dead to self, that when called into active
service, they may have an eye single to the glory of
God. Then they will not move rashly from impulse,
and imperil the Lord’s cause because they are slaves to
temptation and passion, because they follow their carnal desires; but they will move from principle and in
view of the glory of God. The Lord brings His children over the same ground again and again, increasing
the pressure until perfect humility fills the mind, and
the character is transformed; then they are victorious
over self, and in harmony with Christ and the Spirit of
heaven.
“The purification of God’s people cannot be
accomplished without suffering. God permits the fire
of affliction to consume the dross, to separate the
worthless from the valuable, in order that the pure metal may shine forth. He passes us from one fire to
another, testing our true worth. True grace is willing
to be tried. If we are loath to be searched by the Lord,
our condition is one of peril. God is the refiner and
purifier of souls. He places us in the heat of the furnace, that the dross may be forever separated from the
true gold of Christian character. Jesus watches the test.
He knows just what fire of temptation and trial is needed to purify the precious metal, in order that the radiance of divine love may be reflected.
“It is in mercy that the Lord reveals to men their
hidden defects. He would have them critically examine the complicated emotions and motives of their
own hearts, and detect that which is wrong, and
modify their dispositions, and refine their manners.
God would have his servants become acquainted with
their own hearts. In order to bring to them a true
knowledge of their condition, he permits the fire of
affliction to assail them, so that they may be purified.
The trials of life are God’s workmen to remove the
impurities, infirmities, and roughness from our
characters, and fit them for the society of pure,
heavenly angels in glory. Then as we pass through
trial, as the fire of affliction kindles upon us, shall we
not keep our eyes fixed upon the things that are unseen,
on the eternal inheritance, the immortal life, the far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory? and while
we do this, the fire will not consume us, but only
remove the dross, and we shall come forth seven
times purified, bearing the impress of the Divine.”
R&H, 4/10/1894.

earthliness. It is because God is leading his children,
that trying experiences come to them. Trials and obstacles are his chosen methods of discipline, and his
appointed conditions of success. He who reads the
hearts of men knows their weaknesses better than they
themselves can know them. He sees that some have
qualifications which, if rightly directed, could be used
in the advancement of his work. In his providence he
brings these souls into different positions and varied
circumstances, that they may discover the defects that
are concealed from their own knowledge. He gives
them opportunity to overcome these defects, and to fit
themselves for service. Often he permits the fires of
affliction to burn, that they may be purified.
“God’s care for his heritage is unceasing. He suffers no affliction to come upon his children but such
as is essential for their present and eternal good. He
will purify his church, even as Christ purified the temple during his ministry on earth. All that he brings
upon his people in test and trial comes that they may
gain deeper piety and greater strength to carry forward
the triumphs of the cross.” R&H, 8/8/1912.
“And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin: 26
And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy
counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be
called, The city of righteousness, the faithful city. 27
Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness.” Isa 1:25-27.
“God permitted the period of Papal persecution
for the purification of His people. He did not abandon
them during the long night of the Dark Ages, neither
did He permit one blow to fall on His people that was
not for their own good and the advancement of His
cause on the earth.” Hiddekel, 61
Even to the Time of the End, A Time Appointed.—
“God placed His church in captivity ‘for a time
appointed’—that is, until ‘the time of the end.’ The
book of Daniel gives two dates for the time of the
end—the end of the 1260 years in 1798, and the end
of the 2300 years in 1844. (See Daniel 12:4-7,
11,12,13.) In 1798 the period of Papal supremacy ended; in 1844 the church was freed from her captivity.
(See Prophets and Kings, p.714.)” Hiddekel, 61.
“Though restrained, the spirit of persecution was
not destroyed. It broke whenever there was opportunity. Especially was this the case in England. The religious state of that kingdom was fluctuating, it being
sometimes under Protestant and sometimes under papal
jurisdiction, according to the religion of the ruling
monarch. ‘Bloody Queen Mary’ was a mortal enemy
to the Protestant cause, and multitudes fell victims to
her relentless persecutions. This condition of affairs
was to last more or less ‘to the time of the end.’ The
natural conclusion would be that when the time of the

“Trial is part of the education given in the school
of Christ, to purify God’s children from the dross of

454

DANIEL 11
end should come, this power which the Church of
Rome had possessed to punish heretics, which had
been the cause of so much persecution, and which for a
time had been restrained, would now be taken entirely
away. The conclusion would be equally evident that
this taking away of papal supremacy would mark
the beginning of the period here called the ‘time of
the end.’ If this application is correct, the time of the
end began in 1798; for then, as already noticed, the
papacy was overthrown by the French, and has never
since been able to wield all the power it before possessed. The oppression of the church by the papacy is
evidently referred to here because that is the only one,
with the possible exception of Revelation 2:10, connected with ‘a time appointed,’ or a prophetic period.”
Smith, DR, 279,280.

shall be done.
Shall Do According to His Will.—
“This clause suggests that the ruler considers
himself worthy of worship as a god…. The clause
also denotes universal dominion.” Teach, D&R, 73.
“This compromise between paganism and Christianity resulted in the development of ‘the man of sin’
foretold in prophecy as opposing and exalting himself
above God. That gigantic system of false religion is a
masterpiece of Satan’s power—a monument of his
efforts to seat himself upon the throne to rule the
earth according to his will.
“It is one of the leading doctrines of Romanism
that the pope is the visible head of the universal church
of Christ, invested with supreme authority over bishops and pastors in all parts of the world. More than
this, the pope has been given the very titles of Deity.
He has been styled ‘Lord God the Pope’, and has
been declared infallible. He demands the homage of
all men. The same claim urged by Satan in the wilderness of temptation is still urged by him through the
Church of Rome, and vast numbers are ready to yield
him homage.” Great Controversy, 50.

“Since 1798 the book of Daniel has been unsealed, knowledge of the prophecies has increased, and
many have proclaimed the solemn message of the
judgment near.” Great Controversy, 356.
“The attention of the people should be called to
the momentous event which is so near at hand. The
signs of the times should be kept fresh before their
minds. The prophetic visions of Daniel and John foretell a period of moral darkness and declension; but at
the time of the end, the time in which we are now
living, the vision was to speak and not lie.” 5 Testimonies, 9,10.

“The expression, ‘the king shall do according to
his will,’ is used in this chapter to indicate unopposed
and universal dominion. In verse three it is used to
describe Grecia under Alexander the Great, and in
verse 16 it is descriptive of Rome under the Caesars. It
is only logical that Papal Rome should be designated by the same term. With verse 36 the angel Gabriel
breaks the continuity of his narrative and recapitulates
as was done in the prophecies concerning Pagan Rome
in this same interpretation. The purpose is to further
interpret another phase of the vision of the little horn of
Daniel 8. This method is often pursued in Bible prophecy.” Bunch, BOD, 187.

“A specific period of 1260 years is frequently referred to in the Bible during which the powers of darkness were permitted by God to enjoy a time of supremacy. This is an appointed time—appointed by God
in His wisdom to give evil the opportunity to reveal
what it really is, to show what the lengths are to
which it will go when divine restraints are removed,
and to make clear the terrible fruitage of the rule of
evil. Such a period is referred to in Dan. 7:25; 12:7;
Rev. 11:1,2; 12:6,14; and 13:5. At the end of these
1260 years comes ‘the time of the end.’ Specifically
this is 1798, but the time of the end is also the entire
period since that specific year. Jesus refers to this season of ‘great tribulation’ Matthew 24:21,22,29 which
He said would be shortened ‘for the elect’s sake.’ Before 1798 this time of dire distress for the saints of God
had come to its end.” Thiele, OSID, 154,155.

“In Daniel 8:4 this expression is applied to Persia; in Daniel 11:3, it is applied to Grecia; in 11:16 to
imperial Rome; and here in 11:36 to papal Rome.”
Thiele, OSID, 155.
“The king here spoken of is the same as Daniel’s
little horn, which came up among the ten horns. It is
the same that blasphemed the God of heaven.” Miller, Evidence, 97

DANIEL 11:36
And the king shall do according to his
will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak
marvelous things against the God of gods,
and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined

Only God does According to His Own Will.—
“It took seven years for Nebuchadnezzar, who did
according to his will, to learn a hard lesson: ‘And at
the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine
eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned
unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and
honored him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an
everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation: And all the inhabitants of the earth

455

GEMS FROM DANIEL
are reputed as nothing: and He doeth according to his
will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto
him, What doest thou?” Daniel 4:34,35.

has been turned against God; for the Lord declares that
He has sanctified the day of His rest.” 7BC, 910.
He Shall …Magnify Himself Above Every God.—
“He magnified himself even to the Prince of the
host. Daniel 8:11.
“And he shall magnify himself in his heart….”
Daniel 8:25.

ROME—PAGAN AND PAPAL
Daniel 8
Daniel 11
little horn
king of north
waxes exceeding great
do according to his will
toward the pleasant land shall stand in glorious land
king of fierce
with strength enters whole
countenance
kingdom
be peace destroys many shall enter peaceably
casts down some of host them of understanding
and stars to ground
shall fall
magnifies self to Prince Prince of covenant
of host
broken
causes craft to prosper
works deceitfully
place of the sanctuary
pollutes the sanctuary
cast down
of strength
daily taken away
takes away the daily
transgression of
abomination that makes
desolation
desolate
shall destroy the holy
many fall by sword
people
and flame
magnifies himself in heart magnifies himself above all
shall prosper and practice shall prosper till the
in the last end of the
indignation be accomplished
indignation
at the time appointed the that that is determined shall
end shall be
be done
vision which was told
shows what is in scripture
is true
of truth
shall be broken without shall come to his end
hand
Thiele, OSID, 137.

“This was what brought about the fall of Lucifer:
Isaiah 14:12-15.” Thiele, OSID, 155.
“These same expressions used in other prophecies
of the papacy identify this as the same proud and blasphemous anti-christian power. See Dan. 7:8,20,25;
8:10-12,25; Rev. 13:5,6; 2 Thess. 2:3,4. No other
earthly power can fit the prophetic mold. The claim of
infallibility and the blasphemous names and titles assumed by the pope are surely marvelous things spoken
against the God of gods. The exaltation and blasphemy
of the papal power identifies his counterfeit system of
religion as ‘the mystery of iniquity.’ The language
here used is a further interpretation of the previous
visions of Daniel.” Bunch, BOD, 187.
God of Gods.—
“For the LORD your God is God of gods, and
Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible,
which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.” Deuteronomy 10:17.
“O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his
mercy endureth for ever.” Psalm 136:2.
He Shall Speak Marvelous Things Against the God of
Gods.—
“In this horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and
a mouth speaking great things.” “And he shall speak
great words against the most High.” Daniel 7:8,25.

He Shall Exalt Himself …Above Every God.—
“Paul was no doubt citing Daniel 11:36 when he
said that the man of sin ‘opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so
that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing
himself that he is God.’—2 Thess. 2:4.” Hiddekel, 61.

“And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was
given unto him to continue forty and two months.”
“And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God,
to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heaven.” Revelation 13:5,6.

“In 498 Symmachus, a recent convert from paganism, ascended the papal throne. His advance to the
pontifical chair was stained with the murder of his opponent. Once on the seat of authority, his first act was
to excommunicate Emperor Anastasius. This was
hailed by the crowd as evidence that he was now
judge in the place of God, vicegerent of the Most
High.” Anderson, UDP, 148,149.

Shall Prosper till the Indignation be Accomplished.—
“Daniel 8:24 says, ‘He shall destroy wonderfully,
and shall prosper, and practice, and shall destroy the
mighty and the holy people.’ The ‘indignation’ refers
to the war on the saints. ‘And it was given unto him to
make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and
power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues,
and nations.’—Revelation 13:7. God allows evil to
‘prosper’ for a time, that the principles of Satan’s
kingdom might be unmasked.” Hiddekel, 62.

“The man of sin has exalted himself against
God, sitting in the temple of God, and showing himself to be God. He has trampled underfoot God’s great
memorial of creation, established to commemorate His
work; and in its stead he has presented to the world a
common working day. This day he has set up as a rival
Sabbath, to be observed and honored. Thus the world

“The statement that he ‘shall prosper’ shows its

456

DANIEL 11
relation to Daniel 8:24,25.” Bunch, BOD, 188

thers.’ The Roman Church itself supplanted the deities
known to the Roman emperors.” Hiddekel, 62.

Till the Indignation Be Accomplished.—
“He shall continue in a prosperous state until the
seven last plagues have been completed. The ‘indignation’ means the seven last plagues, see Rev. 14:10
and 15:1.” TEACH, D&R, 85.

“The God of His Fathers is God the Father, the
Creator of heaven and earth—a distinct eternal Being,
along with the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Together, they
are known as the Heavenly Trio. Instead, the Roman
Catholic Church would forcefully install a new god
from paganism—the Catholic Trinity concept. Now
the Father was not a distinct Being—He was one-inthree, or three-in-one—all of the same identical substance.” PJ

“One of the chief purposes of Daniel’s vision was
to reveal the final end or doom of the papal power.
Daniel 8:19. It is especially during the last end of the
wrath or indignation of God as manifested by the
seven last plagues that Babylon receives her punishment. See Rev. 16:19.” Bunch, BOD, 188.

The Desire of Women.—
“Contrary to what many have been led to believe,
this does not refer to the celibacy of the Roman clergy.
First, the context is about various deities which are not
honored by the Papacy. Second, ‘the desire of women’
does not mean ‘the desire for women.’ The Revised
Standard Version translates the expression as ‘the beloved by women.’ The word ‘desire’ is from the Hebrew word chemdah, which is used as a title for
Christ—‘the Desire of all nations.’—Haggai 2:7. Jesus is the Desire of all nations, the Desire of every
heart, the Desire of ages. …The title ‘Desire of all
nations’ means the same as ‘Desire of women,’ for the
nations are sometimes represented as women—the
daughter of Zion, the daughter of Tyre, the daughter of
Babylon, etc.
“The text therefore becomes quite straightforward. This king would not honor the gods of old
Rome, nor Jesus Christ, nor any god. He would
worship none but himself.” Hiddekel,62,63.

“After this, says the prophet, ‘his deadly wound
was healed: and all the world wondered after the
beast.’ Paul states plainly that the ‘man of sin’ will
continue until the second advent. 2 Thessalonians
2:3-8. To the very close of time he will carry forward
the work of deception.” Great Controversy, 579.
For That That is Determined Shall Be Done.—
“The appointed and determined doom of the Papacy is described in Dan. 7:11; 8:25; 11:45; Rev. 1620. This destruction and consumption will include the
whole wicked world [that is loyal to the Papacy.] See
Isa. 10:22,23; 28:21,22; Rev. 18.” Bunch, BOD, 143.
“Many centuries before the Papacy came on the
scene, the angel said to Daniel, ‘I will shew thee that
which is noted in the Scripture of truth.’—Daniel
10:21. The history of the Papacy was written down
even before Daniel had his vision by the Hiddekel. It
could be said of the saints, as it was said of Jesus, that
they were ‘delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God’ to the indignation of the man of
sin. (See Acts 2:23.) Such expressions appear
throughout Daniel 11, which assure the saints that God
has perfect control of the affairs of earth. Everything is
moving forward to the final victory of truth just as He
has planned.” Hiddekel, 62

PHYSICAL: “Paul also refers to Daniel 11: 37
when he says of the Papal system: ‘Forbidding to marry.’ The celibacy of the Papal priests and nuns is one of
the specifications brought to view in the prophecy of
Daniel 11. By its celibacy, the Papacy is able more
successfully to enslave both priests and people in
their false mediatorial system.” Were, KONAJ, 46.
“A woman’s desire for a home and husband,
Genesis 3:16, is disregarded in the vows of celibacy
nuns are forced to take. See 1 timothy 4:1-3.”
TEACH, D&R, 85.

DANIEL 11:37
Neither shall he regard the God of his
fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself
above all.

He Shall Magnify Himself Above All.—
“The worship of images and relics, the invocation of saints, and the exaltation of the pope are devices of Satan to attract the minds of the people
from God and from His Son. To accomplish their
ruin, he endeavors to turn their attention from Him
through whom alone they can find salvation. He will
direct them to any object that can be substituted for
the One who has said: ‘Come unto Me, all ye that labor
and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest.’ Matthew
11:28.” Great Controversy, 568,569..

“This [verse] repeats the thought of the preceding
verse: ‘He shall exalt himself, and magnify himself
above every god.’ The verse now specifies some of the
deities that the Papacy would not honor.” Hiddekel,
62.
Shall Not Regard The God of His Fathers.—
“Most other translations favor ‘the gods of his fa-

457

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Just as the little horn was ‘diverse’ from all other
earthly powers, the papal religion was different from
all previous religions. It is a compromise between Paganism and Christianity. While Catholics regard the
Pope as ‘another god on earth’ and give him divine
honors ‘as if he were God,’ the Pope exalts himself
‘above every god’ including ‘the god of gods’ against
whom he speaks ‘marvelous things’ blasphemously.”
Bunch, BOD, 188.

“It is true that the Pope, for ages past, has had
large armies at his command, and always a bodyguard to attend him in his capital.” Miller, Evidence,
98.
“The papal system is one of force and power.
She requires strict obedience and respect for her authority from princes and kings. Her churches often are
fortress-like structures, resplendent with purple and
scarlet, silver and gold, and precious stones.” Thiele,
OSID, 157.

DANIEL 11:38
But in his estate shall he honour the
God of forces: and a god whom his fathers
knew not shall he honour with gold, and
silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.

“The Revised Standard Version gives a much
clearer translation of the verse, and it is more in keeping with the context: ‘He shall honor the god of fortresses instead of these; a god whom his fathers did not
know shall he honor with gold and silver, with precious
stones and costly gifts.’
“Verse 37 has already said that the Papacy would
honor no god but himself. Verse 38 does not contradict
what has been explicitly stated in the preceding verse.
Then what is meant by this god who has these two
identifying characteristics?
“One: ‘The God of forces.’ The Hebrew word for
‘forces’ is mauzzim (the plural form of maoz), which
means fortresses, forts, etc. In verses 7,10, and 19,
maox clearly means the capital city or the seat of government. For instance, Washington is the maoz of the
United States, and Paris is the maoz of France. A nation is often referred to by the name of its maoz. Instead of saying, ‘The United States is involved in Vietnam,’ it might be said, ‘Washington is involved in
Vietnam.’ ‘The God of forces,’ therefore, would
mean ‘the god of the governments,’ ‘the god of the
powers,’ ‘the god of the nations.’
“Two: ‘A god …shall he honor with gold, and
silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.’
Revelation 17 identifies this god who is adored by the
powers of earth (mauzzim) and lavished with gold, silver, precious stones and pleasant things:
“ ‘…the great whore …with whom the kings of
the earth have committed fornication …and I saw a
woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast …And the
woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color and
decked with gold and precious stones and pearls.’—
Revelation 17:1-4. (Note the similarity with Daniel
11:38.)
“The great apostate church is presented in Revelation 17 as the god of forces (the powers of earth), for
the nations (represented by the beast) are said to carry
her. (See verse 7.) This act of carrying the woman
about is in keeping with the ancient practice of adoring
idols by carrying them about. Thus Amos accused
Israel, saying, ‘But ye have borne the tabernacle of
your Moloch and Chiun your images.’—Amos 5:26.
The practice is still seen in processions carrying about
the Roman Virgin Mary and the pope himself, who are
merely personifications of the church.
“Daniel 11’s description of the Papacy finds its

But In His Estate.—
“The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her power
increased, the darkness deepened. Faith was transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope of
Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God for forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the people
looked to the pope, and to the priests and prelates to
whom he delegated authority. They were taught that
the pope was their earthly mediator and that none
could approach God except through him; and, further, that he stood in the place of God to them and
was therefore to be implicitly obeyed. A deviation
from his requirements was sufficient cause for the severest punishment to be visited upon the bodies and
souls of the offenders. Thus the minds of the people
were turned away from God to fallible, erring, and
cruel men, nay, more, to the prince of darkness
himself, who exercised his power through them. Sin
was disguised in a garb of sanctity. When the Scriptures are suppressed, and man comes to regard himself
as supreme, we need look only for fraud, deception,
and debasing iniquity. With the elevation of human
laws and traditions was manifest the corruption that
ever results from setting aside the law of God.” Great
Controversy, 55.
The God of Forces.—
“It is clearly describing a religious system that
does something the fathers of Christianity did not do.
It depends on ‘force,’ ‘munitions,’ ‘fortresses,’ and
‘arms’ to forward its ends and maintain its
strength. This is a further interpretation of Daniel
8:24: ‘His power shall be mighty, but not by his own
power.’ In Daniel 11:31 we are told that ‘arms shall
stand on his part.’ The Papacy would unite with the
state and depend upon the sword and fortresses of
Caesar instead of the mighty sword of the Spirit, the
Word of God.” Bunch, BOD, 189.

458

DANIEL 11
counterpart in Revelation 17. Both chapters are alike
in that they distinguish between the civil and ecclesiastical aspects of Rome. In Daniel 11 ‘the king’ identifies the civil aspect of the Vatican, while the ‘god’
whom he worships is the ecclesiastical aspect of the
Papacy. In Revelation 17 the civil power of the Papacy
is represented by the ‘beast’ (or the head), while the
church is represented by the ‘woman.’
“Thus is identified the only god that is worshipped in the Papal system—the Church of Rome.
The essence of the Roman system is the deification
of the church institution. Church worship is selfworship, for members merely worship themselves in
a corporate capacity. This is the most subtle form of
idolatry. All those who put the church institution in the
place of God are idolaters; all who allow their church
to rule their consciences are idolaters; all those who
will only accept the doctrines of the Bible as interpreted by their church are idolaters. Those who deify their
own church are ruled by the spirit of anti-christ. They
also take away ‘the daily’ and replace it by the abomination that maketh desolate. The organized church
should be an instrument, not an idol.
“Rome does not acknowledge any god but herself. She exalts and magnifies herself above all. She
worships herself by honoring, extolling and deifying
the church of her own creation. She covers this religious system with names of blasphemy by declaring
that the church alone has power to forgive sins, to interpret the Bible, to open the gates of paradise unto
whomsoever it wills, and even to change the law of
God—especially the holy Sabbath (Daniel 7:25).
Then, to crown the church’s blood-thirsty reign with
ultimate impiety, Rome bestows upon it the title of
infallibility.” Hiddekel, 63-65.

kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we
compare it?’ Mark 4:30. He could not employ the
kingdoms of the world as a similitude. In society He
found nothing with which to compare it. Earthly
kingdoms rule by the ascendancy of physical power;
but from Christ’s kingdom every carnal weapon,
every instrument of coercion, is banished. This
kingdom is to uplift and ennoble humanity. God’s
church is the court of holy life, filled with varied gifts
and endowed with the Holy Spirit. The members are to
find their happiness in the happiness of those whom
they help and bless.” Acts of Apostles, 12.
Honored With Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones.—
“And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones
and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication.” Revelation 17:4.
“While Romanism is based upon deception, it is
not a coarse and clumsy imposture. The religious service of the Roman Church is a most impressive ceremonial. Its gorgeous display and solemn rites fascinate
the senses of the people and silence the voice of reason
and of conscience. The eye is charmed. Magnificent
churches, imposing processions, golden altars, jeweled shrines, choice paintings, and exquisite sculpture appeal to the love of beauty. The ear also is
captivated. The music is unsurpassed. The rich notes
of the deep-toned organ, blending with the melody of
many voices as it swells through the lofty domes and
pillared aisles of her grand cathedrals, cannot fail to
impress the mind with awe and reverence.
“This outward splendor, pomp, and ceremony,
that only mocks the longings of the sin-sick soul, is
an evidence of inward corruption. The religion of
Christ needs not such attractions to recommend it. In
the light shining from the cross, true Christianity appears so pure and lovely that no external decorations
can enhance its true worth. It is the beauty of holiness, a meek and quiet spirit, which is of value with
God.” Great Controversy, 566,567.

“The papacy would ‘honor the god of forces’ by
using force as a means of exercising its authority; the
armed forces of the European nations were used by the
Catholic Church to maintain medieval supremacy.”
Swearingen, TOOTN, 166.
“When a church system loses the power of the
gospel to change humanity from within, it will turn to
the power of force (the state) and demand an external
compliance.” PJ.

DANIEL 11:39
Thus shall he do in the most strong
holds with a strange god, whom he shall
acknowledge and increase with glory: and
he shall cause them to rule over many, and
shall divide the land for gain.

“Lucifer desired God’s power, but not His character. He sought for himself the highest place, and
every being who is actuated by his spirit will do the
same. Thus alienation, discord, and strife will be inevitable. Dominion becomes the prize of the strongest.
The kingdom of Satan is a kingdom of force; every
individual regards every other as an obstacle in the way
of his own advancement, or a steppingstone on which
he himself may climb to a higher place.” Desire of
Ages, 435.436.

The Most Strong Holds.—
“This expression is from the Hebrew maoz, and
refers again to those powers or seats of government
that would hold the Church of Rome in idolatrous regard. The Revised Standard Version gives a clear rendering to the first part of the text: “He shall deal with

“ ‘Whereunto,’ asked Christ, ‘shall we liken the

459

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the strongest fortresses [nations, powers, cities, etc.] by
the help of a foreign god [a god whom his fathers did
not know].’
“It is interesting how the prophecy makes a distinction between the Papacy and the church, just as it
does in Revelation 17. The Papacy is a civil power
which maintains dominion by controlling the nations
by its religion. It was an astonishing thing how imperial Rome held control of the nations through a small
army of representatives that were scattered among the
nations like international police. When this system
broke up, Rome reasserted its power over the nations
by sending among them an army of priests who taught
all nations to worship the Church of Rome. The Vatican is a political institution which has gained power
and control of the nations by masquerading under the
cloak of Christianity. Into the hands of the scarlet
woman it places a golden cup, full of intoxicating doctrines. The nations drink of the wine, become mad,
then carry the woman about in idolatrous regard
(Jer. 51:7; Rev. 17:3,7). Herein has Satan perfected his
tactics in his great battle for the minds of kings, nations, governments and peoples.” Hiddekel, 65.

who acknowledge him he shall magnify and honor.’
“This applies to the Roman clergy, whose life’s
work is to promote the worship of the Roman
Church. They, in turn, are magnified and honored by
the Papacy. One only has to think of a well-known
book called Dignity and Duties of the Priest: ‘The
priest has the power of the keys, or the power of delivering sinners from hell, of making them worthy of paradise, and of changing them from the slaves of Satan
into the children of God. …And God Himself is
obliged to abide by the judgment of His priests. …The
Sovereign Master of the universe only follows the
servant by confirming in heaven all that the latter decides on earth.’—N.Y. Benziger Bros., Printers to the
Holy Apostolic See, 1888, pp.27,28.” Hiddekel, 66.
And He Shall Cause Them to Rule Over Many.—
“The popes claim to be the ‘King of kings’ with
authority over earthly sovereigns. The historian Wylie
in History of the Papacy, p. 102, declares that ‘History
presents us with a list of not less than sixty-four Emperors and Kings deposed by the popes.’ Surely the
Papacy alone fits the prophetic mold in fulfilling the
specifications of the angel’s interpretation.” Bunch,
BOD, 190.

“Sir I. Newton, Birks, Elliott, and other most able
interpreters have shown that the allusion is to saintworship; that the term Mahuzzim or ‘fortresses’ means
guardian deities, or tutelary saints, who receive worship as protectors—as defenses and fortresses—from
their votaries.’—Daniel and the Revelation, Joseph
Tanner, pp. 521-523.

“The city of imperial Rome performed an amazing feat by ruling the world by an army of officers
called magistrates, procurators, etc., who fanned out
through the entire empire. When this system broke
down, the new Rome emerged with a far more effective system—the priesthood. Armed with the mysteries of the Roman Church, holding the pretended
keys to heaven and hell, and operating a fabulous
international espionage system in its own Latin
tongue, the clergy wielded a power over people never dreamed of by the officials of the Roman Empire.
The officers of the Roman Church ruled ‘over many’—
they ruled the ‘souls of men’ as well as their bodies
(Revelation 17:13.).” Hiddekel, 66.

Another Strange God.—
“The elevation of the little wafer called ‘the
host’ to be a manifestation of God, is indeed a
strange god. ‘The Eucharistic Sacrifice, that is the
Mass, is the principal act of Christian worship.’—Dr.
John A Ryan, Professor of Moral Theology in the
Catholic University at Washington, D.C. Catholics
consider the unbloody sacrifice of the Mass as a continuation of Calvary and in importance it is just as
great.” Bunch, BOD, 190.

And Shall Divide the Land For Gain.—
“Pagan Rome divided the world into provinces
which were given to favorite generals to rule and exploit for gain, and the Papacy has followed the same
policy. The whole world has been divided into diocese territories or provinces, under the jurisdiction
of bishops who rule as princes. These districts are
subdivided between the priests and monks. The combination of several diocese jurisdictions form the kingdom of the arch-bishop, and over several of them rules
in glory and honor the cardinal. From each of these
divisions, according to their size and wealth, flows a
never ceasing stream of riches into the coffers of the
man ruling in splendor on the banks of the Tiber—the
successor of the Caesars. In Rev. 18, ‘Babylon the
Great’ is pictured as a great commercial system
seeking gain even from trafficking in ‘the souls of
men.’” Bunch, BOD, 190.

“The gods they (Roman Catholics) worship, such
as the images of Christ, apostles, and Virgin Mary,
and canonized saints, were not known to Pagan worshipers. [Verse 39 quoted.] These patron saints, which
the Pope divided among the several nations of the
earth, and in almost every family, each one having their
patron saint to rule over them, by the appointment of
the Pope, were strange gods indeed; and rational beings might truly wonder when they behold the power of
this last abomination over the minds and judgments of
mankind.” Miller, Evidences, 98.
Whom He Shall Increase With Glory.—
“This seems to be redundant, and makes the following pronoun ‘them’ ambiguous unless the rendering
of the Revised Standard Version is accepted: ‘Those

460

DANIEL 11
the prophecy that the Papacy would ‘divide the land
for gain:’
‘You have expressed to us your desire to enter the
island of Ireland in order to subject its people to law,
and to root out from them the weeds of vice, and your
willingness to pay an annual tribute to the blessed
Peter of one penny from every house…. We, therefore, meeting your pious and laudable desire with due
favor and according a gracious assent to your petition,
do hereby declare our will and pleasure… you shall
enter that island….’
“Pope Alexander III, who held office in Rome in
1172, at the actual date of the invasion of Ireland by
Henry II, solemnly ratified this Bull of his predecessor,
Pope Adrian IV, and actually wrote to Henry expressing his confidence that it was the King’s desire to ‘extend the privileges of the church,’ and ‘to establish her
jurisdiction where at present she has none.’ The extension of ‘the privileges of the church’ and the establishment of ‘her jurisdiction’ results in the increase of
her enormous wealth.
“The presumptive power of the Papacy to ‘divide
the land’ to its own advantage was brought to view in
connection with the discoveries of the new world by
Columbus. In his book, The Prophetic Faith of Our
Fathers, volume II, Leroy E. Froom says:
“‘The popes had given Portugal a monopoly on
the sea route to India by way of Good Hope. Spain and
Portugal, rival sea powers, had found it impossible to
traffic with the Far East without violating the papal
mandate-until this westward route was proposed, and
against which there was no papal edict,’ pp. 165, 166.
This writer continues: ‘Pope Divides Globe Between
Spain and Portugal. The Spanish and Portuguese discoveries offered a wide field for papal extension. However, soon after Christopher Columbus discovered the
New World, a hot dispute arose between Spain and
Portugal... Ferdinand and Isabella at once dispatched
an embassy to Alexander VI for the purpose of ensuring their rights to the new territories, on the principle
that Martin V had given to the king of Portugal possession of all lands he might discover between Cape Bojador and the East Indies. In two bulls, of May 4 and 5,
1493, Alexander VI presumed to divide the Western
world between Portugal and Spain by a line one
hundred leagues west of the Azores, north and
south. The possession of the lands discovered, and to
be discovered, was assigned to the two countries to be
held in perpetuity.... Thus half the globe was divided
between Spain and Portugal.
“…In his book, King of the North, pp. 27, 29, M.
C. Wilcox says: ‘The whole earth has been divided.
Whole countries have been dedicated to patron and
protecting saints as tutelary deities. The country has
been divided up, and cities have been consecrated to
different saints as witness in our land-San Francisco,
St. Louis, St. Paul, St. Augustine, St. Joseph. And the
earth, its countries, its cities, have not only been parceled out to the saints but to clericals of various ranks,

“The Roman Empire was divided into districts
called dioceses. The system was carried into Papal
Rome, and the head of each diocese was now called a
bishop. Each diocese was divided into a small district
called a parish, which was in turn ruled over by a
priest. A group of diocese was called an archdiocese
and was presided over by an archbishop. These church
offices were bought and sold. Wealthy dioceses or
archdioceses offered opportunity for personal gain
and self-aggrandizement to those who obtained the
benefice. Archbishops and bishops gained control of
districts by promising to pay their religious superiors fabulous sums of money, and those who obtained these offices in turn divided their territory
among those who would pay for their benefice. The
whole system of the Papacy was rotten with simony.
During its reign the court of God’s temple was desecrated by the traffic of moneychangers. The vineyard
of the Lord was divided for gain.
“The merchandising spirit of the church was
symbolized in the third seal of the Apocalypse: ‘And
I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat on him
had a pair of balances in his hand. And I heard a voice
in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat
for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny;
and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.’ Rev. 6:5,6.
“The words of Micah, the prophet, accurately fit
the medieval church: ‘The heads thereof judge for
reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and
the prophets thereof divine for money.’ Micah 3:11.
“Ezekiel brings this indictment against the religious rulers: ‘Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that
do feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the
flocks? …with force and with cruelty have ye ruled
them. …Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have
eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with
your feet the residue of your pastures? (See Eze. 34.)
“These are ‘the merchants of the earth’ who
shall wail over Babylon when ‘no man buyeth their
merchandise anymore.’ Rev. 18:11.”
Hiddekel,
66,67.
“And then, again, to see the number of kingdoms,
provinces. states, and territories, which the Pope has
sold to enrich his coffers, without any more right of
title to them than we have to the land in the moon,
must convince everyone that the description given must
apply to the church of Rome or the Pope, who claims
to exercise this great authority by his crazy title to St.
Peter’s chair.” Miller, Evidences, 98.
“The Normans went over to Ireland in the reign of
Henry II. It was Pope Adrian IV who gave Henry
permission to possess the land. That permission is
contained in the now famous papal Bull, ‘Laudabiliter.’
In that Bull the Pope addresses Henry II in the familiar
words, ‘My well-beloved son in Christ.’ The Bull contains the following conclusive proof of the accuracy of

461

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the representatives of the Papacy and always and ever
to the gain of the Papacy.’” Were, KONAJ, 30,31,32.

threatened by powers along the borders of their national homeland, the prophecies describe the conflict of
the true church with the great antichrist. This side
of the cross, national Israel has ceased to be the object
of God’s supreme regard. The Middle East is not the
locale of the final conflict. Yet it is not surprising that
the prophecy of the church’s final conflict is couched
in the Palestinian terminology of the Old Testament.
“All the prophecies of the Old Testament are
clothed in the language of Palestine. It is impossible to
interpret Old Testament prophecies without the clear
light of the book of Revelation. The Revelation is a
mosaic of the Old testament. It cites the prophecies of
the Old Testament and shows how to understand their
peculiar expressions. For example, Babylon now
symbolizes the apostate religious world; Egypt, the
atheistic world; and Israel, the believers in the three
angels’ messages. (See Revelation 17; 11:8; 7; 14.)
Since the Revelation unseals the book of Daniel (Revelation 10; Testimonies to Ministers, pp. 112-115), one
must expect that important features of Daniel 11:40-45
are covered and clarified in the book of Revelation.
Scripture, rather than the newspaper, must be used to
interpret prophecy.” Hiddekel, 70,71.

“These words well describe the practice of the
papacy from ancient times until the present. She well
realizes the power of the mercenary spirit in the human
heart; and she takes every advantage of it to secure her
ends. Everywhere she rules she divides the land for
gain. Wherever she is in a position of power—in Europe or the countries of the East, in North or South
America, there Rome deals not only in religion, but
in finance and politics. Everywhere she builds up
vast landholdings and secures to herself great financial
subsidies, and there she places her deputies in key positions of power. Spain, Portugal, Peru, Mexico, and
Italy all testify that the policy of Rome today is the
same as it was in Europe during the Middle Ages when
Rome occupied the seat of power.” Thiele, OSID, 158.
INTRODUCTION TO DANIEL 11:40-12:3
“The last six verses of Daniel 11 give a clear delineation of the major events leading to the close of
human probation. This is the most important section of
Daniel 11, for it not only depicts present-day events,
but it sets forth in chronological order the church’s
final struggle and deliverance.
“Before proceeding to examine this scripture
phrase by phrase, there should be a review of some of
the guidelines used in the interpretation of Daniel 11.
“It has been seen that the message of Daniel is
restoration—restoration of all that was lost in the Babylonish captivity. Daniel 2 presents the restoration of
the kingdom. Daniel 7 focuses on the restoration of the
king. Daniel 8 highlights the restoration of the sanctuary, and Daniel 10 to 12 concludes the entire book by
describing the restoration of God’s people from the
dominion of ungodly powers. It should be remembered that the angel said to Daniel at the outset of the
vision, ‘Now I am come to make thee understand what
shall befall thy people in the latter day.’—Daniel
10:14. Therefore one must expect that the final conflict and victory of God’s people are the primary concern of the verses being examined.” Hiddekel, 69,70.

DANIEL 11:40
And at the time of the end shall the
king of the south push at him: and the king
of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow
and pass over.
At the Time of the End.—
“Daniel was actually told to ‘seal’ up his prophecy until the ‘time of the end’ (Dan. 12:4). After Daniel
asked when this ‘end,’ or ‘time of the end,’ would
begin, he was told that it would take place after the
‘time,’ ‘times,’ and a ‘half,’ which would correspond to
the 1,260-year papal rule (Daniel 12:5-9, 7:25). Thus,
the ‘time of the end’ began in AD 1798 and will span
to the end of time.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 93.

The Use of Palestinian Terminology.—
“Daniel’s four lines of prophecy (chapter
2,7,8,11) all commenced in Daniel’s time. Palestine
was then the home of God’s people, and the great nations of prophecy surrounded ‘the glorious land.’ The
two great centers of world civilization were along the
rivers in Mesopotamia and along the river Nile in
Egypt. Palestine lay between these two great powers
as a sort of buffer state. For centuries Israel witnessed
repeated struggles between the power of the north and
the power of the south.
“As each line of prophecy comes down to the
Christian dispensation, it swings away from the geographical setting of Palestine and assumes a world
wide scope. Instead of the Jews in Palestine being

“ ‘And at the time of the end,’ meaning the end of
his power, to tread on the church by his civil authority,
or reign over the kings of the earth, and to dispose of
lands for gain …the year AD 1798, when the Pope of
Rome lost his civil power. ” Miller, Evidence, 99.
“According to Daniel 12:4-7, ‘the time of the end’
would commence with the unsealing of the book of
Daniel, which would take place at the close of the 1260
years of Papal supremacy. (See also Revelation 10.)
This was 1798. Daniel also gives another date—the
end of the 2300 days in 1844. As the fall of ancient

462

DANIEL 11
ment.”—Blackwood’s Magazine, November, 1870.’
(Quoted in The Great Controversy, p. 270.
“The French Revolution was a reaction against
the corruption of Romanism. ‘Rome had ground down
the people under her iron heel; and now the masses,
degraded and brutalized, in their recoil from her tyranny, cast off all restraint. Enraged at the glittering cheat
to which they had so long paid homage, they rejected
truth and falsehood together…. “The scaffolds ran red
with the blood of the priests. The galleys and the prisons, once crowded with Huguenots, were now filled
with their persecutors. Chained to the bench and toiling at the oar, the Roman Catholic clergy experienced
all those woes which their church had so freely inflicted on the gentle heretics.”’—The Great Controversy,
pp.281-283.
“Concerning ‘Egypt,’ Ellen G. White wrote, ‘This
is atheism.’ The activities of the king of the south at
the time of the end embrace more than France’s savage
revolt against the Church of Rome. The theories or
atheism, infidelity and liberalism, which were
spawned in the French Revolution, have filled the
world. ‘…All are tending to involve the whole world
is a struggle similar to that which convulsed France.’—
Education, p.228.
“Communism also had its roots in the French
Revolution. In 1848, Karl Marx wrote the Communist
Manifesto, and in 1917 the Russian Revolution created
the greatest atheistic state known in the history of the
world.
“It is very significant that the idea of Communism goes back to Plato. Writing before 300 BC,
in The Republic, he urged the existence of communal
property. He taught that the ideal state would train its
citizens to be upright and virtuous, and that each person would perform the work for which he was best
suited. Both Roman Catholicism and Communism
find their roots in Plato.” Hiddekel, 72-74.

Babylon in 539 BC prepared the way for the end of
the captivity in 536 BC, so the end of the civil power
of the Papacy in 1798 prepared the way for the
church’s deliverance from spiritual Babylon in
1844. (See Prophets and Kings, p.714.)
“…Verse 40 announces ‘the time of the end.’
The end of what? The end of the church’s long warfare
with evil! The end of the great conflict between the
forces of good and the forces of evil! The end of the
rule of force and falsehood! The end of the times of
the Gentiles! But it is the time when God will work for
the final vindication of His truth and the deliverance of
His people.” Hiddekel, 72.
South.—
“The word ‘south’ is derived from a He\brew
word negeb which means ‘parched.’ The land to the
south of Israel was a parched desert land. Egypt is the
kingdom to the south of Israel.”
The King of the South.—
“Egypt has consistently been the king of the south
[See Daniel 11:7-9], and verses 42 to 43 show that this
passage is no exception. But the Egypt of the Middle
East is no longer the subject of Bible prophecy. This
prophecy is located in the Christian dispensation, when
Egypt is ‘not …as it was before.’ (See Daniel 11:29.)
The book of Revelation identifies modern Egypt: “and
their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where
also our Lord was crucified.’—Revelation 11:8.
“Ellen G. White makes these comments on modern Egypt: ‘ “The great city” in whose streets the witnesses are slain, and where their dead bodies lie, is
“spiritually” Egypt. Of all nations presented in Bible
history, Egypt most boldly denied the existence of the
living God and resisted His commands. No monarch
ever ventured upon more open and highhanded rebellion against the authority of Heaven than did the king
of Egypt. When the message was brought him by Moses, in the name of the Lord, Pharaoh proudly answered: “Who is Jehovah, that I should hearken unto
His voice to let Israel go? I know not Jehovah, and
moreover I will not let Israel go.” Exodus 5:2, A.R.V.
This is atheism, and the nation represented by Egypt
would give voice to a similar denial of the claims of the
living God and would manifest a like spirit of unbelief
and defiance.’—The Great Controversy, p.269.
“Near the close of the 1260 years of Papal supremacy, France, which for centuries had been the
most ardent supporter of the Papacy, turned atheistic
in the French Revolution. Until the present century,
it could be said:
“ ‘“…France stands apart in the world’s history as the single state which, by the decree of her
Legislative Assembly, pronounced that there was no
God, and of which the entire population of the capital,
and a vast majority elsewhere, women as well as men,
danced and sang with joy in accepting the announce-

HUMAN REASON EXALTED

“Egypt denotes an atheistic power which denies
the existence of God (see Ex. 5:2). In the ‘time of the
end [1793-1798]’ an atheistic power emerged in the
country of France. ‘On the 23rd November atheism in
France reached its extreme point, by a decree of the
municipality ordering the immediate closing of all the
churches, and placing the whole priests under surveil-

463

GEMS FROM DANIEL
lance.’ [Library of Universal History, vol. 8, 1900, p.
2612.] Thus at the ‘time of the end’ the power of
the ‘south [atheism]’ took hold of the government in
France, fulfilling Bible prophecy. ‘Infidelity and
atheism reigned supreme. The National Convention
abolished the Sabbath, and the leaders of the Paris
Commune declared that they intended “to dethrone the
King of heaven as well as the monarchs of the earth.”’
[Alexander Keith, The Signs of the Times, vol. 2, 1833,
pp.114,115.]”
“This power eventually evolved into modern
communism.” Light Bearers, UOD-14.

ing upon the power referred to as being ‘spiritually
Egypt,’ and applying it to the French atheistic revolutionaries, the Spirit of Prophecy says: ‘This is atheism;
and the nation represented by Egypt would give voice
to a similar denial of the claims of the living God.’
Great Controversy, p.269. The French Revolution
was really a revolt against the authority of the Papal
church, which suffered severely at the hands of the
revolutionaries. Thus did ‘the king of the south
push at him’ (the Papacy) ‘at the time of the end.”
Were, KONAJ, 67.
The Repetition of the Four Prophetic Outlines.—
“The prophecies of Daniel are a unit. Much depends on following the parallelism of Daniel’s four
prophetic outlines. By showing that Daniel 8 is parallel to Daniel 7, it is proved that the cleansing of the
sanctuary is the judgment. By showing that Daniel 9
relates to Daniel 8, the judgment is shown to begin in
1844. If the parallelism cannot be established, neither
can the Biblical basis for Adventism. James White was
very conscious of maintaining the parallelism of all
four lines of prophecy, and warned that a failure to do
so, even in Daniel 11, would endanger the ‘landmarks
fully established by the Advent Movement.’ In The
Review and Herald, November 29, 1877, James White
wrote:
“ ‘Let us take a brief view of the line of prophecy
four times spanned in the book of Daniel. It will be
admitted that the same ground is passed over in chapters two, seven, eight, and eleven. We first pass down
the great image of chapter 2, where Babylon, Persia,
Greece, and Rome are represented by the gold, the silver, the brass, and the iron. All agree that these feet
are not Turkish, but Roman. And as we pass down
to the lion, the bear, the leopard, and the beast with ten
horns, representing the same as the great image, again
all will agree that it is not Turkey that is cast into the
burning flame, but the Roman beast. So of chapter
8, all agree that the little horn that stood up against
the Prince of princes is not Turkey, but Rome. In all
these thus far Rome is the last form of government
mentioned.
“Now comes the point in the argument upon
which very much depends. Does the eleventh chapter
of the prophecy of Daniel cover the ground measured
by chapters two, seven, and eight? If so, then the last
power mentioned in that chapter is Rome.’” Hiddekel, 71

“Not only did Napoleon take the pope prisoner
in 1798 and thus bring an end to the 1260 year period
of papal supremacy, but that year he invaded Egypt
in connection with a struggle in which he was engaged
with England. He realized that an attempt at a direct
invasion of England would offer him no chance of success, so he decided that he would strike at her by directing himself against her empire in the east. The east
held a great fascination for him, and he declared, ‘only
in the east can one do great things.’ The possession of
Egypt he believed would provide him with a route to
India. So he struck at Egypt, landing near Alexandria
with his army on July 1, 1798. A month later Nelson
destroyed the French fleet and Napoleon found himself
cut off from France. However he brought Egypt down
in a brilliant campaign. Egypt was declared a French
protectorate, a colony of France, and remained in
French hands for three years. Thus in 1798 Napoleon became the king of the South, and is the ruler
thus referred to in Daniel 11:40.
“To strengthen his hold on the Mohammedan
populace of Egypt Napoleon sought to convince them
that he and the French people were one with them in
religion, and that they had the highest regard for Mohammed and the Koran. He pointed to his overthrow
of the authority of the pope, the great Christian
leader, who was then being held in exile in France.
“By these events Napoleon became directly
involved in the fulfillment of two of Daniel’s prophecies having to do with the year 1798, with each providing an interesting confirmation of the other. By taking
the pope prisoner in 1798 he brought about the fulfillment of Daniel 7:25 [overthrow of pope and end
of 1260 days], and by his seizure of Egypt in 1798,
he [became king of south and] brought about the
fulfillment of Daniel 11:40.” Thiele, OSID, 160.
“Egypt, the literal king of the south, in the early
parts of Daniel 11, is mentioned in Revelation 11:8 in a
spiritual sense. …Egypt, the king of the south who
pushes at the Papacy (see Daniel 11: 40) is mentioned
in Revelation 11: 8 in connection with the revolutionaries who deluged France with blood at the time of the
French Revolution. They ascended ‘out of the bottomless pit’ (Revelation 11: 7): they came from ‘beneath.’
See Proverbs 15:24; Isaiah 14:9; John 8: 23. Comment-

The First King of North Was Babylon.—
“Behold, I will send and take all the families of
the north, saith the LORD, and Nebuchadrezzar the
king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them
against this land….” Jeremiah 25:9.
“For the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in
the north country by the river Euphrates. …The
daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; she shall be

464

DANIEL 11
delivered into the hand of the people of the north.
The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; Behold, I
will punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and
Egypt, with their gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh,
and all them that trust in him:
And I will deliver them into the hand of those that
seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon….” Jeremiah 46:10, 24-26.

Rome, the second Babylon, becomes the king of the
north, and as such stood ‘in the glorious land, which
by his hand was consumed’ (v. 16).
“…The prophecy of Daniel 11: 15-17 outlines the
conquest, first of Syria thus making Rome the king of
the north, then Palestine and, continuing on in his
conquests, subdues Egypt. Now it will be observed
that, in verses 40-45, the king of the north is again pictured as covering by conquests the same territories
as did Rome: from the north he proceeds in a southerly direction until not only Egypt, but also Libya and
Ethiopia are subdued. In other words, the last-day
‘king of the north’—the Papacy—will do something
similar to that done by literal Rome. As we shall show
later, the Papacy is represented in earlier parts of the
prophecies of Daniel as repeating in a spiritual sense
in relation to the church that which literal Rome did
literally in relation to the literal Jews.” Were,
KONAJ, 40,41.

“For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will
bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a
king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with
chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much
people.” Ezekiel 26:7.
“The Bible defines its own terms. By comparing
Scripture with Scripture, …we see that the Bible use of
the word ‘north’ is in relation to Babylon and the river
Euphrates. The Scriptures emphatically declare: ‘The
north by the river Euphrates,’ ‘in the north country
by the river Euphrates’ (Jeremiah 46: 2, 6, 10). In
the book of Jeremiah, references are repeatedly made
to the coming of the Babylonians from the north, the
region of the Euphrates, to destroy Jerusalem and to
afflict God’s professing people. See Jeremiah 1: 13, 14,
15; 4: 6; 6: 1; 25: 9, 26; etc. It was the book of Jeremiah which Daniel studied in connection with his
visions (Daniel 9: 2). He thus could not be mistaken as
to the territory referred to in the term ‘the king of the
north,’ for the king of Babylon was declared to be
the king of the north. The Lord had said through Jeremiah: ‘Behold, I will send and take all the families of
the north, said the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar the
king of Babylon, My servant, and I will bring them
against this land’ (Jeremiah 25: 9).” Were, KONAJ, 38.

“In the early verses of Daniel 11, the Syrian dynasty of the Seleucids was the king of the north. This
kingdom was a division of the Grecian Empire. Syria
was conquered by Rome and then incorporated into the
Roman Empire along with the rest of the Grecian Empire. So any attempt to identify the modern king of the
north with the old Syrian dynasty is wide of the mark.
“In the Old Testament times, the northern power was Israel’s archenemy which invaded her borders from the north. ‘North’ indicated directional
relationship to Jerusalem. So the king of the north in
the time of the end must be the great enemy of the true
church in the last days. Since God’s people are scattered all over the earth, ‘north’ can no longer have
any geographical significance.
“Above everything else, Babylon was national
Israel’s greatest foe. Repeatedly, Babylon was referred to as the power from the north. (See Jeremiah 1:14; 4:5-7; 6:1; 10:22; 13:20; 16:15; 20:4; 23:8;
25:9,12.) The city was founded by Nimrod and became the great religious center of the ancient world. It
was Satan’s rival to Jerusalem. Even when Babylon
was eclipsed by Assyria, it remained the religious center of the Assyrian Empire as well as a second capital.
Some of the kings of Assyria took the title, King of
Babylon. Manasseh was carried captive to Babylon
during Assyrian rule. The Assyrian power was also
called the power from the north. (See Zephaniah
2:13; Isaiah 14:31; Nahum 1:1; 3:1,19.)
“The Medes and Persians captured Babylon and
made it one of the great centers of the empire. One of
the titles of Cyrus was King of Babylon. The term
‘north’ is also associated with the Medes and Persians (Jeremiah 50:9).
“Babylon was the center of Alexander’s empire,
and he died there while planning to make it the great
capital of his kingdom. When Seleucus became the
king of the north, he made his first capital at Babylon.

LIST OF THE KINGS OF THE NORTH
Jer. 25:9, Eze. 26:7.
Babylon

PreDan.11
PreDan.11

1
2
3

Medo-Persia

Ezra 5:13

Greece
Selecuid Greece
(Syria)
Pagan Rome
Papal Rome

Dan. 11:3
Dan. 11:5,6
Dan. 11:16
Dan. 11:31,36-45

Rome (Pagan then Papal) Becomes King of North.—
“The last king referred to as ‘the king of the
north,’ prior to verse 40, is Antiochus III. See Daniel
11:15. Rome, the power that fulfilled Daniel 11:16
and came ‘against him’—the last ‘king of the north,’
see v. 15—forced Antiochus III to keep to his territories south of the Taurus mountains. Rollin, in his Ancient History, book 18, chapter 1, refers to him as Antiochus, King of Syria.’ Later, BC. 65, Syria was conquered, and added to the Roman Empire. The term ‘the
king of the north’ is maintained in the prophecy until
his territory is absorbed in the Roman Empire. Then

465

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Unquestionably, Rome became the great Babylon of the new world, religiously as well as politically.
“ ‘When Cyrus captured the city of Babylon, the
ancient seat of Satan’s counterfeit system of religion,
the supreme pontiff of the Chaldean mysteries and his
retinue of priests fled from the city and ultimately
made their residence in Pergamos. Here they reestablished their Babylonian worship and made there
the king of Pergamos the chief pontiff of their religion. When Allatus III, the last of their priest-kings,
died in 133 BC, he bequeathed both his royal and
priestly offices to Rome and Pontifex Maximus of
the religion of the empire.’—Taylor Bunch, The Seven Epistles of Christ, p. 150.

ty, unbelief, evolutionary theories and darkness of
Egypt on the other.
“Finally, to use the argument of James White,
since the last power brought to view in Daniel 2,7, and
8 is Rome, and since Daniel 11 covers the same ground
as the other lines of prophecy, Rome is the last power
brought to view in Daniel 11. And this power is
called the king of the north.” Hiddekel, 74-77.

“The early Christians referred to the seven-hilled
city by the symbolic name, Babylon. The footnote on
Revelation 14 in the Roman Catholic New Testament
(for the United States Army) states, ‘Babylon: in Jewish and Christian circles, Babylon was a synonym for
Rome.’
“The popes of Rome became the successors of the
Caesars, and even to this day they still bear the religious title handed down from ancient Babylon
through the King of Pergamos—Pontifex Maximus.
Revelation 17 identifies the church of Rome as ‘Babylon the great, the mother of harlots.’
“Since the Babylon of the Middle East was for
centuries the great power that menaced Israel from
the north, how fitting that the great Babylon of the
Apocalypse is called the king of the north in the
time of the end. And even as Egypt is broader than
the activities of one single nation, so great mystical
Babylon may be taken to include the entire apostate
religious world, whose head, of course, is the Papacy. There is a third reason why ‘king of the north’ is a
fitting title for the Papacy. Throughout the history of
ancient Israel, the civilized world witnessed repeated
struggles for world supremacy between the king of the
north and the king of the south. Assyria and Egypt
were locked in desperate conflict until the king of the
south was defeated. Then Babylon and Egypt contended for the supremacy until Egypt was again defeated.
The same thing happened during the reign of Cambyses, king of Persia. As pointed out earlier, Daniel 11
describes in some detail the conflicts between Syria
and Egypt. Finally, Rome and Egypt fought for the
control of the world in the Battle of Actium in 31 BC.
The Jews in Palestine were witnesses to all these conflicts between the two powers, and sometimes, unfortunately, they were participants in the struggle.
“Down in the time of the end, the world is still
seen divided into two antagonistic camps—the religious world, led by the Papacy, and the atheistic
world, led by Communism. The Israel of God is still,
figuratively speaking, between the two powers,
fighting the warfare of truth on two fronts—against
false religion on the one hand, and against the infideli-

Pagan Rome is Not King of the South.—
“Some may wonder if pagan Rome would also be
the ‘king of the south,’ since it also conquered Hellenistic Egypt (31-30 BC); yet, even though it would conquer Egypt, it would not become the ‘king of the south’
because of the fact that it had conquered Hellenistic
Syria first to become the ‘king of the north,’ and
therefore could not be both the ‘king of the north’ and
the ‘king of the south’ simultaneously.” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 177.

“When pagan Rome came from the ‘north’ to incorporate Syria into its empire (63 BC), it ‘replaced’
this kingdom as the new ‘king of the north.’ Furthermore, when papal Rome had ‘replaced’ pagan Rome,
it also became the ‘king of the north’ by transition.”
Swearingen, TOOTN, 177.

Push.—
“ ‘Push’ or ‘pushing’ describes an attempt to kill
or a military conquest.
“But if the ox were wont to push with his horn
in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner,
and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a
man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death.” Exodus 21:29.
“I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward,
and southward; so that no beasts might stand before
him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his
hand.” Daniel 8:4.
The King of the South Shall Push at Him.—

“We are on solid ground if we say that here in
Dan.11:40 the French Revolution under symbol of
King of the South is in action against Papal Rome un-

466

DANIEL 11
der symbol of him being the King of the North. We
may also say that along Daniel’s terms we have the
same picture as in Rev.13:3 where the beast (Papal
Rome) receives a deadly wound. Who inflicted the
deadly wound? History confirms that as a result of the
French Revolution the Papacy lost its power and the
Pope was taken captive and died in captivity.” Knopper, Dan11, 2.

a battle for the mind. The Catholic Church has not
only suffered reverses through Communism, but, in a
more general way, through the forces of intellectualism
and liberalism, which are merely forms of atheistic
philosophy. She is even battling the winds of ‘Egyptian’ philosophy within her own church. All these antireligious forces may be included in ‘Egypt’s’ push at
the stronghold of the religious world.” Hiddekel, 74.

“ ‘Power was given unto him to continue forty
and two months.’ And, says the prophet, ‘I saw one of
his heads as it were wounded to death.’ And again: ‘He
that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity: he
that killeth with the sword must be killed with the
sword.’ The forty and two months are the same as the
‘time and times and the dividing of time,’ three years
and a half, or 1260 days, of Daniel 7—the time during
which the papal power was to oppress God’s people.
This period, as stated in preceding chapters, began with
the supremacy of the papacy, AD 538, and terminated
in 1798. At that time the pope was made captive by
the French army, the papal power received its deadly wound, and the prediction was fulfilled, ‘He that
leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity.’” Great
Controversy, 439.

“When we examine the scope of history after
1798, there is only one empire, namely the former
Soviet Union (1917-1991), which had espoused ‘atheism’ on a global scale. Therefore, the ‘king of the
south’ is a symbol of Soviet atheistic communism,
because there has been no greater example of an atheistic empire in recent history other than the Soviet Union. …Similar to ancient Egypt, this powerful atheistic
empire had ‘pushed’ against the authority of the ‘king
of the north,’ the papacy, by openly denying the existence of God during its specific era as a superpower
(1945-19910.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 184.
“From the overthrow of the ‘See of Rome’ at the
‘time of end’ into the twentieth century, atheism has
consistently warred against Papal Rome. Here is an
account of the ‘spiritual war’ given in a recent Time
magazine article: ‘Until recently, the battalions of
Marxism seemed to have the upper hand over the soldiers of the Cross. In the wake of the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, Lenin had pledged toleration but delivered terror. “Russia turned crimson with the blood of
martyrs,” says Father Gleb Yakunin, Russian Orthodoxy’s bravest agitator for religious freedom. In the
Bolsheviks’ first five years in power, 28 bishops and
1,200 priests were cut down by the red sickle. Stalin
greatly accelerated the terror, and by the end of
Khrushchev’s rule, liquidations of clergy reached an
estimated 50,000. After World War II, fierce but generally less bloody persecution spread into the Ukraine
and the new Soviet bloc, affecting millions of Roman
Catholics and Protestants as well as Orthodox.’ Time,
December 4, 1989.” Light Bearers, UOD-14.

“[On Feb. 15, 1798] ‘The cardinals who had been
taking part in the papal ceremonies that morning were
arrested and taken first to a Roman penitentiary and
later to Civita Vecchia. The French Commissioner
Haller (a Swiss banker, who was in charge of the expedition’s finances, and therefore its most important figure) bluntly informed the octogenarian Pope that he
would have to leave in three days. He claimed the two
rings the Pope was wearing, but when Pius explained
that he had to retain the fisherman’s, to pass on to his
successor, he was allowed to do so although neither
Berthier nor his companions believed that there
would ever be a successor. When Pius asked to be
allowed to die in Rome the general replied: “One can
die anywhere.”’ E.Y. Hales, Revolution and Papacy,
114.” Heiks, Source, 63.
“Daniel 11:40 declares that at the time of the end,
Egypt (atheism) would ‘push at’ the Papacy [the king
of the north]. Beginning with the French Revolution,
the Papacy has lost much of its power and influence,
due to the atheistic forces of the world. Many of the
Catholic countries of eastern Europe have come
under the control of Communism. Even in the Vietnam conflict, the king of the south is seen pushing at
the Papacy. South Vietnam has been controlled by the
Catholics. It was Cardinal Spellman who influenced
the American nation to go to the support of South
Vietnam against Communism.
The Catholic
Church also lost Cuba to Communism. Far from
being the bulwark against Communism, many of the
Catholic lands have been breeding grounds for it.
“The real conflict in the world is ideological. It is

“Tracing the history of the Soviet Union’s conquests through the following years is enlightening in
many ways. First is the fact that as country after country came under the control of this kingdom, the primary
mode to accomplish such a feat was revolution. The
design of Communism was to infiltrate, indoctrinate, and bring about a revolution.
“Another aspect of this growth is that almost all
the countries which were eventually brought under
the umbrella of the Soviet Union had previously
been Catholic [or Orthodox] dominated nations.
One by one, Catholicism was losing its power base.”
Pippinger, TOTE, 3,4.
The Deadly Wound Would Be Healed.—
“Almost with one stroke of the pen as in Rev.

467

GEMS FROM DANIEL
13:3 the deadly wound is healed. Daniel does something similar with his pen and writes: ‘and the King of
the North shall come against him like a whirlwind.’
This is saying the same as in Revelation that the wound
will be healed. A counter attack would take place. All
in one verse.” Knopper, Dan11, 2.

ism. In Newsweek, December 25, 1989, an article describing the fall of communism was entitled, ‘DAYS
OF THE WHIRLWIND.’ Amazing! The Bible carefully delineates, thousands of years in advance, what is
historical fact to our world today.
“The words used in these modern-historical accounts describe the fall of communism as the end of a
‘dramatic spiritual war.’ John Paul is credited with
helping to inflame a fervor for freedom that has ‘swept
like brush fire’ across atheistic countries. Gorbachev is
said to have bowed to ‘Roman legions,’ attributing to
John Paul II a ‘sweet victory.’ The demise of communism is referred to as ‘Days of the Whirlwind.’ All
of this speaks with unerring accuracy of Bible prophecy fulfilled.” Light Bearers, UOD-14.

“Beginning with the Concordat in 1801 between
Napoleon and the papacy, the restoration of the Roman
Church started with the new pope, Pius VII. Since
then, the influence of the papacy has continued to expand up through the present.” Shea, DARG, 210.
“The wound continued to heal with the signing of
the Lateran Treaty in 1929, which created the little
Vatican State. Now the pope had civil power again.
The wound will not be completely healed till the
Roman Catholic Church regains the power to persecute using the civil powers. See Revelation 13:3 for
more on the healing of the wound.” PJ.

“The angel appears to be borrowing the words of
Jeremiah, who wrote of ancient Babylon, ‘His chariots shall be as a whirlwind: his horses are swifter
than eagles.’—Jeremiah 4:13. Isaiah also mentions
that Babylon’s power lies in chariots, horses and ships.
(See Isaiah 43:14,17.) This is further evidence that the
king of the north is great mystical Babylon, of whom
old Babylon was a type.
“The prophecy clearly foretells Rome’s rapid recovery and return to world power. The book of Revelation more clearly outlines Rome’s manner of regaining her lost dominion. Revelation 13 first shows the
papacy receiving a ‘deadly wound’ in 1798 when the
pope was taken prisoner by the French army; then it
describes how that deadly wound shall be healed.
Protestant America, represented by the two-horned
beast, will restore the lost ascendancy of the man of sin
(Testimonies, vol.5, p.712).
“ ‘Rome is aiming to re-establish her power, to
recover her lost supremacy. …Stealthily and unsuspectedly she is strengthening her forces to further her
own ends when the time shall come for her to strike.’—
The Great Controversy, p.581.
“The book of Revelation does not indicate that
Rome’s resurgence of power will be through a military
conquest, although Daniel 11:40 does couch the king of
the north’s attack on Egypt in language reminiscent of
old Babylon’s military conquest. The real battle
against Egypt today is ideological, and the prophecy
merely indicates that somehow the pope will gather his
forces in a great and sudden assault on the antireligious forces of the world.” Hiddekel, 77.

Whirlwind.—
“When your fear cometh as desolation, and your
destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress
and anguish cometh upon you.” Proverbs 1:27.
“Behold, a whirlwind of the LORD is gone forth
in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked.” Jeremiah 23:19.
“Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, evil shall
go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind
shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.” Jeremiah 25:32
The King of the North Shall Come Against Him Like
a Whirlwind.—
“In Daniel 11:40, the king of the south, which
Biblically represents atheism, is overthrown by the last
power brought to view—the king of the north, or papal
Rome. Thus the title in U.S. News & World Report,
‘GORBY’S BOW TO THE ROMAN LEGIONS,’ was
a profound historical statement having deep prophetic
significance (December 11, 1989).
“First, it describes a face-lift which took place in
our world through the removal of political and religious lines in communist Eastern bloc countries. But
more importantly, this speaks of the ‘return’ of the
Roman power identified in Daniel 11:40 as the king of
the north. The fall of communism at the hand of Rome
is a direct fulfillment of end-time prophecy.
“The historical record states further, ‘The rush to
freedom in Eastern Europe is a sweet victory for John
Paul II.’
Papal Rome is identified in Daniel 11:40 as the
king of the north, the power to which atheistic communism has bowed. In Daniel 11:40, the king of the
north is depicted as coming against the king of the
south ‘like a whirlwind.’ Here is one of the most significant confirmations of this prophecy, found in the
description of the fall of the king of the south, or athe-

With Chariots, and With Horsemen.—
“But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the
horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen,
and his army, and overtook them encamping by the
sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon.” Exodus
14:9.
“For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and
hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of
the land, to possess the dwelling places that are not

468

DANIEL 11
theirs. They are terrible and dreadful: their judgment
and their dignity shall proceed of themselves.
Their horses also are swifter than the leopards,
and are more fierce than the evening wolves: and
their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their
horsemen shall come from far; they shall fly as the
eagle that hasteth to eat.
They shall come all for violence: their faces shall
sup up as the east wind, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.” Hab. 1:6-9.

“When the way was thoroughly prepared, the
king of the north struck! Through using the threat of
the superior military might of the United States, represented by Gabriel in Daniel 11:40 as ‘chariots, horsemen and many ships,’ the USSR became bankrupt, and
fell. The king of the north had prevailed over the second superpower of the world (the U.S. being the other
such power.) With the speed of a ‘whirlwind’ atheistic
Russia and her satellites were toppled. That very word
‘whirlwind’ (as stated by Gabriel) was used over and
over by various news reporters as they related the
swiftness of the demise of communism in eastern Europe.” Rosenvold, TKONAGP, 3, 4.

“Used in the Bible to describe military might
and power, this phrase points to the strength and support the king of the north has allied to him. (1 Kings
1:5; 1 Kings 20:1). This strength and support comes
from the [apostate Protestant] Christian allies of Catholicism which have had a strong affect upon the
crumbling of Communism.” Rafferty, 2TOAW, 1.

“In 1981, the communist bloc got another shock.
A new American President, Ronald Regan, began fulfilling his promise to challenge the Soviets, not placate
them. Over the next few years he accelerated the military buildup and announced the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a space-based system for protecting
against missile attack. He backed anti-communist rebels in Nicaragua, Angola, Cambodia and Afghanistan.
And with American troops, he liberated the island of
Grenada from communist thugs….
“To interpret the ‘chariots and horsemen’ as military pressure is further substantiated by historical fact.
The front cover of Time, February 24, 1992, was entitled, ‘HOLY ALLIANCE.’ Inside, a special report
uncovered to the public eye that the United States and
Papal Rome secretly worked together to bring down
Communism. The subtitle reads, ‘How Reagan and
the Pope conspired to assist Poland’s Solidarity movement and hasten the demise of Communism.’ The
main thrust of the alliance began with a meeting on
June 7, 1982. This was the first time the two leaders
had met, and immediately they ‘agreed to undertake a
clandestine campaign to hasten the dissolution of the
communist empire.’ President Reagan’s first National
Security Adviser, Richard Allen, described the agreement as ‘one of the great secret alliances of all time.’”
Light Bearers, UOD-14.

“All through the centuries the papacy has had no
real army of her own. How then could she be a conqueror represented in prophecy as coming with
‘chariots, and horsemen, and many ships?’ In the
past the papal king of the north had always used the
armies of those countries which chose to be subservient
to her, to help her overcome her enemies. This time
her tactics would be no different!
“The king of the north did not go against atheistic
Russia all by himself!—No! Through geopolitical
machinations with the then president of the United
States, Ronald Reagan, she developed a secret plan.
During the 8 years of Reagan’s presidency the Pope
and Reagan [the United States] collaborated in their
plans to topple ‘the evil empire’ of communism.
“Malachi Martin, a Jesuit, a teacher and an author
for the Roman Catholic Church, has written a book
titled The Keys of This Blood, It was published in
1990. The title page reveals the reason why his book
was written. …‘The Struggle for World Dominion
Between Pope John Paul II, Mikhail Gorbachev, and
the Capitalist West.
“In his book Martin reveals that the geo-political
struggle for world dominion was, at this time, between
Pope John Paul II (the king of the north, and Russia
(the king of the south), and the Captital West (primarily the USA).”
“Martin delineates that the Pope had carried on
diplomatic intrigue in Eastern Europe, especially in
Poland, hoping to bring about the fall of the communist
rulers in their various nations. Though Reagan was
anxious to get rid of the threat which communism
posed to world peace, yet he was also being used by
the king of the north to accomplish the latter’s own
ends. Reagan’s role turned out to be to break the economy of Russia through the arms race, ‘star-wars’ program, etc. We observe that in doing so, the economy
of the United States also became greatly weakened, so
that the national indebtedness rose to astronomical figures—in the trillions!

Ships.—

469

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“They that go down to the sea in ships, that do
business in great waters. Psalm 107:23.
“She is like the merchants’ ships; she bringeth
her food from afar.” Proverbs 31:14.
“For in one hour so great riches is come to
nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in
ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea,
stood afar off….” Revelation 18:17.

and shall overflow the land, and all that is therein; the
city, and them that dwell therein: then the men shall
cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl. At
the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong
horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the
rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back
to their children for feebleness of hands.” Jeremiah
47:2.

“Economy, trade, merchandise, merchants, riches—in other words, monetary matters are here named.”
Heiks, KON, 8.

“A military invasion is depicted, during which
nothing can stand in its way.” Heiks, KON, 9.
He Shall Enter Into Countries, and Shall Overflow
and Pass Over.—
“The Papacy—the spiritual king of the north—
situated upon the spiritual Euphrates (Revelation 17: 1;
Jeremiah 51:13) will flood across the anti-typical
land of Israel, and will reach right up to the neck,
even to Jerusalem (see Isaiah 8: 7, 8; Daniel 11:45;
etc.), but God’s wrath will be poured out upon the
flooding of the Euphrates (Revelation 16: 12).” Were,
KONAJ, 41.

With Many Ships.—
“Used in the Bible to describe economic trade,
ships speak of the economic pressure that is being
brought against the king of the south. (See Psalm
107:23; Proverbs 31:14; Revelation 18:17-19.).
“In The 1980’s, communist economies, always
inefficient, went belly up. Before they had lacked consumer and luxury goods. Now perennial shortages of
staples worsened as well. When Soviet miners went
on strike in 1989, their demands included soap, toilet
paper and sugar.’ Reader’s Digest, March, 1990,
p.107.
“It is clear from Bible prophecy and current history that , to a large degree, the cold war was lost on the
economic front. The Soviet Union could not keep up
its high military spending to the neglect of the basic
staple needs of its people.
“Time magazine states that ‘during the first half
of 1982, a five-part strategy emerged that was aimed at
bringing about the collapse of the Soviet economy.’
[Time, Feb. 24, 1992].” Light Bearers, UOD-14.

“In order to form a correct picture of the activities
of the king of the north, one should imagine the ancient
king of the north coming rapidly south to overthrow the
land of Egypt. In his march south he would overflow
the countries like a river in flood time. Palestine
would be included. (See verse 10.) The Assyrian
march southward in the days of Hezekiah serves as a
type of the last conflict of the king of the north. It
seems that the last part of Daniel 11:40 could be repeating the words of Isaiah:
“ ‘Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up
upon them the waters of the river, strong and many,
even the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and he
shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his
banks: and he shall pass through Judah; he shall
overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck;
and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth
of thy land, O Immanuel.’—Isaiah 8:7,8.” Hiddekel,
77,78.

Overflow.—
“But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of great forces: and one shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass through: then shall
he return, and be stirred up, even to his fortress.” Daniel 11:10.
“Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many,
even the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and he
shall come up over all his channels, and go over all
his banks;
“And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck; and
the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of
thy land, O Immanuel.
“Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall
be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces;
gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.”
Isaiah 8:7-9.

“The people of the Soviet Union and East bloc
nations, hungry for basic staple needs and tired of broken promises, left Gorbachev or any Soviet leader with
few choices. ‘Cracking down’ on the push for freedom
would have squandered ‘his enormous stock of good
will in the West, endangering pools of much-needed
financial aid.’ In the face of this economic pressure—
with the world looking on—the Soviets had little
choice but to open the door to political change and
freedom, allowing the power of the ‘north’ to: enter
into the countries.” Rafferty, PI, 30.
“ ‘While Gorbachev’s hands-off policy was the
immediate cause of the chain reaction of liberation that
has swept through Eastern Europe in the past few
months, John Paul deserves much of the longer-

“Thus saith the LORD; Behold, waters rise up
out of the north, and shall be an overflowing flood,

470

DANIEL 11
range credit.’ Time, December 4, 1989.
“ ‘With the Pope’s support, Solidarity (Polish Labor Union) was formed, and John Paul II sent word to
Moscow that if Soviet forces crushed Solidarity, he
would go to Poland and stand with his people. The
Soviets were so alarmed they hatched a plot to kill
him…. The Pope cautioned Solidarity leaders, particularly his friend Lech Walesa, to proceed slowly. They
did. In 1988 General Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Polish
communist leader, went to them offering a deal. Solidarity insisted on an election, which it carried with
some 80 per cent of the vote. When the communist
government fell, the impact on Eastern Europe was
electrifying.’ Reader’s Digest, March, 1990, p.108.
“… ‘How has the king of the north (Papal Rome)
entered into the (communist) countries? When we recognize that the fall of communism began with the
country of Poland, the home of John Paul II, that this
country’s 90 per cent Catholic population, once controlled by Communism, now has a Catholic leader, the
entering ‘into the countries’ of atheism by the Papacy
begins to have its proper application.
“When Tadeusz Mazowiecki took over in August,
1989, as Poland’s first non-communist prime minister
in 45 years, he was asked if he was a socialist. ‘I am a
Catholic,’ he answered tersely.’ US News and World
Report, May 21, 1990.
“… ‘Three new Catholic bishops have recently
been named in Czechoslovakia. And this month Gorbachev meets Pope John Paul II during a visit to Italy—the first face-to-face encounter between leaders
of the Kremlin and the Vatican. The sessions may
lead to legalization of the long-banned Ukrainian Catholic Church in the USSR.’ Life, December 1989.
“ ‘Addressing the Pope as ‘Your Holiness’—no
small gesture for the leader of a nation and party formally pledged to atheism—Gorbachev promised that
the Supreme Soviet would ‘shortly’ pass a law guaranteeing religious freedom for all believers.’ Time, December 11, 1989.” Rafferty, 2TOAW,1-3.

cided to seek the pardon of Pope Gregory VII in 1077,
he stood barefoot for three days in the snow outside the
papal quarters in Canossa, Italy. Though Gorbachev’s
concordat with the church was less arduous, it was no
less significant in its way.’ Time, December 11, 1989.”
Rafferty, 1TOAW, 1.

“ ‘Of all the events that have shaken the Soviet
bloc in 1989, none is more fraught with history—or
more implausible—than the polite encounter to take
place this week in Vatican City. There, in the spacious
ceremonial library of the 16th century Apostolic Palace,
the czar of world atheism, Mikhail Gorbachev will
visit the Vicar of Christ, Pope John Paul II.
“ ‘The moment will be electric, not only because John Paul helped inflame the fervor for freedom
in his Polish homeland that has swept like brush fire
across Eastern Europe. Beyond that, the meeting of
the two men symbolizes the end of the 20th century’s
most dramatic spiritual war, a conflict in which the
seemingly irresistible force of Communism battered
against the immovable object of Christianity.’ Time,
December 4, 1989, p.74.” Rafferty, 1TOAW, 4.

“How has the king of the north (Papal
Rome/U.S.) entered into the communist countries?
When we recognize that the fall of Communism began
with the country of Poland, the home of John Paul II,
and that this country’s 90 percent Catholic population, once controlled by Communism, now has a
Catholic leader as well as a democratic form of government, the entering ‘into the countries’ of atheism by
the Papacy and the West begins to have its proper application.
“In Poland the Catholic population looks to
John Paul II as a hero figure and ‘when Tadeuz Mazowiecki took over in August, 1989 as Poland’s first
noncommunist prime minister in 45 years, he was
asked if he was a socialist. ‘I am a Catholic,’ he answered tersely.
“Due to Gorbachev’s policy change, the Papacy
is re-establishing its church services; confiscated

“ ‘THE TRIUMPH OF JOHN PAUL II—The
Tide of Freedom Washing Over Eastern Europe Answers His Most Fervent Prayer.’ Life, December,
1989.” Rafferty, 1TOAW, 4.

The King of the North entered many countries!

“ ‘When the Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV de-

471

GEMS FROM DANIEL
his papacy with an international profile and, as Pope,
move around among world leaders and nations, vindicating a position for himself as a special leader among
leaders, because in that competition he plans to emerge
as the victor.’ …‘No one really suspects him [John
Paul II] of seeking territorial aggrandizement, gold,
political power or personal pleasure,’ says Mr. Martin.
The Keys of This Blood, p. 21, 492.” Rafferty, PI,
37,38,43.

church buildings are being returned; and Catholic
bishops and clergy are being dispatched to communist countries where the Catholic Church was once
strictly banned by the government, consider unlawful
and heavily persecuted.” Rafferty, PI, 30,31.
“ ‘The revival of religious freedom lifted an official ban on the 5-million-member Ukrainian Catholic Church, which has survived underground since
1946 when Stalin ordered it absorbed into the Russian
Orthodox Church.
Winning legalization for the
Ukrainian Church had been a primary aim of the
Pope’s.’ Time, December 11, 1989.
“These policy changes by Gorbachev resulted in
‘hundreds of churches and tens of thousands of followers’ returning to the Ukrainian Catholic
Church. Though there was inner turmoil in the
U.S.S.R. over Gorbachev’s decisions, and doubts from
onlookers of true and lasting change, it is clear that
‘Gorbachev’s choices’ were ‘meager.’ ‘Having embarked upon the road of radical reform,’ he stated in
1990, ‘the socialist countries are crossing the line beyond which there is not return to the past.’ Ibid.
“The fulfillment of Daniel’s prophecies, documented by contemporary historical accounts, finds its
accurate application. ‘And at the time of the end
[1798 and onward] shall the king of the south [atheism, communism] push at [war against] him [Papal
Rome]: and the king of the north [Papal Rome] shall
come [sweep] against him [atheism, communism] like
a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen [military support, U.S.], and with many ships [trade or economic strength, U.S.], and he shall enter into the countries [atheist controlled], and shall overflow and pass
over.'’(Daniel 11:40).” Light Bearers, UOD-14.

Shall Overflow.—
“In His Second Advent sermon, Jesus said:
‘When you therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the
holy place [‘the glorious holy mountain’] (who so
reads, let him understand).’ Matthew 24: 15. In Daniel
9:26, 27 we read of the coming of the Romans who
would ‘destroy the city and the sanctuary. And the end
thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the
war desolations are determined, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate,
even unto the consummation, and that determined shall
be poured upon the desolator.’ (See margin.) The enemy would ‘come in like a flood’ but ‘the Spirit of the
Lord,’ because of their sins, would not ‘lift up a standard against him’ (Isaiah 59: 19). The ‘abominations’
(mentioned in Daniel 9:27; 11:31; 12:11) is the word
employed in Scripture when referring to idolatrous
worship. Commenting on Matthew 24:15, God’s servant says: ‘When the idolatrous standards of the Romans should be set up in the holy ground, which
extended some furlongs outside the city walls, then the
followers of Christ were to find safety in flight’
(Great Controversy, p. 26).
“In describing the spiritual Roman power, the
Revelator designates her ‘the mother of harlots and
abominations of the earth’ (Revelation 17:5). Thus, in
Revelation 17:4, 5 and also Matthew 24:15, Jesus applies, in a ‘double,’ ‘spiritual,’ sense, Daniel’s prophecy concerning ‘the abomination of desolation.’ Both
literal and spiritual Rome are designated by the same
word: pagan Rome was an idolatrous power, and papal Rome, also, is an idolatrous power.
“To His disciples, Jesus declared: ‘And when you
see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that
the desolation thereof is nigh’ (Luke 21:20). When that
occurred they were to know that ‘the days of vengeance’ had come (v. 22). As recorded in Matthew 24:
15, 16, Jesus said: ‘When you therefore shall see the
abomination of desolation stand in the holy place
[Mark 13: 14 ‘standing where it ought not’], (who so
reads, let him understand:) then let them which be in
Judea flee into the mountains.’
“…The persecution of the church during the Dark
Ages is declared to be a ‘war’ (Revelation 13:7), also
the treading under foot of ‘the holy city’ (Revelation
11:2), and also the flooding of the river Euphrates
(Revelation 12:15, 16; Joshua 24:2, 4, 14, 15; Isaiah
8:7, 8; etc.). Thus the final phase of the conflict be-

“Now it can be said that everything which took
place in Eastern Europe in recent years would have
been impossible without the Pope’s efforts and the
enormous role, including the political role, which he
played in the world arena. Pope John Paul II will play
an enormous political role now that profound changes
have occurred in European history.” (Mikhail Gorbachev). Toronto Star, March 9, 1992.
“An article in Life magazine, which attributes to
John Paul II much of the credit for the collapse of
Communism, states that ‘in the course of 44 journeys
he walked in the dust of Morocco and on the grass at
Yankee Stadium, reached out to tumultuous audiences
in Indonesia and Korea, Central America and New
Zealand, sent greeting to the U.S.S.R. from a jet plane
flying over Siberia. No other pope—indeed no other
human being—has seen and been seen by so many
people. In less than a decade he had become one of the
most recognizable faces and forces in the world.
“Why would John Paul II travel the world, from
country to country, speaking with leader after leader? Mr. [Malachi] Martin says that, ‘he would endow

472

DANIEL 11
tween the forces of good and evil is again a ‘war’
(Revelation 12:17), an attack upon ‘the holy city’
(Daniel 11:45; Revelation 14:20; Joel 3; Zechariah 14),
and the flooding of the river Euphrates (Revelation
16:12). In ‘the battle of that great day of God Almighty’ (Revelation 16:14), the Lord makes ‘war’
(Revelation 19:11-20) upon the multitudes that are
gathered against His ‘holy city’(Daniel 11:45; 12:1;
Zechariah 14:2, 3, 12, 13, Rev. 14: 20). He dries up
the flooding waters of the Euphrates (Rev. 16:12;
Jeremiah 50:38; Isaiah 44:27; etc.)—the river of
Babylon (Rev. 17:1, 15; Jer. 51: 13, etc.) which is
declared to be ‘in the north country’ (Jeremiah
46:6, 10). Thus the ending of the king of the north
and the drying up of the waters of the Euphrates
refer to the same power: the doom of the forces of
Babylon.” Were, KONAJ, 79,96.

that which the Spirit of the Lord impelled me to write. I
did not want to be compelled to present the misleading
influence of these sophistries. But in the providence of
God, the errors that have been coming in must be
met.” 1 Selected Messages, 204,205.
Last Part of Vs. 40, an Overview of Vss.41-45.—
“The latter part of verse 40 of Daniel 11 is none
other than an overview…of the remaining events of
chapter 11. Daniel then symbolically sets forth in
verses 41-45 and 12:1-3 the remaining events that are
to transpire in their chronological order. It has been
necessary to set this foundation so that the commencement of these events will be clear to all.” Heiks, KON,
10, 13.

DANIEL 11:41
He shall enter also into the glorious
land, and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his
hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief
of the children of Ammon.

“Today the idolatrous standard that Rome
plants in holy ground is her idol God. It is found
today in Beliefs #2,3,4,5 of the ‘28 Statements.’
These define the Catholic Trinity concept that was
brought into the SDA church in 1980 under Gen.
Conference President, Neil Wilson. It stands in opposition to (and has replaced) the ‘Heavenly Trio’ concept of the Godhead in the Bible and Spirit of Prophecy, where God the Father is the Most High God.” PJ.

The Glorious Land = Spiritual Israel.—
“And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye
shall be a delightsome land, saith the LORD of
hosts.” Malachi 3:12. [The glorious land is God’s
people.]

“The enemy of souls has sought to bring in the
supposition that a great reformation was to take place
among Seventh-day Adventists, and that this reformation would consist in giving up the doctrines
which stand as the pillars of our faith, and engaging
in a process of reorganization. Were this reformation to
take place, what would result? The principles of truth
that God in His wisdom has given to the remnant
church, would be discarded. Our religion would be
changed. The fundamental principles that have sustained the work for the last fifty years would be accounted as error. A new organization would be established. Books of a new order would be written. A
system of intellectual philosophy would be introduced.
The founders of this system would go into the cities,
and do a wonderful work. The Sabbath of course,
would be lightly regarded, as also the God who created
it. Nothing would be allowed to stand in the way of
the new movement. The leaders would teach that virtue is better than vice, but God being removed, they
would place their dependence on human power, which,
without God, is worthless. Their foundation would be
built on the sand, and storm and tempest would
sweep away the structure. }
“Who has authority to begin such a movement?
We have our Bibles. We have our experience, attested
to by the miraculous working of the Holy Spirit. We
have a truth that admits of no compromise. Shall we
not repudiate everything that is not in harmony with
this truth?
“I hesitated and delayed about the sending out of

“But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should
shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out
of darkness into his marvellous light. 1 Peter 2:9.
“The kingdom of God shall be taken from you
[literal Israel] and given to a nation [spiritual Israel] bringing forth the fruits thereof’ (Matthew
21:43). To those who bear the ‘fruit of the Spirit’ (Galatians 5:22, 23) in the Lord’s vineyard (Matthew
21:33-43; John 15: 1-11, etc.) are assured the blessing
and protection of God. ‘You [the church] are a holy
nation’ (1 Peter 2: 9).
“…The New Covenant is made ‘with the house
of Israel and the house of Judah’ (Hebrews 8: 8).
The church is now the ‘nation’ of Israel (1 Peter 2: 9;
Matthew 21: 43). The phraseology employed to designate the church is the same as that describing national
Israel in the Old Testament.
“…Those prophecies which would have had their
literal Palestinian fulfillment had the Jews been faithful
now have their spiritual fulfillment because the
church has taken the place of national Israel.”
Were, KONAJ, 51, 52.
“God’s Word spoken by the angel Gabriel in
verses 14 and 16 identifies the ‘glorious land’ as representing ‘His chosen people’ (His church). Would

473

GEMS FROM DANIEL
not the ‘glorious land’ spoken of by the same angel,
just 25 verses later in the same chapter, also represent
God’s chosen people?
“…The passing of so many years between verses
16 and 41, need not be confusing. The only reason
the land of Palestine was called the ‘glorious land’
was because on its soil was located God’s church on
earth! His chosen people! There was nothing ‘glorious’ about Palestine itself. As soon as God’s people
rejected Him, and crucified the Lord Jesus, Palestine
was no longer a ‘holy’ place. On the other hand, ‘The
curse of God is upon Jerusalem and its surroundings,
and the land is defiled under the inhabitants thereof.’
(RH July 30, 1901).
“All are aware that after the Jewish nation of Israel was rejected as God’s special people in AD 34,
God’s church no longer dwelt in a single, national geographic location such as Palestine. In response to
Christ’s own command: ‘Go ye therefore, and teach all
nations’ (Matt. 28:19), His people (His church), were
soon scattered into an international setting. Today, all
God’s people do not dwell in the United States, or in
Germany, Africa, India, or any other one nation or
country. Today, God’s ‘glorious land,’ His church,
is world-wide!
The important thing for us to remember, however, is that the Old Testament names such as, ‘Israel,’
‘Jerusalem,’ ‘Mt. Zion,’ ‘holy mountain,’ etc. were not
abandoned. Rather, they were adopted and became
symbolic terms used by God to represent His true people—His New Testament church, wherever they might
be located throughout the world. Whether they be
Jews or Gentiles, if they are spiritual Jews, they are
called by God, ‘My people Israel,’ ‘the holy city,’
etc. Paul writes: ‘And if ye be Christ’s, then are ye
Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.—
Galatians 3;29.” Rosenvold, TKONAGP, 8,10.

time God’s people, in obedience to Christ’s command,
were taking the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue
and people. By this time most of the Roman empire
was Christian, but in great apostasy. In their midst,
(the spiritual “pleasant land”) there was one (the bishop
of Rome) who would move vertically into the heavens,
symbolizing his dominance in the religious world.
‘And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven.
And it cast down some of the host and of the stars to
the ground, and stamped upon them.’ Daniel 8:10.
The host represents God’s people dwelling by faith
in the glorious land of heavenly Mt. Zion, and the
stars represent the ministers of God’s people. These
faithful ones are persecuted—cast down to the ground
and stamped upon.
“The pope would even attempt to block the view
of Christ and His work in the heavenly sanctuary:
‘Yea, he magnified himself even to the Prince of the
host! and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away,
and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.’ This
he is attempting to do again in the glorious land of latter day Israel.
“That the glorious land is spiritual is seen in the
following Scripture: ‘Yea, they despised the pleasant
land, they believed not his word.’ Psalm 106:24.
“As you study the word ‘glorious’ and ‘glory’ in
the Bible you begin to see that only God is glorious.
The glory of God is His character. Ex. 34. But
God’s glory is bestowed upon His people through faith
in His word. Thus, the glorious land today is still
Mount Zion and the people that worship God there
by faith.
“ ‘For ye are not come unto the mount that might
be touched, But ye are come unto mount Sion, and
unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, To the
general assembly and church of the firstborn, which
are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and
to the spirits of just men made perfect, And to Jesus
the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of
Abel.” Hebrews 12: 18,22,23.
“The glorious land is where God’s glorious presence is found. The glory is God’s character. God’s
character is seen in the life of Christ, who perfectly
kept His Father’s ten commandments, which define
righteousness when obeyed, and sin when broken. The
New Covenant promise is that the Holy Spirit will
write God’s law (God’s character = God’s glory) by
faith in our hearts and minds.
“This glory is found in the Three Angels’ messages: ‘Fear God and give glory to Him.’ Rev. 14:7.
Today the glorious land is seen in the two or three
gathered together in Christ’s name that are scattered
all over the earth, who are ‘keeping the commandments
of God, and have the faith of Jesus.’ Rev. 14:12—the
last verse of the Third Angel’s message. The glorious
land is where the Three Angels’ messages are being
given. Ellen White wrote: ‘I saw a company who

“The king of the south represents organized Atheism, which is spiritual and global. The king of the
north represents the Roman Catholic Church system,
which is spiritual and global. Between them (geographically) is the Glorious Land representing
modern-day Israel, which also is spiritual and global.
“The revived Papacy (Papal Rome) has moved into the modern-day Glorious Land, just as pagan Rome
entered into the literal “pleasant” land of Israel in the
OT period. Daniel mentions this entrance: ‘And out
of one of them came forth a little horn, which waxed
exceeding great, toward the south, and toward the east,
and toward the pleasant land.” The same Hebrew
word translated as ‘glorious land’ is found here in Daniel 8:9 as ‘pleasant land’ representing geographic
Israel in the Old Testament period. Pagan Rome
entered into the pleasant land under Pompei’s forces in 83 BC. At that time God’s people were localized in the geographic area of Palestine.
“Pagan Rome would rule till 476 AD. By this

474

DANIEL 11
stood well-guarded and firm, giving no countenance to
those who would unsettle the established faith of the
body. God looked upon them with approbation. I
was shown three steps—the first, second, and third
angels' messages. Said my accompanying angel,
‘Woe to him who shall move a block or stir a pin of
these messages. The true understanding of these messages is of vital importance. The destiny of souls
hangs upon the manner in which they are received.’”
Early Writings, 258,259.
“Those who stand on the firm platform [structure] of present truth—the Three Angels’ Messages—are not overthrown but standing in the glorious
land today. Indeed, they are giving ‘glory to Him’
(Rev. 14:7).” PJ.

humanity, and dwelt upon our earth. He was despised
and rejected of men; in Jerusalem He was crucified by
wicked hands. I have not the slightest inclination to
visit Jerusalem, to see where it is thought probable
that Jesus trod, where He may have labored, and where
He may have been crucified. The means which might
be expended thus I would prefer to treasure, that I may
point souls to the Saviour risen from Joseph's tomb,
and proclaiming, "I am the resurrection and the life.
“I can trace His footprints in the sure word of
prophecy, and can obtain a better idea of His works
and of His ways, than I could by visiting Jerusalem,
defiled with unholy feet and unholy deeds. I could
not expend money to visit these places when the living
interests of Christ's kingdom are to be presented to the
people. We are to teach the word of God, and to be
doers of that word, which is represented as building
upon the rock; the structure thus built will withstand
the storm and the tempest, because it is founded on the
eternal Rock.
“I wish to see Jerusalem when the fires of the last
great day shall have cleansed it from all sinful defilement. Jerusalem is now no more sacred to me than
any other place on the globe. Wherever by his Holy
Spirit Jesus makes known His presence, wherever
his righteousness shines forth in bright and glorious
beams, wherever his divine love illuminates the
humble places of the earth, wherever his honor
dwells, there I am pleased to be.
“Christ looks with sadness upon the delusions that
ensnare human minds who are so eager to behold the
place where His feet are supposed once to have trodden, and yet who do not heed His command, ‘Follow
me,’ who do not walk in the light as He is in the light.
A shadow is resting over Jerusalem, a terrible shadow, which I have no desire to come under. Everywhere a curse is visible, which I have no desire to look
upon. I can see marks of the curse everywhere.
“…I know that Christ looks with sadness upon
those who are searching for the places He passed over
while in the flesh, but who fail to recognize Him as a
living Saviour, on any ground, in any place. He
says, ‘Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the
world.’ Men may search in vain for the foot-prints of
Christ in Jerusalem. I care more for where He is now,
in heaven, and for what He is doing in my behalf. ”
Paulson Collection, 137,138.

“In fact God’s church is the spiritual land! Paul
calls the church the ground of truth! ‘But if I tarry
long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church
of the living God, the pillar and ground of the
truth.’ 1 Timothy 3:15.”
[Please see Rev. 14:6-12 for understanding of the
Three Angels’ Messages.]
“When at Christ’s trial before Pilate, ‘The chief
priests answered, We have no king but Caesar,’ John
19:15, the Jewish people by their own decision chose
not to continue as God’s people (DA 738) and prophecies beyond the cross dealing with Zion, Jerusalem, the
‘glorious land,’ or ‘My people,’ now have a spiritual
and world-wide application which is applicable to
God’s true church, 1 Peter 2:5,10; Matt. 21:43.”
TEACH, D&R, 88.
“God has a church. It is not the great cathedral,
neither is it the national establishment, neither is it the
various denominations; it is the people who love God
and keep His commandments. ‘Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them’ (Matthew 18:20). Where Christ is even
among the humble few, this is Christ's church, for
the presence of the High and Holy One who inhabiteth eternity can alone constitute a church.
“Where two or three are present who love and
obey the commandments of God, Jesus there presides,
let it be in the desolate place of the earth, in the wilderness, in the city enclosed in prison walls. The glory of
God has penetrated the prison walls, flooding with glorious beams of heavenly light the darkest dungeon. His
saints may suffer, but their sufferings will, like the
apostles of old, spread their faith and win souls to
Christ and glorify His holy name.” Upward Look, 355.

“If we have faith in the promises of God, we shall
show in conversation and in deportment that we are not
living for this world, but are making it our first business to prepare for that holy land.” Review & Herald, 11/29/1881.
“These all died in faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.
14 For they that say such things declare plainly that

The Glorious Land is Not the United States.—
“I am told that before finishing the life of Christ I
ought to visit Jerusalem, the holy land. What made it
holy? The Majesty of heaven clothed His divinity with

475

GEMS FROM DANIEL
they seek a country. 15 And truly, if they had been
mindful of that country from whence they came out,
they might have had opportunity to have returned. 16
But now they desire a better country, that is, an
heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called
their God: for he hath prepared for them a city.” Hebrews 11:13-16.

fruits that were given to Adam and Eve in Eden. He
was about to establish them in a second Eden, a goodly
land, where they might enjoy the fruits and grains that
He would provide for them. He purposed to remove
the feverish diet upon which they had subsisted in
Egypt; for He wished them to be in perfect health and
soundness when they entered the goodly land to which
He was leading them, so that the surrounding heathen
nations might be constrained to glorify the God of Israel, the God who had done so wonderful a work for
His people. Unless the people who acknowledged
Him as the God of heaven were in perfect soundness
of health, His name could not be glorified.” 1BC,
1102.

The Glorious Land is Not the Apostate Protestantism.—
“Since 1844 the Protestant churches fell by rejecting the first angel’s message of Rev. 14:6,7:
“ ‘Jesus commissioned a mighty angel [the first
angel] to descend and warn the inhabitants of the earth
to prepare for His second appearing. As the angel left
the presence of Jesus in heaven, an exceedingly bright
and glorious light went before him. I was told that his
mission was to lighten the earth with his glory and
warn man of the coming wrath of God. Multitudes received the light. Some of these seemed to be very solemn, while others were joyful and enraptured. All who
received the light turned their faces toward heaven and
glorified God. Though it was shed upon all, some
merely came under its influence, but did not heartily
receive it. Many were filled with great wrath. Ministers and people united with the vile and stoutly resisted
the light shed by the mighty angel.’ Early Writings,
245,246.
“ ‘Instead of receiving the message with gladness,
they [the Protestant churches] declared it to be a delusion.’ ‘They hated those who loved His appearing and
shut them out of the churches. Those whose hearts
burned with an intense desire to see Jesus were forbidden by their professed brethren to speak of His coming.’ Early Writings, 260, 247.
“Thus, the Protestant churches fell from truth and
became part of spiritual Babylon. Hence, the call was
given in 1844 for God’s people to come out of Babylon. Heeding the Second Angel’s message of Rev.
14:8, over 50,000 left the churches they were members
of, to wait for Christ’s second Coming. A remnant of
these were raised up to give the Third Angel’s message
of Revelation 14:9-12. Thus, the Protestant church
systems are now part of fallen Babylon, and are more
closely related to the king of the north, while those who
profess faith in the Three Angel’s messages are part of
the Glorious Land—spiritual Israel.
We should point out, however, that many of
God’s people are still in spiritual Babylon—the
Catholic church and the fallen Protestant church systems. God makes a distinction between church systems
and the members in those systems—individuals who
are following all the light they know. See Rev. 18:4.”
PJ

Last Day Spiritual Entrance by Papal Rome into Glorious Land Parallel to Papal Rome’s Rise to Domination of Christianity in 538 AD.—
“In Daniel 8:11-13 and 11:31, the Papal phase of
the little horn of Rome enters the ‘pleasant’ (same Hebrew word as ‘glorious’) land and exalts itself into
heavenly places and casts down the place of His sanctuary, the truth, and the people to the ground, symbolizing the loss of the true Biblical doctrines of the everlasting gospel and the work of Christ in the Holy Place
of the heavenly sanctuary from the minds of God’s
people by 508 AD. This eclipse of Christ lasted for
1335 prophetic days (literal years) through the Dark
Ages until 1844 when the knowledge of the heavenly
sanctuary was restored to God’s people.
“In these last days, the king of the north (the
papacy) again enters the glorious land with the
purpose of taking away of the knowledge of Christ’s
work in the Most Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary. This is the knowledge contained in the Three
Angels’ messages of Rev. 14:6-12, and many people
have been overthrown from the correct understanding
of this present truth. This is seen by the removal of the
Three Angels from the logo of the church. Today, the
term, ‘Three Angels’ messages’ is heard and repeated
by many, but not understood. Few realized that when
Jesus forgives their sins, their sins go to the heavenly
sanctuary to be blotted out and put on Satan the scapegoat. Few understand that Babylon represents the fallen church systems. No longer is the beast viewed with
any horror.” PJ.
Timing of Entrance into Glorious Land.—
“Because the Glorious Land was in between the
king of the north and the king of the south geographically, the king of the north could not reach the king of
the south, until he had first entered into the glorious
land. This means that we should expect that the
king of north entered into the glorious land before it
reached ‘Egypt’ and overthrew the communist
countries of eastern Europe and the U.S.S.R. in
1989-1992.” PJ

Diet in the Glorious Land—Tested as was Daniel.—
“In Egypt their taste had become perverted. God
designed to restore their appetite to a pure, healthy
state, in order that they might enjoy the simple

The King of the North Enters Secretly Into the Glori-

476

DANIEL 11
God in His wisdom has given to the remnant church,
would be discarded. Our religion would be changed.
The fundamental principles that have sustained the
work for the last fifty years would be accounted as error. A new organization would be established. Books
of a new order would be written. A system of intellectual philosophy would be introduced. The founders of
this system would go into the cities, and do a wonderful work. The Sabbath of course, would be lightly regarded, as also the God who created it. Nothing would
be allowed to stand in the way of the new movement.
The leaders would teach that virtue is better than vice,
but God being removed, they would place their dependence on human power, which, without God, is
worthless. Their foundation would be built on the
sand, and storm and tempest would sweep away the
structure.
“Who has authority to begin such a movement?
We have our Bibles. We have our experience, attested
to by the miraculous working of the Holy Spirit. We
have a truth that admits of no compromise. Shall we
not repudiate everything that is not in harmony with
this truth?” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 204,205.

ous Land.—
“Unfortunately, the king of the north has fully entered the glorious land, and the entrance has been
by stealth as predicted by Jude and Peter. See Jude
3,4; 2 Peter 2:1,2:
“Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto
you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to
write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly
contend for the faith which was once delivered unto
the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God
into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ.” Jude 3,4.
“But there were false prophets also among the
people, even as there shall be false teachers among
you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall
follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.” 2 Peter 2:1,2.
“This entrance has been secretly accomplished
not only by means of Jesuit infiltration, but especially
by the teaching of false doctrines [wine] to Adventist
ministers and members who attend Babylonian universities and ecumenical gatherings.
“ ‘Notwithstanding I have a few things against
thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel
[symbol of Papal Rome], which calleth herself a
prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to
commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.’ Rev. 2:20.” PJ.

King of North Enters Into Glorious Land—Professed
SDA Church System.—
[The following was written in 1970.] “As the
king of the north marched south in those ancient campaigns against Egypt, he marched through ‘the glorious
land.’ So in this time of the final conflict, the king of
the north will enter ‘the glorious land’ and overthrow
‘tens of thousands.’—R.S.V. (‘Countries’ in verse 41 is
a supplied word.)
“…It is perfectly obvious that ‘the glorious land’
in the time of the end has no relation to the Middle
East. George McCready Price comes close to the truth
when he suggests that it ‘probably means the Protestant
world as a whole.’—The Greatest of the Prophets,
p.315. But unless his point is clarified, it could be very
misleading. Protestantism so-called in the world
today is not ‘the glorious land,’ for since 1844 the
Sunday keeping Protestant bodies are part of Babylon (Revelation 14:8). Indeed, they constitute apostate
Protestantism.
“The Advent Movement is now the successor of
the Protestant Reformation. ‘The glorious land’
must therefore embrace the people of the Advent
Movement the world over. Truth often appears to be
frightening. It flatters neither man nor denominational
ego. Many have been educated to think that the true
church of the last days is impregnable. It will finally
become impregnable, but that is mentioned in verse 45,
not verse 41. Daniel 11:41 is the only passage in either
Daniel or the Revelation that specifically mentions the
great sifting in the church of God at the time of the
great final test. …Ellen G. White says that ‘chaff like a
cloud’ and ‘a large class’ will ‘abandon their position and join the ranks of the opposition.’—
Testimonies, vol.5, pp.81, 136; The Great Controversy,

“The end is near, stealing upon us stealthily,
imperceptibly, like the noiseless approach of a thief
in the night. May the Lord grant that we shall no
longer sleep as do others, but that we shall watch and
be sober.” Maranatha, 27.
“Therefore Satan's step is noiseless, his movements stealthy, and his batteries masked. He does
not venture to show himself openly, lest he arouse
the Christian's dormant energies and send him to
God in prayer.” Maranatha, 60.
“The enemy is preparing for his last campaign
against the church. He has so concealed himself from
view that many can hardly believe that he exists, much
less can they be convinced of his amazing activity and
power. . . .” Maranatha, 64.
Ellen White Predicts Glorious Land Overthrow.—
“The enemy of souls has sought to bring in the
supposition that a great reformation was to take place
among Seventh-day Adventists, and that this reformation would consist in giving up the doctrines which
stand as the pillars of our faith, and engaging in a process of reorganization. Were this reformation to take
place, what would result? The principles of truth that

477

GEMS FROM DANIEL
p.608. Indeed, Inspiration warns that the mighty shaking will be so devastating that ‘the church may appear
as about to fall.’ It will be the greatest crises in the
history of God’s people, the darkest hour in the experience of the true church. Assyria’s invasion of Judea
under Sennacherib and the terrible ravages of Judea
wrought by his armies serve as an accurate type of this
last conflict. Habakkuk also saw a vision of the
northern armies descending upon God’s people.
The prophet had been complaining to God about the
sinful condition of His people and challenging the Lord
to do something about it (Habakkuk 1:1-4). Then the
Lord answered the prophet:
“ ‘Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and
wonder marvelously: for I will work a work in your
days, which ye will not believe, though it be told
you. For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and
hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of
the land, to possess the dwelling places that are not
theirs.’—Habakkuk 1:5,6.” Hiddekel, 78,79.

“…Can ‘many’ actually be ‘overthrown’ or
‘slain’ spiritually by the king of the north, while still
remaining members of God’s church? In Ezekiel’s
day these twenty-five men were worshipping at the
door of the temple of God—between the porch and the
altar—they were undoubtedly a company of priests—
ministers of God’s own church! In an end-time prophecy the prophet of the Lord predicted:
“ ‘But the glory of the Lord had departed from
Israel; although many still continued the forms of religion, His power and presence were lacking.’ 5T 210.
“What happens to the ‘many’ who are ‘overthrown’? ‘Many’ may still be continuing their
‘forms of religion’—as if they were active SDA’s.
But the ‘presence.’ The ‘power,’ and the ‘glory of the
Lord will have departed’ from them.” Rosenvold,
TKONAGP, 12.
“The word ‘countries’ is italicized and not found
in the original text. It should simply read, ‘And many
shall be overthrown.’
“Isaiah describes this same time of Dan. 11:41:
“Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of
Ephraim, whose glorious beauty [the glorious land] is
a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with wine! Behold,
the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a
tempest of hail and a destroying storm, as a flood of
mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the
earth with the hand. The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet: And the
glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley,
shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before
the summer; which when he that looketh upon it seeth,
while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.” Isa. 28:1-4.
“But not all will be overthrown:
“‘And it shall come to pass in that day, that the
remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the
house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that
smote them; but shall stay upon the LORD, the Holy
One of Israel, in truth. 21 The remnant shall return,
even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. 22
For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the
sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness.’
Isaiah 10:20-22.” PJ.

“We need to point out that while the king of the
north was recovering from his deadly wound [1798], he
had not been idle. In an underhanded manner, during that long interval, he had been working for decades
at the same time, both on his determination to topple
the USSR, …and on his determination to enter into the
‘glorious land’ of Israel. Supporting documentation for
the latter will be noted…. Verses 40 and 41 are not
consecutive happenings. They actually transpire
concurrently. Suffice it to say here that finally the day
arrived when the king of the north was able to work
openly and brazenly to fulfill both verses—40 and
41—of Daniel 11.
“The greatest goal of the king of the north is to
overthrow the church of God, which has a Biblebased message that exposes the machinations of the
beast of Revelation 13—of the king of the north
himself! In the end it is God’s church that will stand in
his way of regaining the total world-control he enjoyed
during the Dark Ages.” Rosenvold, TKONAGP, 11.
“At the present we are literally seeing and experiencing the invasion of the Glorious Land (God’s
Church) which means we are in Daniel 11:41.” Mason,
KONAS, 57.

“As the storm approaches, a large class who have
professed faith in the third angel’s message, but have
not been sanctified through obedience to the truth,
abandon their position [of truth] and join the ranks of
the opposition. By uniting with the world and partaking of its spirit, they have come to view matters
in nearly the same light; and when the test is
brought, they are prepared to choose the easy, popular side.” Great Controversy, 608.

And Many Shall Be Overthrown.—
“It is with heavy hearts, that we present the evidences of the fulfillment of verse 41. The Bible says,
‘many’ of God’s people will be ‘overthrown’ or spiritually ‘slain’ (Peshitta).
“Please note that the italicized word ‘countries’ is
a supplied word. It does not belong in this text. The
text should not be perceived as indicating that many
‘countries’ were overthrown, but rather, that ‘many’ of
God’s modern people in His ‘glorious land’ would be
beguiled and overthrown by the king of the north.
How could this possibly happen?

“There are those who have the blazing light of
truth shining all around them, and yet are insensible to

478

DANIEL 11
it. They are enchanted by the enemy, held under a
spell by his bewitching power. They are not preparing for that great day which is soon to come to our
world. They seem utterly insensible to religious
truth.
“Are there not some youth who are awake?
Those who see that the night cometh, and also the
morning, should work with untiring energy to arouse
their sleeping associates.” Maranatha, 220.

“God’s word has given warning of the impending
danger; let this be unheeded, and the Protestant world
will learn what the purposes of Rome really are, only
when it is too late to escape the snare. She is silently
growing into power. Her doctrines are exerting their
influence in legislative halls, in the churches, and in
the hearts of men. She is piling up her lofty and massive structures in the secret recesses of which her former persecutions will be repeated. Stealthily and unsuspectedly she is strengthening her forces to further her own ends when the time shall come for her
to strike. All that she desires is vantage ground, and
this is already being given her. We shall soon see and
shall feel what the purpose of the Roman element is.
Whoever shall believe and obey the word of God will
thereby incur reproach and persecution.” Great Controversy, 581.

“It was apostasy that led the early church to seek
the aid of the civil government, and this prepared the
way for the development of the papacy—the beast.
Said Paul: ‘There’ shall ‘come a falling away..., and
that man of sin be revealed.’ 2 Thessalonians 2:3. So
apostasy in the church will prepare the way for the
image to the beast.
“Satan will work with all power and ‘with all deceivableness of unrighteousness.’ 2 Thessalonians
2:9, 10. His working is plainly revealed by the rapidly
increasing darkness, the multitudinous errors, heresies,
and delusions of these last days. Not only is Satan
leading the world captive, but his deceptions are
leavening the professed churches of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The great apostasy will develop into darkness deep as midnight. To God’s people it will be a
night of trial, a night of weeping, a night of persecution
for the truth’s sake. But out of that night of darkness
God’s light will shine.” Maranatha, 165.

“The intrusion of Romanism into God’s modern church became more identifiable soon after the
Second Vatican Council [1962-1965]. For some
years she had been working stealthily and secretly.
About ten years after that council was ended, a Roman
clergyman compiled a book of over 1000 pages containing many of the various official documents and
decisions which were produced during that monumental Council, but for whatever reasons, most of us did
not know about that book until quite recently. Some of
the ambitions of the papacy are revealed in this volume.
“…The popular celebration-type worship services among our people seemed to follow after Vatican
Council II. Even while the Second Council was in
progress, during the early 60’s, Satan and his agents
were preparing for a drastic change: Rock-style celebration music! By introducing into the churches and
popularizing the beat and swing of western-style gospel
music—the way was prepared! After this Satan could
introduce rock music with plenty of hand clapping,
physical gestures, bodily attitudes and movement,
etc.—a Pentecostal-type worship—without much
protest, at least from the ‘many’ in our midst!
“…The popular celebration movement, with its
cheap drama, has robbed many of God’s churches of
the solemnity of their worship services, causing them
to depart from the divine counsels of the Bible and the
Spirit of Prophecy regarding the solemn conduct of our
worship.
“For Seventh-day Adventist, a raucous celebration type service is devastating, for under this influence, a church, not only loses its appreciation for good
music, but also its ability to preserve pure doctrines.
Ellen White warns that those who participate in such
services ‘receive impressions which send them adrift.
They cannot tell what they formerly knew about Bible
principles’ (2 SM 37). She states further that under a
bedlam of noise, ‘the third angel’s message loses its
force and influence’ for it cannot be given in ‘straight
lines’ (Ibid.)!

Overthrown by a False Church System.—
“Beware of false prophets, which come to you
in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves.” Matthew 7:15.
PROVERBS 2:16-19: “To deliver thee from the
strange woman [church], even from the stranger
which flattereth with her words; 17 Which forsaketh
the guide of her youth [Dan. 11:30 forsake the holy
covenant], and forgetteth the covenant of her God.
18 For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths
unto the dead. 19 None that go unto her return again,
neither take they hold of the paths of life.”
PROVERBS 4:4,5,24-27: “Say unto wisdom,
Thou art my sister; and call understanding thy kinswoman: 5 That they may keep thee from the strange
woman [church], from the stranger which flattereth
with her words.
24 Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children,
and attend to the words of my mouth. 25 Let not thine
heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her
paths. 26 For she hath cast down many wounded:
yea, many strong men have been slain by her. 27
Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.” Proverbs 4:4-27.
History of King of North’s Stealthy Entrance into the
Glorious Land and Overthrow of Many.—

479

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Just as Ellen White warned, so it happened.
Some of our pure doctrines have already become polluted with error. God have mercy on us! It seems as if
at times, we are hearing ‘another gospel’ being
preached from our pulpits, or expressed by participants
during class study at Sabbath school. Some of our
official publications are not beyond teaching a
strange gospel. We can only say, ‘God help us!’
“…Our beloved church (‘the glorious land’), has
gone far beyond celebration formats. Some of our
churches do not now hesitate to invite Roman Catholic
priests to stand in their pulpits to deliver a Sabbath
message! Or, of hiring a Catholic priest to teach or to
act as dean in a college. We have gone so far as to
affiliate some of our hospitals with Catholic management! Yes! We even invited a high ranking Catholic
bishop to speak to our people during the Indianapolis
General Conference Session (1990). He was also seated as an official observer!
“Today, we can observe the influence of the king
of the north from the grass roots in many of our
churches, even to the General Conference! Unbelievable as it may seem, it is true!
“During Vatican Council II the papacy made
plans to gradually bring about less difference between
the Eucharistic celebration practiced by the Roman
Catholics and the Protestant type of the Lord’s supper.
She would educate the masses that the Eucharistic
celebration as conducted by Catholics is the basis of
all Christian unity and fellowship.
“…Today, some of our people are beginning to
adopt various Eucharistic forms in observing the
Lord’s supper. And Oh, what sorrow has come into
God’s ‘glorious land!’ Turn to hymn #402 in our
current church hymnal. Verse 2 reads as follows:
“His broken body in our stead is here in this memorial bread; And so our feeble love is fed until He
comes.
“How dare we sing outright papal Eucharistic
doctrine in our churches? Roman Catholics teach
that when in the mass the priest lifts up the wafer that
he actually by that act creates the body of Christ in that
wafer! Should we not rather be singing that ‘this memorial bread’ is ‘Symbolic’ of Christ’s broken body?’
Certainly not that His body ‘is here in this memorial
bread!
“Plans concerning the Eucharist were not all that
were made during the Second Vatican Council. The
papacy also laid plans to demonstrate to the churches
the close tie between the Eucharist celebration….
“A paragraph or two from a letter written on April
6, 1996 by a concerned member to a concerned SDA
minister, may be appropriate to quote at this juncture:
“ ‘Just at this time of year I am saddened. In my
early years I can never remember hearing the word
‘Easter’ mentioned from the pulpit. Last Sabbath Pastor ____ announced that ‘This is the beginning of passion week, Let us remember good Friday.’ There were
Easter lilies and a wooden cross on the platform and

some of the children marched down the center aisle
with palm fronds and placed them at the foot of the
cross….’
“We pause to ask once more, Have the practices
of the king of the north entered into the ‘glorious
land’—into God’s churches today? Similar activities
such as those portrayed in the above letter, could be
multiplied many times over.
“…A real disrespect for the Sabbath is growing
among our people. Some churches are sponsoring the
sending out of their young people into their communities on Sabbath afternoons—to give Bible studies?
NO! Rather to clean people’s yards and houses, or to
paint their fences or homes, etc.! Such accounts of
slackness in Sabbath observances are too numerous to
be named!
“We recently received a letter from a lady living
in an overseas division. Read, and weep as we quote
her!
“ ‘I used to attend a church in _____. I had to
leave because they started having drama plays acted
out by the youth on the pulpit stage after Sabbath
School. One time there were about 8 people involved:
men and women bathers with beach towels, rubbing
sunscreen lotion on themselves, acting out a drama of
“Zion’s ship!”’
“Does that not cause you to ‘sigh and cry?’ And
almost remind you of Israelites, unclothed, and dancing
around the golden calf at Sinai?
“…In addition to all this, the papacy, headed by
John Paul II, through the avenue of ecumenism, is
seeking to attain unity between the various Protestant
churches and between Catholics and Protestants. As a
church, we, along with other Protestants, have been
drawn into the net of ecumenism….
“We were privileged to watch a video of the colorful 1995 Parade of Nations [at the G.C. in Utrecht].
…This parade is intended to show the widespread
‘presence’ of God’s people throughout the nations of
the world. …In the midst of the parade, the official
commentator announced: ‘The Vatican!’ Had we
heard him correctly? Yes! Here their representatives
came, carrying their brilliant yellow and white Vatican
flag to the platform of the General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists! The audience burst into wild
applause! The announcer identified ‘The Vatican’ as
an independent state of less than one-half square mile,
contained inside the city of Rome. Then he added,
‘The Vatican is the most religious state in the world.’
We are puzzled. We wonder why the Vatican’s
‘presence’ was presented at our General Conference!
“The principle figures on their banner, which
were on the white part of the flag, were the crossed
keys, and the triple crown of the pope. Most of our
people should know what that crown represents—
the claim of the godhead of the pope, and his claim
to world-wide authority and dominion on earth.
How could it be that the Vatican was being loudly ac-

480

DANIEL 11
claimed by a world-wide gathering of Seventh-day
Adventists?!
“Once more we must ask, Has the ‘presence’ of
the papacy (the king of the north) entered into the
midst of the ‘glorious land’ of modern Israel?
“We can conclude that Satan through the king of
the north and other worldly avenues, is determined to
prepare SDA’s to be on his side in the controversy of
Revelation 13. And to a far greater extent than we can
imagine he is succeeding! ‘Many’ ‘the majority’ (5T
136), but not all, will abandon the truth:
“ ‘As the storm approaches, a large class who
have professed faith in the third angel's message,
but have not been sanctified through obedience to
the truth, abandon their position and join the ranks
of the opposition. By uniting with the world and partaking of its spirit, they have come to view matters in
nearly the same light; and when the test is brought,
they are prepared to choose the easy, popular side. Men
of talent and pleasing address, who once rejoiced in the
truth, employ their powers to deceive and mislead
souls.’ Great Controversy, 608.
“…Have you heard our church people singing together (SDA Hymnal #403): When I fall on my
knees, With my face to the rising sun, O Lord, have
mercy on me? Does not this cause you to immediately
visualize Ezekiel 8:18?
“…Through omissions and substitutions these
new Bible versions have purposely been worded so that
the different religions of the world—Christian or Pagan—might find them acceptable. These ecumenical
‘new age’ Bibles will play an important role in aiding
the king of the north to achieve his goal of world dominance. How tragic!
“In the supplement to Modern Bible Translations
Unmasked by Russell and Colin Standish, page 3, we
find the following revealing account:
“ ‘During the General Conference Session at Indianapolis in July, 1990, Russell spoke to a group of
200 believers in a meeting held in one of the nearby
hotels. His topic was the use of Scripture by our members. At the conclusion of the presentation, two pastors
stood up and stated that they held Master of Divinity
Degrees from our seminary, and they were totally ignorant of the fact that modern translations were any other
than the same Bible as the King James Version in
twentieth-century language. Not once had their attention been drawn to the fact that they were based
upon different Greek manuscripts.’
“Few SDA lay members have not so much as
heard of Westcott and Hort and their mischief. The
same can be said of our ministers. Possibly this should
not surprise us, for insofar as we can determine, our
colleges and seminaries do not routinely offer courses
in the history of ancient sacred manuscripts, nor do
they teach the mischievous part that Westcott and Hort
and their committee had in providing a false Greek
New Testament Text (translated from the Alexandrian,
Egypt,, Vaticanus Bible), which when completed close-

ly resembled the Catholic Vulgate Bible, so closely in
fact that it was very acceptable to the papacy. If this
were planned by the king of the north, and documentation substantiates that it was, have we not also allowed
him to enter into the ‘glorious land’ through the
avenue of false Bible versions?
“…Not only are many of our SDA books and
Sabbath School lessons of today filled with advice to
read this or that modern version, but worse yet, about a
decade ago the General Conference Sabbath School
Department ordered that henceforth the New International Version (NIV) would be used in all the children’s Sabbath School divisions. Whereas for more
than a century Adventist children had learned Bible
verses from memory from the Authorized Version (the
KJV), now they were to have their tender minds fed
with verses from confusing modern translations.
“…There are those time when audience is asked
to participate in a responsive Scripture reading, but
when they turn to the back of their Adventist church
hymnals to find the passage, What do they find? The
King James Version is rarely used. Most of the Scripture readings are taken from one or another of the
modern Bible versions. Thus it is that modern versions
are falsely represented to the people of God (by unsuspecting pastors and leaders), to be pure Bible truth.
“Insofar as many members of our church are concerned, is the king of the north succeeding in his plan
to replace the KJV with versions more to his liking?
…Today multitudes of deceived members in our
churches and multitudes of deceived students in our
schools are crying, ‘Away with the KJV! We want
modern versions!
“…It is undeniable! Though some may not understand that the ‘glorious land’ of verse 41 is
speaking of God’s church, yet we are all faced with
the undeniable fact that the king of the north has
indeed entered into God’s last-day church, and has
brought about great changes. No student of the Bible can deny that ‘many’ of God’s people, have already
either been greatly wounded or ‘overthrown’ altogether. As unbelievable as it may seem, it is undeniable.
“We do wish to point out to our brethren and sisters who read these lines that we derive no pleasure in
calling your attention to these departures from truth
that are taking place in our beloved church. However,
we dare not be among those ‘dumb dogs that would not
bark’ Is. 46:10, and fail to warn God’s people. It is
with great sorrow that we have identified these Roman
incursions into our midst.” Rosenvold, TKONAGP, 1230.
“In 1903 a hierarchical [Papal] church structure
was chosen and received. Thus, the church structure—the body—was Catholicized.
“Proof: ‘In 1976-77 …then vice-president Neal
Wilson submitted an affidavit in which he makes the
following statement regarding the organizational structure of the church: "The Seventh-day Adventist

481

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Church...maintains...a hierarchical structure of church
authority." USSoL vs PUC and GC, Case CV 75-3032R (February 6, 1976).
“In 1922 accreditation was approved in the area
of medicine, and we received a Catholic medical system—a Catholic right arm. This is seen when in
1996, the Porter SDA hospital in Bolder,. Colorado
merged with the Catholic hospital. Also, this is seen in
the fact that medical missionary institutions, such as
Wildwood and Uchee Pines that follow the medical
counsel that God gave to the church, receive no help
from the General Conference, while Loma Linda Hospital and Florida Hospital, which follows the AMA
philosophy of medicine, receives millions from the
Gen. Conf. and the government!
“In 1929 accreditation was accepted in the educational system, and we received a Catholic educational system. This opened the door wide for the king
of the north to enter the glorious land. Now most SDA
teachers at SDA colleges and universities would get
higher degrees from Babylonian universities and be
trained by Jesuit thinking teachers. The rebuke to
the Thyatiran church fits here: ‘Notwithstanding I
have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest
that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit
fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.’
Rev. 2:20. Proof that the education system is now papal is seen in the history of Samuel Bacchiochi, who
graduated from the Gregorian Pontifical University in
Rome, and went straight to Andrews University, where
he immediately began to teach in the SDA seminary.
Again, self-supporting educational intstitutions that
strive to follow the light that God has given to the
church in the area of education receive no financial
help from the General Conference, while accredited
universities like Andrews Univ. and Oakwood Univ.
receive millions from the Gen. Conf. and the government.
“In 1955-56 the false Catholic concept of Jesus
having the sinless flesh of Adam before the fall
[along with the Augustinian doctrine of Original Sin]
entered the glorious land! How? SDA leaders secretly agreed with apostate protestant leaders Martin
and Barnhouse that they would trade away the doctrine
of the true Bible Jesus who came in fallen humanity for
the immaculately-born, papal Jesus.] At the same time
they traded away the doctrine that Christ’s ministry in
the Most Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary is vital
for our salvation, for the false doctrine that ‘It was all
done at the cross.’ Why did they do this? In order to
be accepted by the fallen Protestant churches. Thus,
Who the real Jesus is, and Where the real Jesus is, was
officially lost by the Gen. Conf. sponsored SDA
church. This was exactly predicted by Jude—See Jude
3,4. 26 years later, in 1993, Martin asked the General
Conference if the agreement was still on. The official
reply was, ‘Yes.’
“See M.L. Andreasen’s Letter to the Churches,

for a history of the Barnhouse and Martin meetings.
One of the results of these agreements is that ‘Books of
a new order’ (books that contain new theology, false
doctrines, and/or pleasant truth—but not present truth)
are now being printed by SDA publishing houses as
predicted by Ellen White in 1 Selected Messages,
204,205.
“1962-1964 Vatican II: Arthur S. Maxwell was
one of the observers. Upon his return, he called for
the scrapping of the old evangelistic sermons on the
Papacy, and a completely new approach. “I sat
closer to the Pope than any of the cardinals. I was
only forty feet away from him for three or four hours.
…Nobody will ever believe me, that I sat so long, so
near to His Holiness.” “…His new friendliness.
…The pope’s opening speech was on Love.”
“Also observing at Vatican II, B.B.Beach became
friends with Catholic and World Council of Churches’
leaders there. He set up the first meetings between the
WCC and SDAs, which took place from 1969-1973.
He wrote a book with the WCC called ‘So Much In
Common’!!
“In the 1960’s, the ABC bookstores start selling
Babylonian wine—books from fallen Protestantism.
“In 1974, Samuel Bacchiochi graduates from the
Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome and goes
straight to Andrews University Seminary to teach Adventist ministers.
“In 1976, North American division president (future General Conference of SDA president), Neil Wilson, under court oath, throws historic Adventism’s
‘anti-Roman Catholic viewpoint’ and ‘anti-popery’ into
‘the historical trash-heap. The following is his testimony under court oath:
“ ‘Although it is true that there was a period in
the life of the Seventh-day Adventist Church when the
denomination took a distinctly anti-Roman Catholic
viewpoint, and the term “hierarchy” was used in a pejorative sense to refer to the papal form of church governance, that attitude on the church’s part was nothing
more than a manifestation of widespread anti-popery
among conservative Protestant denominations in the
early part of this century and the latter part of the last,
and which has now been consigned to the historical
trash heap so far as the Seventh-day Adventist
Church is concerned.’ EEOC vs PPPA and GC, Civil
Case #74-2025 CBR (1975). According to Wilson, the
Great Controversy is now in the General Conference’s
file 13.
“In 1977, B.B. Beach [SDA Religious Liberty
Department leader} places a gold medal representing
the SDA church into the hand of the pope. On the back
of the medallion are the words of the 4th commandment—exactly the same as found in any Catholic catechism.
“In 1979, the SDA church’s Ministry Magazine
goes ecumenical. Note: Ministry magazine is ‘Dedicated now to stimulate supportive dialogue among
denominations’ [fallen church systems]. More issues

482

DANIEL 11
are sent to ministers from non-SDA denominations
than to SDA ministers.
“In 1980, through the subtle double-meaning
words of the 27 statements, the Catholic Trinity concept of God entered the glorious land—one God in
Three ‘co-eternal’ ‘Persons.’ This was also predicted
in Jude 3,4—“denying the only Lord God.” (Belief in
the Trinity, which is the foundation of all Catholic doctrine, is the only requirement for membership in the
World Council of Churches.)

small independent SDA congregations who (although
they may be spiritually correct) use the term SDA illegally according to commercial law.
“In 1984, 1335 Hungarian SDA’s are disfellowshipped for protesting the SDA church’s membership
in the ecumenical World Council of Churches.
“In 1985, a Catholic hymnal was received into
the SDA church. It contains: 13 new hymns to the
Trinity never found before in a Adventist church hymnal; one hymn [#403] where you kneel before the rising
sun and pray for mercy; one hymn [#402] containing
the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation—‘his broken body in our stead is here, in this memorial
bread;’ one hymn [#471]could be sung to the Pope—
one verse to be sung in Latin the official language of
the Papal See.
“By this time, 1985, the King of the North (the
Papacy) had infiltrated all the Protestant church
systems. The SDA church was the last mainline
church system to be entered into steathfully. At the
same time, the Papacy had also taken away the
Protestant heritage of the United States, when for the
first time in 1984, the United States sent an ambassador
to the Papal See, which runs Vatican City for civil cover. Then allied with the USA, and with no protestant
churches left, the papacy was on its way to Egypt,
the King of the South, and within the next decade it
would enter into atheist, communist Soviet Union
and the Eastern bloc communist countries. All
would fall without a shot!
“So well did this entrance and take-over of Adventism occur, that in 1990, B.B.Beach (fulfilling the
role of Zimri in Numbers 25) unashamedly introduce WCC president, J. Campbell to the 5th Business meeting of the General Conference Session in
Indianapolis, Indiana, who said: ‘I bring you the
warmest of greetings from the World Council of
Churches. …So as fellow Christians, like those Pentecost people in the earliest of days, we look at one
another and WE SAY THAT WE HOLD ALL
THINGS IN COMMON.’
“The next day, B.B.Beach (a.k.a. Zimri) brashly
introduced another guest, his friend, A. Lee, to the
Sixth Business meeting, who said: ‘A number of us are
here because of the invitation of B.B. Beach…. He is
also secretary of a group to which both of us belong,
namely, the Secretaries of Christian World Communions. …I pray God’s richest blessings on this great
conference, for TRULY IT IS GOOD AND
PLEASANT TO DWELL TOGETHER IN UNITY.”
“But never was vice bolder or more stubborn,
when Zimri (B.B. Beach) came boldly into the camp of
Israel, accompanied by a Midianitish harlot, a princess ‘of a chief house in Midian,’ (the Roman
Catholic church—also known as ‘The King of the
North’) whom he escorted into the midst of the camp
and introduced to the Ninth Business meeting. His
guest was Father Thomas Murphy, who represented the

Illustration of Trinity concept
taken from Catholic catechism, My Catholic Faith.
“The same 27 statements of belief in the SDA
Church actually promotes ecumenism!!! You would
think that the 12th doctrine entitled ‘The Church’
would be about the SDA church, but it is not. ‘The
church’ is defined as ‘the community of believers that
confess Jesus Christ as Lord and Saviour.’ This means
that ‘the church’ includes any Christian church ‘community’ (church system) including the Catholic
Church—‘the king of the north’!!! This means that the
General Conference of SDA is officially siding with
Babylon!!!
“You would think that the 14th doctrine, ‘Unity
in the Body of Christ’ would be about unity in the
SDA church, through the Holy Spirit with Christ as
head of the church, but it is not!! It is about the
ecumenical unity of ‘all communities that confess
faith in Jesus Christ.’ This unity is based on the Triune God—the Catholic Trinity concept of God! This is
the same thought found in “Ut Unim Sint’—1995 ecumenical encyclical by Pope John Paul II.
“In 1981, the name ‘Seventh-day Adventist’ was
trademarked under commercial law on counsel by a
Catholic lawyer, Vincent Ramik. The General Conference, now a business entity, uses civil power to sue

483

GEMS FROM DANIEL
Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian unity, who
was there to give greetings on behalf of The King of
the North (the Roman Catholic Church system—also
known as ‘the beast’)!!! When Father Thomas Murphy
was introduced as representing the Pontifical Council
for Promoting Christian Unity, he was warmly welcomed. To the Business Meeting of the church system
that was raised up to preach the Third Angel’s Message, he proclaimed that the Beast system was praying for the success of this General Conference, so
that the prayer of Christ that we all might be one
might be fulfilled!!! Everyone applauded. No one in
Adventism even suspected that the glorious land had
been entered into by the king of the north. Still today
very few realize that the Gen. Conf. has been moving
in the exact opposite direction than the Three Angel’s
Messages that it was raised up to proclaim.
“Reader, do you believe these words you are
reading? If not, truly has the prophet’s words been
fulfilled: ‘Behold ye among the heathen, and regard,
and wonder marvellously: for I will work a work in
your days, which ye will not believe, though it be
told you. For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter
and hasty nation, which shall march through the
breadth of the land, to possess the dwellingplaces
that are not theirs.’ Habbakkuk 1:5.6.
“In 1995, the Vatican flag marches into the
General Conference in Utrecht as part of the family
of God.
“In 1996, SDA hospital merges with Catholic
hospital in Boulder, Colorado under Charles Sandefuer, conference president, now ADRA director.
“In 1998 SDA’s sign agreement with fallen Lutheran Church System. ‘We agree on Trinity and
Justification by Faith.’ Obedience to the Law of
God not necessary for salvation. The next year, in
1999—Lutherans sign agreement with Papacy on
Justification by faith. Agreement already on Trinity.
“In 1999, the Polish SDA church signs agreement with Roman Catholic church after 15 years of
discussion. ‘We [SDA church] teach Catholic doctrine,
especially the Blessed Trinity,’ the document says!!
“The same year, 1999, the SDA church publicly
welcomed the pope on his visit to St. Louis and publicly participated in the ecumenical prayer meeting at the
end of his visit.
“From 2000-2010, in the presidency of the General Conference of SDA, was Jan Paulsen, a graduate
from Tubingen University where Pope Benedict (the
king of the kingdom of the north), and Walter Kasper
(head of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian
Unity) taught!! Tubigen University in Germany specializes in Ecumenical Theology.
“In 2000-2002 AD, the SDA church system
held ecumenical dialogues with the Catholic church
system!
“In 2006, SDA’s dialogue with Presbyterian
Church. They conclude: “To be one church is a

spiritual church, and it is not necessary that there
should be one visible church." SDA leader, William
Johnsson declares: ‘Adventists …realize that they
are but a small part of the larger body of Christ.”
Notice the agreement with 27 statements, points #12
and #14 on The Church and Unity of the Body of
Christ.
“In 2007, SDA’s and Catholics participate and
worship together at the Global Christian Forum
world meeting in Nairobi, Kenya.
“In 2008, 2009, the SDA church participates with
and sponsors Council for a Parliament of World Religions.
“In 2010, the SDA church helps to plan and participates in Toward 2010—the 100th anniversary of the
ecumenical movement!! Jan Dybdhal and Ganoune
Diop represented the SDA church. The goal was to
integrate the mission activity of all the church faithcommunities.” PJ.

[We cautiously submit the following quote only
because it seems to fit the above facts given.]
“According to Ex-Jesuit priest, Alberto Rivera,
all the mainstream churches were taken over by
1980. Under extreme oath of the Jesuits, he was told
that a secret sign was to be given to the Jesuits worldwide when the ecumenical movement had successfully wiped out Protestantism. “The sign was to be
when a President of the U.S. took his oath of office
facing an obelisk. For the first time in U.S. history, the
swearing in ceremonies were moved to the West front
of the Capitol, and President Reagan faced the Washington Monument. This happened January 20, 1981.”
Alberto Rivera, The Godfathers, Part Three, p. 26.
“The world is filled with storm and war and
variance. Yet under one head—the papal power—
the people will unite to oppose God in the person of
His witnesses. This union is cemented by the great
apostate. While he seeks to unite his agents in warring against the truth he will work to divide and
scatter its advocates.” 7 Testimonies, 182.

484

DANIEL 11
great High Priest’ will have a place of refuge in the
coming storm (The Great Controversy, p.488).
“Those who are found united with Christ in sympathy, understanding and faith in His work of final
atonement in the most holy place will be preserved
from the overflowing scourge.” Hiddekel, 79-80.

Way of Escape.—
““One might naturally raise the question as to
whether God has made any way of escape from the
king of the north. The prophet Joel also speaks of
the northern army coming against God’s people….
(See Joel 2:17,20.) But he adds, ‘In Mount Zion and
in Jerusalem shall be deliverance.’—Joel 2:32. It is
significant to notice from the type of Senacherib’s invasion of Judea, that the enemy did not enter the city of
Jerusalem.
“What is the significance of Mount Zion being
the way of escape from the king of the north? ‘The
sanctuary of strength,’ both in type and antitype, is
depicted as being on Mount Zion. It has been seen that
the word ‘strength’ comes from the Hebrew word
maoz, which means ‘refuge’ or ‘fortress.’ During the
Dark ages the church was robbed of this place of refuge by the Roman apostasy, which obscured the truth
of the heavenly sanctuary. But since 1844 the light
concerning the sanctuary has been restored to God’s
people. This is the refuge, the fortress and the
saints’ source of power.
“More significantly, Daniel 8:14 shows that the
time of the final test occurs during the great antitypical
day of atonement. During the ancient Day of
Atonement, the whole congregation of Israel were
required to gather about the sanctuary in prayer,
fasting and deep searching of heart (Leviticus 16;
23:27-32; The Great Controversy, pp.430-432). Those
who failed to afflict their souls at the sanctuary were
cut off from among God’s people. So, in this hour of
the cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary, God’s people
are called to gather on Mount Zion, where they may
enter by faith into the most holy place. Says the
prophet Joel:
“ ‘Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly,
gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into
the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the
Lord.’
“ ‘Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a
solemn assembly: gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and
those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth
of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Let the
priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the
porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them:
wherefore should they say among the people, Where
is their God?’—Joel 1:14: 2:15-17.
“Ellen G. White wrote: ‘I dreamed of seeing a
temple to which many people were flocking. Only
those who took refuge in that temple would be saved
when time should close.’—Early Writings, p.78.
“In its present Laodicean state, the church of God
is obviously not ready for the crisis, for it is not fulfilling the conditions of the great antitypical day of
atonement. …Only those who heed the message and
gain ‘a knowledge …of the position and work of their

Many, But Not All, Are Overthrown From the
Truth.—
“Though the king of the north will have been able
to make an entrance into the glorious land, he will not
be able to make an entrance into the hearts of all the
people of that land:
“ ‘The leaven of godliness has not entirely lost its
power. At the time when the danger and depression of
the church are greatest, the little company who are
standing in the light will be sighing and crying for
the abominations that are done in the land. But
more especially will their prayers arise in behalf of the
church because its members are doing after the manner
of the world. …They lament and afflict their souls
because pride, avarice, selfishness, and deception of
almost every kind are in the church.” –5T 209, 210.
“Praise God. The ‘little company standing in the
light,’ will stand for the right though the heavens fall—
even unto the end!” Rosenvold, TKONAGP, 30,31.
“I asked the angel if there were none left. He
bade me look in an opposite direction, and I saw a
little company traveling a narrow pathway. All
seemed to be firmly united, bound together by the
truth, in bundles, or companies. Said the angel, ‘The
third angel is binding, or sealing, them in bundles for
the heavenly garner.’ This little company looked
careworn, as if they had passed through severe trials
and conflicts. And it appeared as if the sun had just
risen from behind a cloud and shone upon their countenances, causing them to look triumphant, as if their
victories were nearly won.” Early Writings, 88,89.
“I then saw the third angel. Said my accompanying angel, ‘Fearful is his work. Awful is his mission.
He is the angel that is to select the wheat from the
tares, and seal, or bind, the wheat for the heavenly
garner. These things should engross the whole mind,
the whole attention.’” Early Writings, 118.
These Shall Escape.—
“And after these things I saw another angel
come down from heaven, having great power; and
the earth was lightened with his glory. 2 And he
cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of
devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of
every unclean and hateful bird. 3 For all nations have
drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
the kings of the earth have committed fornication with
her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich
through the abundance of her delicacies.

485

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“And I heard another voice from heaven, saying,
Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.”
Revelation 18:4.

shall be given, it will arrest the attention of these
leading men through whom the Lord is now working, and some of them will accept it, and will stand
with the people of God through the time of trouble.”
Great Controversy, 610, 611.

“The only way to escape then out of the “hand” of
the King of the North (the papacy) is to receive the seal
of the living God, the seventh-day Sabbath of the
fourth commandment.” Heiks, KON, 43.

Edom, Moab, and Chief of Children of Ammon.—
“Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab,
and among the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that
were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon
had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over
them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan;
“Even all the Jews returned out of all places
whither they were driven, and came to the land of
Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine
and summer fruits very much.” Jeremiah 40:11,12.

Those that Don’t Escape from Egypt, the Glorious
Land, Edom, Ammom, & Moab.-Jer 9:26 Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the
children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the
utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for all
these nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of
Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.

“ ‘The enemies of the kingdom of the Messiah are
not only called by the name given to the enemies of the
ancient theocracy, viz., the nations of the Gentiles, but
they often bear the name of some one people, who,
at the time, were peculiarly inimical or powerful. In
Isaiah 25, they are called by the name of Moab. In
Isaiah 63 and Amos 9:12, by the name of Edom; and
in Ezekiel 38, by the name of Gog.... Nor need this
peculiarity of prophetic language excite surprise. It is
found pervading the whole ancient dispensation.’ Dr.
Angus, Bible Handbook, pp. 203, 285-292.
“…It should not be forgotten that because Israel
and their land are anti-typically applied here, so must
the other nations mentioned in connection with them
also have their anti-typical characteristics.” Were,
KONAJ, 58.

Out of His Hand.—
“ ‘Hand’ is a term used for power, authority,
or to rule, as the following scriptures confirm:
“Daniel 3:17: ‘If it be so, our God whom we serve
is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thine “hand”, O king.’
“…Exodus 3:20: ‘And I will stretch out my
“hand”, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which
I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let
you go.’” Heiks, KON, 43,44.
Edom.—
“Now these are the generations of Esau, who is
Edom.” [Jacob’s brother]. Genesis 36:1.
Moab and Ammon.—
“And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the
mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he
feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and
his two daughters.
“…Thus were both the daughters of Lot with
child by their father.
“And the firstborn bare a son, and called his
name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites
unto this day.
And the younger, she also bare a son, and
called his name Benammi: the same is the father of
the children of Ammon unto this day.” Genesis
19:30-38.

“Edom in Daniel 11: 41 is not to be understood as
referring to literal Edomites—of which there are none
in the world today! Observe the New Testament interpretation of the prophecy of Amos 9: 11, 12 concerning
Edom. Israel was to ‘possess the remnant of Edom, and
of all the heathen,’ or ‘Gentiles’ [‘which are called by
my name’]. Paul, Barnabas and Peter each came to the
church council held at Jerusalem to give their testimony of the wonderful way the Lord was working through
them in winning Gentiles to the Lord. After summarizing Peter’s testimony very briefly, James quotes this
prophecy of Amos 9: 11, 12 to show that this prophecy
was meeting its fulfillment in the winning of souls
from ‘among the Gentiles.’ In the prophecy of Amos
we read: ‘That they [Israel] may possess the remnant of
Edom [and of all the heathen, which are called by my
name].’ James reads it as: ‘That the residue of men
might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles’ (Acts
15: 7, 12-17).
“The apparently literal, or geographical, sense of
the prophecy of Amos is thus applied in a general sense
in relation to the spiritual victories of the church in the
conversion of the Gentiles….
“In Isaiah 11: 11-16 we have a parallel prophecy
to that of Daniel 11: 41-44. …The very people men-

Chief of the Children of Ammon.—
“While many of our rulers are active agents of Satan, God also has His agents among the leading men of
the nation. The enemy moves upon his servants to propose measures that would greatly impede the work of
God; but statesmen who fear the Lord are influenced
by holy angels to oppose such propositions with unanswerable arguments. Thus a few men will hold in
check a powerful current of evil. The opposition of the
enemies of truth will be restrained that the third angel's
message may do its work. When the final warning

486

DANIEL 11
tioned in the prophecy concerning the activities of the
king of the north—Egypt, Moab, Edom, and the
children of Ammon. In Daniel 11: 41 we read: ‘But
these shall escape out of his hand [the hand of the king
of the north], even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of
the children of Ammon.’ These are the very ones
mentioned in the prophecy of Isaiah 11 as obeying
‘the remnant of His [God’s] people.’ That is, through
heeding God’s last-day message of salvation, they ‘escape out of his hand’ and take their stand with the people of God ‘inside Jerusalem the holy city.’
“In Early Writings, pp. 74-76, God’s servant
makes a spiritual application of the prophecy of Isaiah
11:11-16. As the Lord’s servant has thus spiritualized
the apparently literal prophecy of Isaiah 11:11-16 in
relation to the conflict between the forces of good and
evil, the same people mentioned in the same way in the
prophecy of Daniel 11 cannot logically be interpreted
in any other way than in connection with the spiritual
conflict-and not in connection with military exploits
interpreted in relation to literal Jerusalem.
“Commenting upon the prophecy found in Numbers 24: 17, the Spirit of Prophecy teaches that ‘Moab
and all the children of Sheth’ represent ‘the enemies of
God.’ Patriarchs and Prophets, p. 451. Today, and particularly in the loud cry, from among the ranks of
God’s enemies, souls are being saved, and will yet be
saved, to take their stand with God’s people. See
Early Writings, Pages 277-279. Thus will ‘these escape out of his hand’—the hand of the Papacy.” Were,
KONAJ, 69,70.

“ ‘These prophecies of a great spiritual awakening in a time of gross darkness are today meeting
fulfillment in the advancing lines of mission stations
that are reaching out into the benighted regions of
earth. The groups of missionaries in heathen lands
have been likened by the prophet to ensigns set up
for the guidance of those who are looking for the
light of truth.
“ ‘In that day,’ says Isaiah, ‘there shall be a root
of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people;
to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord
shall set His hand again the second time to recover the
remnant of His people.... And He shall set up an ensign
for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the
four corners of the earth.’ Isaiah 11:10-12.” Prophets
& Kings, 375, 376.
“Once again, after quoting Isaiah 11:10-12, Ellen
White writes: ‘These word outline our work. This
scripture is to be received by our people as a message
for today. The glad tidings of salvation are to be carried to those who have not heard them.’—RH, June 23,
1904.
“…What an encouragement! During this terrible
time in the history of God’s church, when ‘the majority’ (5T 136) in our midst will be overthrown, a little
company will not only preserve the true faith of the
church, but through their influence and missionary
work, those who had been taken captive, by the king of
the north, ‘shall escape out of his hand’ and join with
God’s people in the ‘Glorious land!’
“ ‘Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the
lawful captive delivered?’ ‘Thus saith the Lord, Even
the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the
prey of the terrible shall be delivered.’
Isaiah
49:24,25.” Rosenvold, TKONAGP, 33,34.

“And it shall come to pass in that day, that the
Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left,
from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and
from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from
Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. 12 And he
shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together
the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the
earth. 13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and
the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall
not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. 14
But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines
toward the west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their hand upon Edom and
Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.
15 And the LORD shall utterly destroy the tongue of
the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he
shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the
seven streams, and make men go over dryshod. 16
And there shall be an highway for the remnant of
his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as
it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the
land of Egypt.” Isaiah 11:11-16.

“Who are represented by these tribes? Throughout the Bible these three tribes are seen as enemies to
God’s people. Yet in a prophecy that parallels Revelation 18:1 with the earth being lightened by the
glory of God, these tribes ‘obey’ the message to
worship God according to His commandments. (See
Isaiah 11:11-14.) These prophetic verses reveal that
many who once opposed it will receive the ‘everlasting
gospel’ in the last days. Thus they will escape out of
the hand of the geopolitical power symbolized in Daniel 11 as the king of the north. This is because, as the
glory of God’s everlasting gospel fill the earth, many
who were once enemies to the truth will see the real
issues involved and will join with God’s people.” Rafferty, PI, 110.
“The paradox here is that, while tens of thousands
in the true church will be overcome by the king of the
north, some who have been traditional enemies of
God’s people will escape. The Edomites were descendants of Esau; Moab and Ammon were the chil-

“ ‘And ensign for the nations.’ The servant of the
Lord comments on Isaiah 11:10-12:

487

GEMS FROM DANIEL
dren of Lot. Although closely related to the Jews, they
remained bitter enemies throughout most of their history. No trace of their literal descendants can be found
today, which is another evidence that the prophecy
must not be understood as literally speaking of Palestine. One must therefore look for their spiritual
descendants. Since they will escape from the king of
the north, and since there is only one way of escape in
the final conflict, they must escape to the refuge of
Mount Zion. According to a prophecy in Isaiah
11:11-16, Edom, Moab and Ammon will become
obedient to the faith in the last days.” Hiddekel, 81.

“In the history presented in Daniel 11, it is seen
that the king of the north and the king of the south were
not really two kingdoms; they were divisions of the one
kingdom….
“A careful analysis of the principles behind Catholicism and Communism indicates that they also are
merely two divisions of one kingdom. The Papacy is
anti-Christ; Communism is anti-God. The one puts
herself in God’s place; the other says there is no God.
Both have a philosophy that appeals to the unregenerate man, for while some unregenerate like to cover
their wicked lives with a religious garment, others prefer to deny the existence or claims of God altogether.
“Both Catholicism and Communism find their
father in Plato, the Greek philosopher. It was Platonic philosophy that led to the union of church and
state in the fourth century AD, and it was the teaching
of Plato and Aristotle that formed the entire basis of the
educational system of the medieval church. On the
other hand, historians note that Plato’s The Republic
contained the first concepts of the Communist state.
The Papacy, too, believes in the socialist state. The
feudal system of the Middle Ages was a type of social
state. The late Pope John’s encyclical, Pacem en
Terris, was a socialist manifesto. The Catholic political parties in the Western world can usually be identified by such titles as Social Democrats.
Paul
Blanchard writes:
“There is so much kinship between the doctrinal
absolutism of the Vatican and that of the Kremlin that
the possibility of ultimate collaboration on a basis of
mutual self-interest cannot be dismissed as unthinkable. Both organizations believe in a censorship and
reject democracy as a form of government for themselves. Both are seeking to extend their authority by
developing groups of loyal followers within other jurisdictions. The distorted communism of the Kremlin is a fanatical religion, with commissars instead of
priests, and Stalin as Pope. Communists and Catholics, as Reinhold Niebuhr has said, are “rival absolutists.” It is not too difficult for men to pass from one
absolutism to another. “If we are to judge by the writings of the outspoken apologists of Catholicism in Europe and America,” says Professor Sidney Hook, “they
are just as ready, if necessity arises, to baptize Marx as
they once baptized Aristotle.”’—American Freedom
and Catholic Power (1949), pp.243,244.
“In the final conflict, when the Lord will bring
forth a united people to do battle with the powers of
darkness, Satan will also unite the whole world under one head—the Papal head. All the resources of
Egypt will be placed at the disposal of the ‘man of
sin.’ Revelation 18 is a good description of how completely the world’s wealth will be in the control of
Babylon the great.” Hiddekel, 81-83.

“In the eighteenth chapter of the Revelation the
people of God are called upon to come out of Babylon. According to this scripture, many of God's people must still be in Babylon. And in what religious
bodies are the greater part of the followers of Christ
now to be found? Without doubt, in the various
churches professing the Protestant faith.” Great
Controversy, 383.

DANIEL 11:42
He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt
shall not escape.
He Shall Stretch Forth His Hand.—
“What does it mean, to ‘stretch forth his
hand’? It means to exercise power. This God did at
the time of the Exodus: ‘And the Egyptians shall know
that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth mine hand
upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from
among them.’ Exodus 7:5. But here it is the Papacy
that is stretching forth her hand. Remember that Rome
always wields the civil power of other countries—at
this time, particularly the European Union and the
United States. The flag of Rome’s power is Sunday
sacredness.” PJ, [and Berry, Two Troubles].
He Shall Stretch Forth His Hand Upon Countries.—
“Reader, this commentary focuses on the king of
the north’s entrance into the glorious land, but if you
are a member of another church system, know that the
same stealthy entrance has occurred in your church
community.” PJ.
The Land of Egypt Shall Not Escape.—
“These verses describe Rome’s conquest over the
anti-religious forces of the world. Not merely the
Christian world as it is known today, but ‘all the world’
shall wonder ‘after the beast.’—Revelation 13:3.
“In the oft-repeated conflicts between Egypt and
the king of the north throughout the history of the ancient world, the king of the north invariably subdued
the king of the south in the end of each struggle for
supremacy. History repeats itself in verses 42 to 43.

Is China Next?—
“There are currently five remaining communist
countries in the world that are still a part of ‘spir-

488

DANIEL 11
of the beast, or the number of his name.” Revelation 13:16,17.

itual’ Egypt—China, Cuba, Laos, North Korea, and
Vietnam. Being in Latin America, Cuba could easily
accept Roman Catholicism; yet, the other four countries on the Asian continent might be somewhat more
difficult to bring into compliance, especially China and
North Korea. At some point the papacy will have to
bring these remaining members of ‘spiritual’ Egypt
under its religio-political authority.” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 210.

“We could ask, could it be that the great expanse
of atheistic communistic China is symbolized by the
term ‘Egypt,’ just as was France in 1798? All the
world will wonder after the beast, after the papacy.
Therefore, we can be certain that China, as well as other atheistic countries, ‘will not escape’ his stretched out
hand! The king will gain control of the gold and silver
and all the precious things of Egypt. Does this not
mean that he shall gain economic control?” Rosenvold,
TKONAGP, 35.

“…China, the only remaining major strong-hold
of atheism in the world today.
“An article in Newsweek was entitled, ‘PUBLIC
ENEMY NUMBER ONE,’ subtitled, ‘In China, Beijing takes on the pope and the church.’ It reported that
‘China’s aging leadership’ is ‘convinced that the man
most responsible for the [European communist] party’s
sudden fall from grace was none other than Pope John
Paul II. Last summer, internal party documents accused him of directing ‘reactionary and subversive’
forces against communist everywhere. And now, in
their determination to remain the last important communist power in the world, the Chinese are attempting
to rout out all papal loyalists in their midst.’
Newsweek, August 26, 1991.
“This may be an impossible task. While ‘experts
estimate that half of the 100 Catholic bishops in China,
70 percent of the priests and three fourths of the estimated 7 million faithful are privately loyal to the
pope,’ there is also an increasing amount of ‘disillusioned urban youth’ taking up ‘Christianity.’ Ibid.
“Joining the Catholic Church is more of a political move for these young people, the report states, who
may now be seen early Sunday morning on their way
to mass as they ‘parade blithely by a pair of plainclothes police with walkie-talkies.’ …Are we going to
see a repeat in China of the crumbling of communism which took place in Eastern Europe? Bible
prophecy says, Yes, the king of the north shall enter
into the country of China.’ Current news says that
‘since Christians are a tiny minority among 1.1 billion
Chinese, Communist fear of the pope may be exaggerated, but not if the children of Tiananmen Square see
him as a symbol of liberation.’ Ibid.” Light Bearers,
UOD-15.

The Libyans and the Ethiopians at His Steps.—
“Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and
let the mighty men come forth; the Ethiopians and the
Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that
handle and bend the bow. 10 For this is the day of the
Lord GOD of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may
avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their
blood: for the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the
north country by the river Euphrates.” Jeremiah
46:9,10.
“In that day shall messengers go forth from me in
ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid, and great
pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt: for,
lo, it cometh.” Ezekiel 30:9.
“Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto
me, O children of Israel? saith the LORD.” Amos 9:7
“When we consider modern Libya, we will find
that it is almost exclusively an Islamic nation (97%).
Furthermore, modern Ethiopia is also predominately
Islamic (45-50%), just edging out Ethiopian Orthodoxy (35-40%). Therefore, the ‘spiritual’ nations of
‘Libya” and ‘Ethiopia’ are in fact powerful symbols of
modern Islam.
“We should also understand that the Islamic religion is right at Rome’s ‘steps’ as a worthy spiritual
competitor. As the fastest growing religion in the
world today, it has recently exceeded Roman Catholicism in global membership; as of January of 2005, this
religion has claimed 21% of the global population (approximately 1.3 billion people), while Catholicism has
claimed 18% (approximately 1.1 billion people). Out
of the 258 countries in our modern world, Islam has
claimed dominance in 55 countries (21%), while Catholicism has claimed 69 countries (27%). Overall,
these statistics clearly prove that Catholicism and Islam are right next to each other in spiritual competition.
“It is also quite interesting that both Libya and
Ethiopia are located on the continent of Africa. Recent
statistics demonstrate that approximately 40-45% of
the African population claims adherence to the Islamic

DANIEL 12:43
But he shall have power over the
treasures of gold and of silver, and over all
the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.
Power Over the Treasures of Gold and Silver.—
“And he causeth all, both small and great, rich
and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads: And that no man might
buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name

489

GEMS FROM DANIEL
faith, while 17-20% claim the Catholic faith. Overall,
nearly 30% of all Muslims in the world today live on
the continent of Africa. Once again, these alarming
statistics confirm that Islam and Catholicism are
right at each other’s ‘steps’ as close spiritual competitors.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 212,213.

DANIEL 11:44
But tidings out of the east and out of
the north shall trouble him: therefore he
shall go forth with great fury to destroy,
and utterly to make away many.

“Should ‘Egypt’ represent the atheistic, communistic countries. Libya and Ethiopia, and the ‘countries,’ would undoubtedly represent the remainder of
the world, for ‘All that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of
life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world.’ Rev. 13:8. ‘All’ means ‘all!’ This would include Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus, etc. These too, will
be ‘at his steps.’ Quoting from the book Keys of This
Blood, Malachi Martin writes: ‘there will come a day,
John Paul believes, when the heart of Islam—already
attuned to the figures of Christ, and of Christ’s Mother,
Mary—will receive the illumination it needs’ (Page
285). Thus John Paul reasons that it should not be difficult to persuade these types of religions to modify
their attitudes and enter into a working relationship
with the papacy. The king of the north needs only to
get the world to ‘wonder’ after him, to be ‘at his steps.’
Then will the way be prepared for the complete fulfillment of Daniel 11 and Revelation 13.” Rosenvold,
TKONAGP, 36.

But.—
“The word ‘but’ is very significant. Indeed, it
brings to view the great turning point in the history of
God’s people. Something interposes to upset the secure reign of the man of sin. In the time of utmost extremity for God’s people, the Lord interposes for His
own honor and for the salvation of His people. Babylon’s apparent triumph is merely the signal for her certain defeat.” Hiddekel, 83.
Tidings.—
“And how shall they preach, except they be sent?
as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of
good things! Romans 10:15.
“How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good,
that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy
God reigneth! 8 Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice;
with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall
see eye to eye, when the LORD shall bring again Zion.
9 Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places
of Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people,
he hath redeemed Jerusalem. 10 The LORD hath
made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations;
and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
our God. 11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from
thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the
midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the
LORD.” Isaiah 52:7-11.

“Referring to a source entitled ‘Mary and the
Moslems,’ Mr. Hunt …quoted Bishop Fulton J. Sheen
as predicting that ‘Islam would be converted to Christianity ‘through a summoning of the Moslems to a veneration of the Mother of God.’ He cited Bishop Sheen
as stating further that,
“ ‘The Koran …has many passages concerning
the Blessed Virgin. First of all, the Koran believes in
her Immaculate Conception and also her virgin
Birth…. Mary, then, is for the Moslems the true
Sayyida, or Lady. The only possible serious rival to
her in their creed would be Fatima, the daughter of
Mohammed himself. But after the death of Fatima,
Mohammed wrote: ‘Thou shalt be the most blessed of
all the women in Paradise, after Mary.’ [Hunt, A
Woman Rides the Beast, p. 458.]”
“Anciently, the Libyans and Ethiopians were
blood brothers to the Egyptians. The three countries
were colonized by the descendants of Ham. Egypt,
Libya, and Ethiopia generally confederated together in
the battles against the king of the north. (See Jeremiah
46:2,9.)
“As Babylon overthrew these three powers, so
great Babylon today will overcome the confederated
atheistic forces of the world. According to Revelation 13:11-17, 16:13-14, and 18:11-18, Babylon’s
weapons of conquest will be religious deception and
economic boycott.” Hiddekel, 83.

“Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the
wicked shall no more pass through thee; he is utterly cut off.” Nahum 1:15.
“ ‘I saw that God had children who do not see and
keep the Sabbath. They have not rejected the light
upon it. And at the commencement of the time of
trouble, we were filled with the Holy Ghost as we
went forth and proclaimed the Sabbath more fully.
This enraged the churches and nominal Adventists,
as they could not refute the Sabbath truth. And at
this time God’s chosen all saw clearly that we had the
truth, and they came out and endured the persecution with us. I saw the sword, famine, pestilence, and
great confusion in the land. The wicked thought that
we had brought the judgments upon them, and they
rose up and took counsel to rid the earth of us, thinking

490

DANIEL 11
that then the evil would be stayed.
“…The commencement of that time of trouble,"
here mentioned does not refer to the time when the
plagues shall begin to be poured out, but to a short period just before they are poured out, while Christ is in
the sanctuary. At that time, while the work of salvation
is closing, trouble will be coming on the earth, and the
nations will be angry, yet held in check so as not to
prevent the work of the third angel. At that time the
‘latter rain,’ or refreshing from the presence of the
Lord, will come, to give power to the loud voice of the
third angel, and prepare the saints to stand in the period
when the seven last plagues shall be poured out.” Early Writings, 33,34, 85,86.

gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and His glory shall be seen upon thee. And
the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the
brightness of thy rising.’” Hiddekel, 85,86.
East.—
“The loud cry from heaven (Revelation 18: 1) is
based upon the coming of the Lord to the ‘east’ gate of
the temple ‘upon a very high mountain’ ‘in the land of
Israel’ (Ezekiel 40:2; 43:12): ‘And the glory of the
God of Israel came from the way of the east, and the
earth shined with His glory. And the glory of the
Lord came into the house by the way of the gate whose
prospect is toward the east’ (Ezekiel 43:1-4). The
Revelator’s application of this shows that when ‘east’
is employed literally in relation to the church, it refers
to the east of the whole world.” Were, KONAJ, 66.

“The word signifies ‘a message.’ The saints who
receive the seal from ‘the east’ stand upon Mount Zion
(’north’) and proclaim the third angel’s message
[‘righteousness by faith in verity’] with unwonted
power. The message will have effect. Thousands will
be stirred in every part of the world, Babylon’s sins
will be clearly exposed, and the truth of God in the
hands of the remnant will win many souls from their
allegiance to the king of the north. (See Rev. 18:1-4;
Micah 4:1-3; The Great Controversy, pp. 606, 607.)
Whole nations will be stirred to the center.
“It is vital to see how inspiration sets forth the
true chronology of events. Tidings from the east and
north (the loud cry) do not sound before the sifting
of the church brought to view in verse 41. God waits
for the darkest hour before He signally manifests His
power through His chosen ones. First, the king of the
north returns to power like a whirlwind. He sweeps
through the countries like an overwhelming flood. He
even flows through ‘the glorious land’ and appears to
triumph over the Advent Movement. Egypt, Libya,
and Ethiopia fall into the camp of Babylon. All the
world wonders after the beast. Then, and not until
then, comes the ‘but’ of verse 44: ‘But tidings out of
the east and out of the north shall trouble him.’
“…Verse 44 of Daniel 11 obviously follows verse
41 in the sequence of events. Inasmuch as the tidings
come from the east and north, it may be known that the
sealing of the saints (east) who stand on Mount Zion
(north) results in the loud cry’ message. Isaiah 59:19
to Isaiah 60:3 presents the same order of events as
Daniel 11:40-44:
“ ‘When the enemy shall come in like a flood,
the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against
him. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto
them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the
Lord. As for Me, this is My covenant with them, saith
the Lord: My Spirit that is upon thee, and My words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. Arise, shine; for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.
For, behold the darkness shall cover the earth, and

“ ‘I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness.’ John
12:46. East defines the presence of Jesus, the sun of
righteousness (Mal. 4:2). In Revelation 7:2,3 the ascending angel with the seal of God ascends from the
east (literally, ‘from the rising of the sun,’ having the
sealing message. This angel is the same as the third
angel’s message. The ascending angel from the east
proclaims the sabbath truth (which contains the seal of
God), while the third angel warns about Sunday worship (the mark of the beast). Thus, tidings from the
east will be the time when the sabbath truth is proclaimed more fully.” PJ.
“When the storm bursts upon the church of God,
the saints will be found gathered into the house of the
Lord. As multitudes in the church will be swept aside
by the northern armies, the saints will engage in earnest
intercession: ‘Spare thy people, O lord, and give not
thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule
over them.’—Joel 2:17.
“The spirit of Daniel’s intercessory prayer recorded in chapter 10 will be the experience of the remnant
as they afflict their souls before God, pleading for pardon and deliverance through Jesus their Advocate (Testimonies, vol.5, p.473). It is then they will behold the
full revelation of Jesus Christ, the mar’eh of Daniel 10.
The consciousness of the sinfulness of their nature,
their weakness and unworthiness will be complete.
(See Testimonies, vol.5, pp.474-475.)
“While they afflict their souls, Christ will stand
for them in judgment, plead their cause, blot out their
sins, and impart to them the reviving, refreshing showers of the latter rain. (See Acts 3:19; Early Writings,
p.86.) The Revelator calls this final bestowal of spiritual grace ‘the seal of the living God.’—Revelation
7:2-4. It is bestowed upon the saints by the outpouring
of the latter rain (Ephesians 4:30; Testimonies, vol.3,
p.267) at the time of the great Sabbath test (The Great
Controversy, p.605; The SDA Bible Commentary,
vol.7, p.976). This seal, which signifies full and final

491

GEMS FROM DANIEL
deliverance from sin (Revelation 14:1-5; Testimonies,
vol. 5, p.475), is represented as coming from ‘the east’:
“ ‘And I saw another angel ascending from the
east, having the seal of the living God.’—Rev. 7:2.
“The same event is brought to view in the prophecy of Ezekiel: ‘And, behold, the glory of the God of
Israel came from the way of the east: and His voice
was like a noise of many waters: and the earth shined
with His glory.’—Ezekiel 43:2.
“When the seal of God, which is the character of
God, is placed upon the saints, the earth will shine with
the glory of God. The Revelator says: ‘And after these
things I saw another angel come down from heaven,
having great power; and the earth was lightened with
his glory.’—Revelation 18:1.
“This is the closing work of the gospel, which
Adventists are accustomed to calling ‘the loud cry of
the third angel’s message.’ (Compare Ezekiel 43:2
with Revelation 18:1.)” Hiddekel, 84,85.

“The Medes and Persians captured Babylon and
made it one of the great centers of the empire. One of
the titles of Cyrus was King of Babylon. The term
‘north’ is also associated with the Medes and Persians (Jeremiah 50:9).
“Cyrus, the king of the Medes and Persians, was a
type of Christ. His conquering Babylon was a type of
Christ’s Second Coming.
“Who raised up the righteous man from the
east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before
him, and made him rule over kings? he gave them as
the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.
…I have raised up one from the north, and he shall
come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon
my name: and he shall come upon princes as upon
morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.” Isa. 41:2, 25.
“…It is ironic that the king of the north is himself
troubled by tidings from the north. ‘North’ is often
associated with an enemy power (Isaiah 41:25), so
Christ will lead the armies of the living God in the final
conflict with the man of sin.”
“In Isaiah 14:12-14 and Ezekiel 1:4 Jesus is
depicted as the true King of the north. At His return
the powers of this earth will be shattered as potter’s
clay and His kingdom established which shall never be
removed. (See Daniel 2:44,45; Isaiah 41:25; Revelation 2:27; 19:11-21.)
“Thus, tidings out of the north would symbolize
the proclamation of the 2nd and 3rd Angel’s message
and the fearful warning in Rev. 18:4—‘Come out of
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues’—that come
from the heavenly north.
“Tidings out of the north could also mean tidings from the midst of Babylon, (Rev. 18:4) as Martin Luther was raised up from Catholicism, so
God’s people coming out of the midst of Babylon
and giving the tidings to others in that midst, will
trouble the king of the north—spiritual Babylon.”
[Hiddekel, 75, 85; Rafferty, PI, 109; PJ.]

North.—
“The word that the LORD spake against Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah
the prophet.
“Declare ye among the nations, and publish,
and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: say,
Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is
broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images
are broken in pieces.
“For out of the north there cometh up a nation
against her, which shall make her land desolate, and
none shall dwell therein: they shall remove, they shall
depart, both man and beast.
“For, lo, I will raise and cause to come up
against Babylon an assembly of great nations from
the north country: and they shall set themselves in
array against her; from thence she shall be taken: their
arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man; none shall
return in vain.” Jeremiah 50:1-3.
“Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is
therein, shall sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall
come unto her from the north, saith the LORD. As
Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at
Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.” Jeremiah
51:48,49.

East and North.—
“Christianity brought tidings out of the east to
Rome through Paul. When rejected, tidings came
out of the North with the barbarians and the sounding of the 4 trumpets.” Source Unknown.

“Repeatedly, Babylon was referred to as the
power from the north. (See Jeremiah 1:14; 4:5-7;
6:1; 10:22; 13:20; 16:15; 20:4; 23:8; 25:9,12)….
“Mount Zion, on which the sealed saints are symbolically gathered, is represented as being ‘on the sides
of the north.’—Psalm 48:2.
“Spiritual Babylon—Papal Rome—tries to place
itself in this position in ‘the glorious holy mountain’:
‘For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into
heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I
will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in
the sides of the north.’ Isaiah 14:13.

Tidings out of the East and North.—
“The third angel’s message is to lighten the
earth with its glory; but only those who have withstood temptation in the strength of the Mighty One will
be permitted to act a part in proclaiming it when it shall
have swelled into the loud cry.” Historical Sketches,
155.
“Men of faith and prayer will be constrained to go
forth with holy zeal, declaring the words which God
gives them. The sins of Babylon will be laid open.
The fearful results of enforcing the observances of the

492

DANIEL 11
church by civil authority, the inroads of spiritualism,
the stealthy but rapid progress of the papal power—
all will be unmasked. By these solemn warnings the
people will be stirred. Thousands upon thousands
will listen who have never heard words like these. In
amazement they hear the testimony that Babylon is the
church, fallen because of her errors and sins, because
of her rejection of the truth sent to her from heaven.”
Great Controversy, 606,607.

ing will be given. Miracles will be wrought, the sick
will be healed, and signs and wonders will follow the
believers. Satan also works, with lying wonders, even
bringing down fire from heaven in the sight of men.
Revelation 13:13. Thus the inhabitants of the earth will
be brought to take their stand.
“The message will be carried not so much by argument as by the deep conviction of the Spirit of
God. The arguments have been presented. The seed
has been sown, and now it will spring up and bear fruit.
The publications distributed by missionary workers
have exerted their influence, yet many whose minds
were impressed have been prevented from fully comprehending the truth or from yielding obedience. Now
the rays of light penetrate everywhere, the truth is
seen in its clearness, and the honest children of God
sever the bands which have held them. Family connections, church relations, are powerless to stay them
now. Truth is more precious than all besides. Notwithstanding the agencies combined against the truth,
a large number take their stand upon the Lord’s side.”
Great Controversy, 611, 612.

“As the third angel’s message swells into a loud
cry, great power and glory will attend its proclamation.
The faces of God’s people will shine with the light of
heaven.” 7 Testimonies, 17.
“The angel who unites in the proclamation of the
third angel’s message is to lighten the whole earth with
his glory. A work of world-wide extent and unwonted power is here foretold. The advent movement of
1840-44 was a glorious manifestation of the power of
God; the first angel’s message was carried to every
missionary station in the world, and in some countries
there was the greatest religious interest which has been
witnessed in any land since the Reformation of the
sixteenth century; but these are to be exceeded by the
mighty movement under the last warning of the
third angel.
“The work will be similar to that of the Day of
Pentecost. As the former rain’ was given, in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit at the opening of the gospel,
to cause the upspringing of the precious seed, so the
‘latter rain’ will be given at its close for the ripening of
the harvest. ‘Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord: His going forth is prepared as the
morning; and He shall come unto us as the rain, as the
latter and former rain unto the earth.’ Hosea 6:3. ‘Be
glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord
your God: for He hath given you the former rain moderately, and He will cause to come down for you the
rain, the former rain, and the latter rain.’ Joel 2:23. ‘In
the last days, saith God, I will pour out of My Spirit
upon all flesh.’ ‘And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.’
Acts 2:17, 21.
“The great work of the gospel is not to close
with less manifestation of the power of God than
marked its opening. The prophecies which were fulfilled in the outpouring of the former rain at the opening of the gospel are again to be fulfilled in the latter
rain at its close. Here are ‘the times of refreshing’ to
which the apostle Peter looked forward when he said:
‘Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins
may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord; and He shall send
Jesus.’ Acts 3:19, 20.
“Servants of God, with their faces lighted up
and shining with holy consecration, will hasten from
place to place to proclaim the message from heaven.
By thousands of voices, all over the earth, the warn-

Shall Trouble Him.—
“The king of Babylon hath heard the report of
them, and his hands waxed feeble: anguish took hold
of him, and pangs as of a woman in travail.” Jeremiah 50:43.
“As the controversy extends into new fields and
the minds of the people are called to God's downtrodden law, Satan is astir. The power attending the message will only madden those who oppose it. The
clergy will put forth almost superhuman efforts to shut
away the light lest it should shine upon their flocks.
By every means at their command they will endeavor
to suppress the discussion of these vital questions. The
church appeals to the strong arm of civil power,
and, in this work, papists and Protestants unite. As
the movement for Sunday enforcement becomes more
bold and decided, the law will be invoked against
commandment keepers. They will be threatened with
fines and imprisonment, and some will be offered positions of influence, and other rewards and advantages,
as inducements to renounce their faith. But their steadfast answer is: ‘Show us from the word of God our
error’—the same plea that was made by Luther under
similar circumstances. Those who are arraigned before
the courts make a strong vindication of the truth, and
some who hear them are led to take their stand to keep
all the commandments of God. Thus light will be
brought before thousands who otherwise would know
nothing of these truths.
“Conscientious obedience to the word of God will
be treated as rebellion. Blinded by Satan, the parent
will exercise harshness and severity toward the believing child; the master or mistress will oppress the commandment-keeping servant. Affection will be alienated; children will be disinherited and driven from home.

493

GEMS FROM DANIEL
The words of Paul will be literally fulfilled: ‘All that
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.’
2 Timothy 3:12. As the defenders of truth refuse to
honor the Sunday-sabbath, some of them will be thrust
into prison, some will be exiled, some will be treated as
slaves. To human wisdom all this now seems impossible; but as the restraining Spirit of God shall be withdrawn from men, and they shall be under the control of
Satan, who hates the divine precepts, there will be
strange developments. The heart can be very cruel
when God’s fear and love are removed.
“As the storm approaches, a large class who have
professed faith in the third angel’s message, but have
not been sanctified through obedience to the truth,
abandon their position and join the ranks of the opposition. By uniting with the world and partaking of its
spirit, they have come to view matters in nearly the
same light; and when the test is brought, they are prepared to choose the easy, popular side. Men of talent
and pleasing address, who once rejoiced in the truth,
employ their powers to deceive and mislead souls.
They become the most bitter enemies of their former brethren. When Sabbathkeepers are brought before the courts to answer for their faith, these apostates
are the most efficient agents of Satan to misrepresent
and accuse them, and by false reports and insinuations
to stir up the rulers against them.
“In this time of persecution the faith of the Lord’s
servants will be tried. They have faithfully given the
warning, looking to God and to His word alone. God’s
Spirit, moving upon their hearts, has constrained them
to speak. Stimulated with holy zeal, and with the divine impulse strong upon them, they entered upon the
performance of their duties without coldly calculating
the consequences of speaking to the people the word
which the Lord had given them. They have not consulted their temporal interests, nor sought to preserve
their reputation or their lives. Yet when the storm of
opposition and reproach bursts upon them, some,
overwhelmed with consternation, will be ready to exclaim: ‘Had we foreseen the consequences of our
words, we would have held our peace.’ They are
hedged in with difficulties. Satan assails them with
fierce temptations. The work which they have undertaken seems far beyond their ability to accomplish.
They are threatened with destruction. The enthusiasm which animated them is gone; yet they cannot turn
back. Then, feeling their utter helplessness, they flee
to the Mighty One for strength. They remember that
the words which they have spoken were not theirs, but
His who bade them give the warning. God put the
truth into their hearts, and they could not forbear to
proclaim it.
“The same trials have been experienced by men
of God in ages past. Wycliffe, Huss, Luther, Tyndale,
Baxter, Wesley, urged that all doctrines be brought to
the test of the Bible and declared that they would renounce everything which it condemned. Against these men persecution raged with relentless fury; yet

they ceased not to declare the truth. Different periods
in the history of the church have each been marked by
the development of some special truth, adapted to the
necessities of God’s people at that time. Every new
truth has made its way against hatred and opposition;
those who were blessed with its light were tempted and
tried. The Lord gives a special truth for the people in
an emergency. Who dare refuse to publish it? He
commands His servants to present the last invitation of
mercy to the world. They cannot remain silent, except
at the peril of their souls. Christ's ambassadors have
nothing to do with consequences. They must perform their duty and leave results with God.” Great
Controversy, 607-610.
Therefore He Shall Go Forth With Great Fury to
Destroy, and Utterly to Make Away Many.—
“I heard those clothed with the armor speak forth
the truth in great power. It had effect. I saw those who
had been bound; some wives had been bound by their
husbands, and some children had been bound by their
parents. The honest who had been held or prevented
from hearing the truth, now eagerly laid hold of it. All
fear of their relatives was gone. The truth alone was
exalted to them. It was dearer and more precious than
life. They had been hungering and thirsting for truth. I
asked what had made this great change. An angel
answered: "It is the latter rain, the refreshing from
the presence of the Lord, the loud cry of the third
angel.
“Great power was with these chosen ones.
Said the angel: "Look ye!" My attention was turned
to the wicked, or unbelievers. They were all astir.
The zeal and power with the people of God had
aroused and enraged them. Confusion, confusion
was on every side. I saw measures taken against this
company, who had the power and light of God. Darkness thickened around them, yet there they stood, approved of God, and trusting in Him. I saw them perplexed. Next I heard them crying unto God earnestly.
Through the day and night their cry ceased not. [‘And
shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and
night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell
you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless
when the son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the
earth?’ Luke 18:7, 8. See also Revelation 14:14, 15.]
“I heard these words: ‘Thy will, O God, be done!
If it can glorify Thy name, make a way of escape for
Thy people! Deliver us from the heathen round
about us! They have appointed us unto death; but
Thine arm can bring salvation.’ These are all the words
that I can bring to mind. All seemed to have a deep
sense of their unworthiness, and manifested entire
submission to the will of God. Yet like Jacob, every
one, without an exception, was earnestly pleading and
wrestling for deliverance.
“Soon after they had commenced their earnest
cry, the angels, in sympathy, would have gone to their
deliverance. But a tall, commanding angel suffered

494

DANIEL 11
them not. Said he: ‘The will of God is not yet fulfilled.
They must drink of the cup. They must be baptized
with the baptism.’” 1 Testimonies, 182,183.

science.” Great Controversy, 610.
“When the irrevocable decision of the sanctuary
has been pronounced and the destiny of the world has
been forever fixed, the inhabitants of the earth will
know it not. The forms of religion will be continued
by a people from whom the Spirit of God has been
finally withdrawn; and the satanic zeal with which
the prince of evil will inspire them for the accomplishment of his malignant designs, will bear the
semblance of zeal for God.
“As the Sabbath has become the special point of
controversy throughout Christendom, and religious and
secular authorities have combined to enforce the observance of the Sunday, the persistent refusal of a small
minority to yield to the popular demand will make
them objects of universal execration. It will be urged
that the few who stand in opposition to an institution of
the church and a law of the state ought not to be tolerated; that it is better for them to suffer than for whole
nations to be thrown into confusion and lawlessness.
The same argument many centuries ago was brought
against Christ by the ‘rulers of the people.’ ‘It is expedient for us,’ said the wily Caiaphas, ‘that one man
should die for the people, and that the whole nation
perish not.’ John 11:50. This argument will appear
conclusive; and a decree will finally be issued
against those who hallow the Sabbath of the fourth
commandment, denouncing them as deserving of
the severest punishment and giving the people liberty, after a certain time, to put them to death. Romanism in the Old World and apostate Protestantism in
the New will pursue a similar course toward those who
honor all the divine precepts.
“The people of God will then be plunged into
those scenes of affliction and distress described by the
prophet as the time of Jacob’s trouble. ‘Thus saith the
Lord: We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and
not of peace.... All faces are turned into paleness.
Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is
even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved
out of it.’ Jeremiah 30:5-7.” Great Controversy, 615.

“In the warfare to be waged in the last days there
will be united, in opposition to God’s people, all the
corrupt powers that have apostatized from allegiance to
the law of Jehovah. In this warfare the Sabbath of
the fourth commandment will be the great point at
issue; for in the Sabbath commandment the great Lawgiver identifies Himself as the Creator of the heavens
and the earth.” Maranatha, 187.
“The world is filled with storm and war and variance. Yet under one head—the papal power—the
people will unite to oppose God in the person of His
witnesses. This union is cemented by the great apostate. While he seeks to unite his agents in warring
against the truth he will work to divide and scatter its
advocates. Jealousy, evil surmising, evilspeaking,
are instigated by him to produce discord and dissension.” 7 Testimonies, 182.
“Satanic agencies have been moved from beneath,
and they have inspired men to unite in a confederacy of
evil, that they may perplex, harass, and cause the people of God great distress. The whole world is to be
stirred with enmity against Seventh-day Adventists,
because they will not yield homage to the papacy, by
honoring Sunday, the institution of this anti-Christian
power. It is the purpose of Satan to cause them to
be blotted from the earth, in order that his supremacy of the world may not be disputed.” R&H,
8/22/1893.
“As the opposition rises to a fiercer height, the
servants of God are again perplexed; for it seems to
them that they have brought the crisis. But conscience
and the word of God assure them that their course is
right; and although the trials continue, they are
strengthened to bear them. The contest grows closer
and sharper, but their faith and courage rise with the
emergency. Their testimony is: ‘We dare not tamper
with God’s word, dividing His holy law; calling one
portion essential and another nonessential, to gain the
favor of the world. The Lord whom we serve is able
to deliver us. Christ has conquered the powers of
earth; and shall we be afraid of a world already conquered?’
Persecution in its varied forms is the development
of a principle which will exist as long as Satan exists
and Christianity has vital power. No man can serve
God without enlisting against himself the opposition of
the hosts of darkness. Evil angels will assail him,
alarmed that his influence is taking the prey from their
hands. Evil men, rebuked by his example, will unite
with them in seeking to separate him from God by alluring temptations. When these do not succeed, then
a compelling power is employed to force the con-

“The two armies will stand distinct and separate,
and this distinction will be so marked that many who
shall be convinced of the truth will come on the side of
God's commandment-keeping people. When this grand
work is to take place in the battle, prior to the last closing conflict, many will be imprisoned, many will flee
for their lives from cities and towns, and many will
be martyrs for Christ’s sake in standing in defense
of the truth.... You will not be tempted above what
you are able to bear. Jesus bore all this and far more....”
3 Selected Messages, 397,398.
“And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and
went to make war with the remnant of her seed,
which keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.” Revelation 12:17.

495

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Mark 13:9: ‘But take heed to yourselves: for
they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony
against them.’” Heiks, KON, 79, 80.

“As Nebuchadnezzar became furious with the
three worthies who refused to bow to the golden image,
so the man of sin will be enraged against those who
refuse to worship the image to the Papacy. (See Revelation 13:14-17.) As the mind sweeps back over the
long history recorded in Daniel 11, one may consider
how many times Satan has used the powers of earth to
persecute God’s people. But verse 44 describes his
last and most bitter conflict with the saints.” Hiddekel, 86,87.

Between.—
“The Papacy does what it did in the dark Ages.
Then it hid the work of Jesus Christ from the
knowledge of the masses of people. It situated itself
between the minds of the people and the view of
Jesus Christ in the Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary on the glorious holy mount Zion. Instead, the
pope sat in the Holy Place of the temple—2 Thess. 2:3:
‘Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God
sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is
God.’
“Now, in the final hour, the Papacy tries futilely
to block the yearly—the view of Jesus Christ in the
Most Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary.” PJ.

“Especially will the wrath of man be aroused
against those who hallow the Sabbath of the fourth
commandment; and at last a universal decree will
denounce these as deserving of death.” Prophets &
Kings, 512.

DANIEL 11:45
And he shall plant the tabernacles of
his palace between the seas in the glorious
holy mountain; yet he shall come to his
end, and none shall help him.

“We are considering the aims of the head of the
Roman Catholic religion, who wants to establish himself as the ‘Vicar of Christ,’ the ultimate court of
judgment’ over the nations of the world. A religion
and leader who would plant himself between the
‘sea’—peoples, nations and tongues—and the ‘glorious holy mountain,’ the government and authority
of God.” Rafferty, PI, 104.

The Tabernacles.—
“The word ‘tabernacles’ relates to a religious service or power. The king of the north is a religious entity.” Berry, Two Troubles, 2.

The Seas.—
“ ‘And he saith unto me, The waters which thou
sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues.’ Revelation
17:15. The papacy which sits above them is controlling the nations of this world.” Berry, Two Troubles, 2.

“A ‘tabernacle,’ or temple, is a place where God
dwells and can symbolize a ‘church.’” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 223.
Of His Palace.—
“The word ‘palace’ relates to a political power.
The king of the north would have civil, or state power.”
Berry, Two Troubles, 2.

Glorious.—
“In that day shall the branch of the LORD be
beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall
be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of
Israel.” Isaiah 4:2.

“A ‘palace’ depicts a place where a king or ruler
dwells, and can symbolize the ‘state.’
The Tabernacles of His Palace.—
“Church and state will connect together again in
the last days—just as the feet of iron and clay [in chapter 2] represent the unity of Church and state in the last
days.” Berry, Two Troubles, 2,3.

“In that day shall the LORD of hosts be for a
crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the
residue of his people.” Isaiah 28:5.
“In the day that I lifted up mine hand unto them,
to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a land
that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and
honey, which is the glory of all lands:
15 Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the
wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land
which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.” Ezekiel 20:6,15.

“ ‘Tabernacles’ is an ecclesiastical term while
‘palace’ is a political term. This is a union of
church and state in the end of time as these scriptures likewise confirm:
“Rev. 17:1: ‘And there came one of the seven
angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me,
saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the
judgment [punishment] of the great whore [impure
church] that sitteth upon many waters [peoples, nations].’

“Fear God and give glory to Him for the hour of

496

DANIEL 11
His judgment is come.” Revelation 14:7.

of ‘glorious holy mountain’ in verse 45 indicates God’s
kingdom has been made up.
“…God’s kingdom is made up shortly before the
power of the King of the North is broken. …The King
of the North is broken at ‘that time’ when Michael
stands up. That action closes human probation and
starts the falling of the seven last plagues.
“..When is Christ’s kingdom made up? Ellen
White clarifies that it is when He pronounces:
“ ‘He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he
which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.” Revelation 22:11.
“ ‘Every case had been decided for life or death.
While Jesus had been ministering in the sanctuary, the
judgment had been going on for the righteous dead,
and then for the righteous living. Christ had received
His kingdom, having made the atonement for His people and blotted out their sins. The subjects of the
kingdom were made up. The marriage of the Lamb
was consummated. And the kingdom, and the greatness
of the kingdom under the whole heaven, was given to
Jesus and the heirs of salvation, and Jesus was to reign
as King of kings and Lord of lords.” Early Writings,
279-280.
“Isaiah 4:2-3 portrays God’s church at that time
as well: [Is. 4:2,3 quoted.]” Heiks, KON, 36-38.

“Glorious means that God’s presence is in it—it
is full of the glory of the Lord, the character of God.”
PJ
The Glorious, Holy Mountain.—
“ ‘The holy mountain’ refers to the dwelling place
of God. See Psalm 87:1; Isaiah 11:9; 56:7; Joel 3:17;
Ephesians 2:21; etc. Jerusalem was called ‘the mountain of the Lord of hosts the holy mountain’ only when
the Lord dwelt ‘in the midst of Jerusalem.’ Zechariah
8: 3. Literal Jerusalem is not now ‘the glorious holy
mountain’—such a designation belongs only to the
church. Things are ‘holy’ only when they have a true
relationship to the Godhead. God’s Presence made
‘holy’ the ground upon which Moses stood (Exodus 3:
5). Ancient Israel became ‘an holy nation’ (Exodus
19:6; Leviticus 20:26; etc.) when God dwelt among
them (Exodus 25: 8). But the term ‘holy people,’ applicable to the literal Jews until the time of their rejection, belongs now to spiritual Israel (see Daniel 8:24
and Daniel 12:7) in whose midst the Lord now
dwells. See 1 Corinthians 3:17; 2 Corinthians 6:16;
Ephesians 2:21; etc. The term, ‘the holy mountain,’
belonged to Jerusalem so long as God’s Presence was
there, but that term could not apply to it after God
withdrew His Presence and favor when He rejected the
Jewish nation as His people. That term now belongs to
the church. The church is ‘an holy nation,’ ‘a spiritual house, an holy priesthood’ offering ‘up spiritual sacrifices’ upon ‘Mt. Zion.’ See 1 Peter 2:5-9;
Revelation 14:1; Ezekiel 34:13, 14; 36:1-8; 40 to 48.”
Were, KONAJ, 60,61.

“In that day shall the branch of the LORD be
beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall
be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of
Israel. And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, even every one that is written among the
living in Jerusalem.”
“When the Lord shall have washed away the filth
of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the
blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit
of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.
“And the LORD will create upon every dwelling
place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud
and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence.
“And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in
the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge,
and for a covert from storm and from rain.” Isa. 4:2-6.

“The two symbols designated by heaven for the
church in Daniel 11 are the ‘glorious land,’ verses 16
and 41, and ‘the glorious holy mountain,’ verse 45.
The two terms have several commonalities. Both are
glorious; both are real estate; both verse 41 and 45 are
symbolic. It is obvious two very similar entities are
being described, and rightly so. They share a mutual
identity—God’s church—depicted by Daniel in two
stages of its development. The first stage is the
church militant; [those that escape out of the king of
the north’s hand from Israel, Edom, Moab, and Ammon, make up] the second [stage], the church triumphant. The distinction between them is as important as
their similarities. We are told:
“ ‘The Church militant is not the Church triumphant.’ Review & Herald, December 31, 1901.
“…What does a mountain represent in prophecy? A kingdom. [See Jeremiah 51:25.]
“Why does Daniel call the church the ‘glorious
holy mountain’ in verse 45? Because the church is
now the ‘church triumphant,’ although little beknownst
to the people of God on earth at that time. Since a
mountain in prophecy denotes a kingdom, Daniel’s use

“The ‘glorious holy mountain’ and ‘Mt. Zion’ are
one and the same—they both symbolize God’s dwelling place….
“The phrase ‘he shall plant the tabernacles of his
palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain’
describes the end-time effort of the papacy to sit in
the dwelling place of God by demanding global
worship. As we have emphasized all along, this worship will be compelled through a global union of
church and state, which will require all people to receive Rome’s legislated ‘mark’ of Sunday sacredness.
“Yet, there will be a faithful, obedient last-day

497

GEMS FROM DANIEL
group who will refuse to submit to papal authority; this
group will not presume to stand on the ‘glorious holy
mountain’ in the place of god, but rather would seek
refuge and deliverance on this spiritual ‘mountain.’
The prophet Joel confirmed this concept by stating that
‘in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance,
as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the
Lord shall call’ (Joel 2:32).
“Furthermore, because this ‘glorious holy mountain’ is also a symbol of deliverance, ‘Mt. Zion’ can
also symbolize the faithful people of God. God told
the prophet Isaiah to ‘say unto Zion, thou art my people’ (Isaiah 51:16). In describing the faithful, the apostle Paul told the Hebrew church that ‘ye are come into
mount Sion, and unto the city of the living god, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
angels, to the general assembly and church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven’ (Heb. 12:2223).
“Therefore, the faithful people of God who refuse
to submit to papal authority will also make up the ‘glorious holy mountain’ of ‘Mt. Zion.’ Being faithful to
the seventh-day Sabbath, this special group will seek
deliverance from the papacy on this ‘spiritual mountain’ when persecution explodes on all faithful Sabbath-keepers. And, when Christ returns the second
time, He will rescue this group in the Battle of Armageddon, which, incidentally, means ‘mountain of rendezvous.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 223.

God’s People

The Holy Mountain.—
“Even them will I bring to my holy mountain,
and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their
burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted
upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an
house of prayer for all people.” Isaiah 56:7.
“He that putteth his trust in me shall possess the
land, and shall inherit my holy mountain.” Isaiah
57:13.
“So shall ye know that I am the LORD your God
dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass
through her any more.” Joel 3:17.

“Revelation 14:1 also depicts the glorious holy
mountain at this time: ‘And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb
stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name
[His character = glory] written in their foreheads.’
The glorious holy mountain will not have sin in it,
thus, eliminating any members of Sunday keeping
church systems because Sunday-keeping is sin. The
144,000 are undefiled with women.” PJ.

“Thus saith the LORD; I am returned unto Zion,
and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem
shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the
LORD of hosts the holy mountain.” Zechariah 8:3.
“And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the
mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and
four thousand, having his Father’s name written in
their foreheads. …And in their mouth was found no
guile: for they are without fault before the throne of
God.” Revelation 14:1,5.

“Unlike verse 41 when the king of the north entered into the ‘glorious land,’ and many were ‘overthrown,’ we note with assurance that in verse 45 none
of the members of God’s glorious holy mountain’
are said to be overthrown—not even one!
“…A clear contrast remains between verses 41
and 45. In verse 41 the king is able to ‘enter also into
the glorious land,’ and cause ‘many’ to be ‘overthrown.’ Or to fall. Whereas, in verse 45 God’s
sealed, purified church, though sorely harassed and
threatened, will be impregnable to his assaults.
Though he may completely surround her, planning to
bring her to her end, yet, it will be the king of the north
that shall come to his end—not God’s ‘Glorious holy
mountain.’” Rosenvold, TKOMAGP, 46,47.

“Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also
loved the church, and gave himself for it; 26 That he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water
by the word, 27 That he might present it to himself a
glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing; but that it should be holy and without
blemish.” Ephesians 5:25-27.
In (And) the Glorious Holy Mountain.—
“This verse continues on from verse 44. The
sealed saints are symbolically located on Mount Zion.
The king of the north is represented as taking up a strategic position in his last war against them.
“Many of the prophets depict Mount Zion as being the focal point of the final battle between God’s
people and their enemies. Isaiah writes of ‘the multi-

498

DANIEL 11
problem—He takes a people and seals them.” Hiddekel, 87,88.

tude of all the nations’ that come up to ‘fight
against Mount Zion.’ Then he says that ‘the Lord
of hosts’ will ‘come down to fight for Mount Zion,
and for the hill thereof.’—Isaiah 29:8; 31:4. Joel
declares that ‘in Mount Zion …shall be deliverance.’—Joel 2:32.
“The Revelator complements the message of the
Old Testament prophets by declaring that the three
unclean spirits will gather the kings of the earth and the
whole world to Armageddon (Revelation 16:3-16).
The word ‘Armageddon’ comes from two Hebrew
words. The first is har, meaning ‘mountain,’ and the
second is mo’ed or moged, meaning ‘assembly.’
Mount Zion is the ‘mount of assembly’ or ‘mount of
the congregation’ (Harmoged) where Satan aspires to
place his seat. (See Isaiah 14:13.)
“Most translators favor ‘between the seas and
the glorious holy mountain’ instead of ‘between the
seas in the glorious holy mountain.’ This is more in
harmony with the testimony of the other prophets as
well as the context. Verse 45 describes Satan’s attack
on the sealed church—the church brought to view in
the words of the prophet Isaiah:
“In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be
excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel. And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, even every one that is written among
the living in Jerusalem: when the Lord shall have
washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and
shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the
midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. And the Lord will create upon every
dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a
defense. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow
in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge,
and for a covert from storm and from rain.—Isaiah
4:2-6.
“When God’s people are in the condition here described, Mount Zion can rightly be called ‘the glorious holy mountain.’ It will be glorious because the
saints are sealed, and it will be holy because all but
the holy will have been cut off. Satan will not be able
to enter there either by force of falsehood, for at that
time the Lord will be ‘a wall of fire round about.’—
Zechariah 2:5. That ‘fire’ represents the power of the
Holy Spirit which will seal the saints against the tempter’s devices. (See Testimonies to Ministers, p.18.) The
seal will be placed in the forehead, or in the mind.
Satan therefore will have no way of entering such a
community of saints.
“It has already been seen how the great enemy of
God and His people devised a way to corrupt the early
church. He joined it—he and all his followers. Working on this plan, he can eventually corrupt every good
and successful cause. God has one final answer to the

“Paul quotes from Daniel 11: 36-39 when describing the rise and work of the Papacy: ‘That man of
sin ... as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God’ (2 Thessalonians 2: 3, 4). The Papacy is thus pictured as sitting ‘in the temple,’ God’s
church, which is represented as being ‘on the mount
Zion,’ ‘in the glorious holy mountain.’ Thus by combining the prophetic delineations the Papacy is represented as being ‘in’ Jerusalem during the Dark Ages.
The events associated with the Reformation and the
great Second Advent Movement have caused the Papacy to be more or less ejected from Jerusalem. But the
prophetic word declares that the forces of evil will redouble their efforts to replace the Papacy fully within
the church—that once more ‘the man of sin’ will
seek to show that ‘he is God’ by demanding the world
to obey his law instead of the Law of God. Thus Daniel
11: 45 points to the last conflict in which ‘the man of
sin,’ ‘the beast,’ ‘the little horn,’ will again encircle
‘the holy city’ to subdue or to destroy the people of
God.” Were, KONAJ, 80,81.
Between the Seas and the Glorious Holy Mountain.—
“Let no man deceive you by any means: for
that day shall not come, except there come a falling
away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son
of perdition. Who opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped;
so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.” 2 Thess. 2:3,4.
“ ‘The glorious holy mountain’ may also be
understood as referring to Christ’s intercessory
work. (See Hebrews 12:22-24.) The apostate religious power will try to intercept the message of the
efficacy of Christ’s high-priestly work in the hour of
the judgment. Thus he will place the tent (his system
of worship) of his kingdom between the seas (peoples—Revelation 17:15) and the glorious holy
mountain (the place of Christ’s mediation).” Hiddekel, 88,89.
“The ‘glorious holy mountain’ appears to be a
metaphor for the Jerusalem temple which, in turn,
symbolizes the heavenly sanctuary. Pitching ‘palatial tents’ between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jerusalem temple symbolizes the encroachment of the
king of the north on the prerogatives of Christ’s sanctuary ministry.” Maxwell, 1GC, 287.
“As the crowning act in the great drama of deception, Satan himself will personate Christ. The
church has long professed to look to the Saviour’s advent as the consummation of her hopes. Now the great
deceiver will make it appear that Christ has come. In
different parts of the earth, Satan will manifest

499

GEMS FROM DANIEL
himself among men as a majestic being of dazzling
brightness, resembling the description of the Son of
God given by John in the Revelation. Rev. 1:13-15.
The glory that surrounds him is unsurpassed by anything that mortal eyes have yet beheld. The shout of
triumph rings out upon the air: ‘Christ has come! Christ
has come!’ The people prostrate themselves in adoration before him, while he lifts up his hands and pronounces a blessing upon them, as Christ blessed His
disciples when He was upon the earth. His voice is
soft and subdued, yet full of melody. In gentle, compassionate tones he presents some of the same gracious, heavenly truths which the Saviour uttered; he
heals the diseases of the people, and then, in his assumed character of Christ, he claims to have changed
the Sabbath to Sunday, and commands all to hallow the
day which he has blessed. He declares that those who
persist in keeping holy the seventh day are blaspheming his name by refusing to listen to his angels sent to
them with light and truth. This is the strong, almost
overmastering delusion.” Great Controversy, 624.

tween God and man. Those who seek to be conscience for their fellow men, place themselves above
God. Those who are under the influence of a false
religion, who observe a spurious rest day, will set aside
the most positive evidence in regard to the true Sabbath. They will try to compel men to obey the laws of
their own creation, laws that are directly opposed to the
law of God. Upon those who continue in this course,
the wrath of God will fall. Unless they change, they
cannot escape the penalty.” 9T, 234
“God’s people, rescued from the fire by Jesus
Christ, have a sense of their sin, feel humbled and
ashamed. God sees and recognizes their repentance,
and notes their sorrow for sin, which they cannot remove or cancel themselves. But as they pray their
prayers are heard, and this is the reason that Satan
stands by to resist Christ; because He hears their prayers, He maketh intercession for the saints according to
the will of God. He regenerates the sinner, and pardon
is written off against his name. This stirs Satan up to
resistance. He steps in between the repenting, believing soul and Christ. He seeks to cast his hellish
shadow before that soul, to dampen faith, and to
make of none effect the words of God. . . .
“If Satan stands between the soul and Jesus
Christ, then the love and acceptance and pardon of
Christ are eclipsed—man will be constantly striving
to prepare a robe of righteousness to cover his deformity and sin, when Christ wants him to come to
Him just as he is, and believe in Him as his personal
Saviour. In His tender love, a forgiving Father brings
forth His best robe in which to array His returning
child. . . .
“Satan is a vigilant, untiring foe, and he sleeps
not. He knows that his time is short, and he will work
until the end with every species of deception to draw
souls into his snare and ruin them. I have a message
for you—‘Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.’ Give no place to the devil to stand between
you and Christ, lest you savor of the things that be
of men and not of God. If your faith is genuine, it
must and will produce obedience. God commands us
to do nothing which we cannot do. He will give
strength to every believing, trusting soul. . . .” (Letter
65 , Jan. 6, 1894, to the ship's crew on board the Pitcairn) Upward Look, 20.

Between the Seas and the Glorious Holy Mountain—
Satan’s Old Ploy.
“He [Satan] desired to usurp the throne of
God. Failing in this, he has worked in darkness, in
crookedness, in deception, to usurp his place in the
hearts of men. He has set up his throne between God
and man, to appropriate the adoration that belongs to
God alone.” (MS 33, 1911) 6BC, 1119.
“Though being unable to expel God from His
throne, Satan has charged God with satanic attributes and has claimed the attributes of God as his
own. He is a deceiver, and through his serpentine
sharpness, through his crooked practices he has drawn
to himself the homage which man should have given to
God, and has planted his satanic throne between the
human worshiper and the Divine Father.” 7MR, 215
“The men who claim to be teachers deceive the
people, as did the leaders in Israel in Christ's day.
He, the great Teacher, was in the world; He was the
light of the world; but Satan interposed his hellish
shadow between Him and the souls whom Christ
came to save. When accused by the Pharisees, He
said, ‘Ye make void the law of God by your tradition.’
‘Ye teach for doctrines the commandments of men.’
Again He said to those so-called teachers, ‘Ye are both
ignorant of the Scriptures and the power of God.’” ST,
3/20/1901

“Nothing has been so difficult for the people of
God to learn as loyalty to the pure, elevated, unselfish
principles of heaven. And as a result, sin and suffering
make up a large part of their history. The words spoken to Daniel by the angel are positive: ‘Many shall be
purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked
shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand.’ Be assured that Satan, as a strong man armed, is
continually on the watch, seeking to penetrate to the
very heart of God’s working force, striving to bring
in questionable methods of dealing, and thereby mar

“We entreat of you who oppose the light of truth,
to stand out of the way of God's people. Let Heaven-sent light shine forth upon them in clear and
steady rays.” RH, 5/27/1890.
“The Sabbath is the Lord’s test, and no man, be
he king, priest, or ruler, is authorized to come be-

500

DANIEL 11
the work of God. He works with all his power to bring
his suspicious, evil theories into the business dealing of
God’s people. He would be well pleased to eclipse
the brightness of God’s principles by the selfishness
of the principles on which he works. If he possibly
can, he will tarnish the pure gold of character. If he
can place the false where the true should be, his
object is gained.” Signs, 11/6/1906.

fied rather by the unction of His Spirit than by the
training of literary institutions. Men of faith and
prayer will be constrained to go forth with holy zeal,
declaring the words which God gives them. The sins of
Babylon will be laid open. The fearful results of enforcing the observances of the church by civil authority, the inroads of spiritualism, the stealthy but rapid
progress of the papal power—all will be unmasked.
By these solemn warnings the people will be stirred.
Thousands upon thousands will listen who have
never heard words like these. In amazement they
hear the testimony that Babylon is the church, fallen
because of her errors and sins, because of her rejection
of the truth sent to her from heaven. As the people go
to their former teachers with the eager inquiry, Are
these things so? the ministers present fables, prophesy smooth things, to soothe their fears and quiet the
awakened conscience. But since many refuse to be
satisfied with the mere authority of men and demand a plain ‘Thus saith the Lord,’ the popular
ministry, like the Pharisees of old, filled with anger
as their authority is questioned, will denounce the
message as of Satan and stir up the sin-loving multitudes to revile and persecute those who proclaim it.
“As the controversy extends into new fields and
the minds of the people are called to God’s downtrodden law, Satan is astir. The power attending the message will only madden those who oppose it. The clergy
will put forth almost superhuman efforts to shut
away the light lest it should shine upon their flocks.
By every means at their command they will endeavor to suppress the discussion of these vital questions.
The church appeals to the strong arm of civil power,
and, in this work, papists and Protestants unite. As the
movement for Sunday enforcement becomes more bold
and decided, the law will be invoked against commandment keepers.” Great Controversy, 606,607.

“Christ was crucified for the sin of the world, and
after his resurrection and ascension, all the world were
invited to look to him and live. We are enjoined to look
at the things unseen, to keep before the mind's eye the
most vivid images of eternal realities, that by beholding
we may become changed into the image of Christ.
Christ is the mystic ladder uniting the earth with the
universe of heaven, and as our faith lays hold upon
him, we see him standing as our advocate, our assurance, our life. Unless we keep our attention fixed
upon Jesus, Satan will intercept the bright gleams of
light from the throne of God, and we shall lose the
knowledge of the character of God as it is revealed
in the ten moral precepts, and as it is seen in the life
of his only-begotten Son. Satan constantly seeks to
obstruct the view of Christ by placing a representation of himself before us; but unless our faith shall
pierce his hellish shadow, and we obtain a view of
the holiness of God’s character, we shall be divested
of our strength, and become purposeless, helpless,
weak, and inefficient, the deluded prey of Satan’s
temptations. We shall give to the world the strength
of the faculties of soul, mind, and body, and deprive
Christ of the service which he has purchased with his
own blood.” Signs, 8/29/1895.
Satan Tries to Suppress the Tidings of Christ.—
“In every generation God has sent His servants to
rebuke sin, both in the world and in the church. But the
people desire smooth things spoken to them, and the
pure, unvarnished truth is not acceptable. Many reformers, in entering upon their work, determined to
exercise great prudence in attacking the sins of the
church and the nation. They hoped, by the example of a
pure Christian life, to lead the people back to the doctrines of the Bible. But the Spirit of God came upon
them as it came upon Elijah, moving him to rebuke
the sins of a wicked king and an apostate people;
they could not refrain from preaching the plain utterances of the Bible—doctrines which they had been
reluctant to present. They were impelled to zealously
declare the truth and the danger which threatened souls.
The words which the Lord gave them they uttered,
fearless of consequences, and the people were compelled to hear the warning.
“Thus the message of the third angel will be proclaimed. As the time comes for it to be given with
greatest power, the Lord will work through humble
instruments, leading the minds of those who consecrate
themselves to His service. The laborers will be quali-

“The third angel is represented as flying in the
midst of heaven, symbolizing the work of those who
proclaim the first, second, and third angel's messages;
all are linked together. The evidences of the abiding,
ever-living truth of these grand messages that mean so
much to us, that have awakened such intense opposition from the religious world, are not extinct. Satan is
constantly seeking to cast his hellish shadow about
these messages, so that the remnant people of God
shall not clearly discern their import—their time
and place—but they live, and are to exert their
power upon our religious experience while time
shall last.” 3 Selected Messages, 405.
The Last Battle—The King of the North & Gideon’s
Army.—
“The papacy which sits on and above the seas
[the nations and people of earth] is controlling
them. The king of the north has gathered the waters
[the nations] together before the glorious holy mountain. This is the battle of Armageddon.

501

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“ ‘And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come
out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. 14
For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles,
which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the
whole world, to gather them to the battle of that
great day of God Almighty.
“This battle is symbolized by the story of Gideon in Judges 6 and 7. The Midianites attack Israel.
They came like grasshoppers for multitude and they
were without number. Israel cries to the Lord and God
raises up a man by the name of Gideon. Gideon blows
the trumpet and gathers the people. 32,000 respond.
Not many compared to the enemy, but God says it’s
too much. Victory would come through Him. 22,000
leave because of fear. Only 10,000 left. Then there is
a second test. Only 300 men pass the second test by
drinking on guard. God promises to deliver them
through the 300 men—a remnant. Men of Gideon take
their stand on the mountain top. Midianites are in the
valley. What encourages Gideon to win this battle?
Judges 7:12-15—a remarkable dream! How can a
piece of bread destroy the armies? In John 6:35, Jesus
says, ‘I am the bread of life.’ Christ is represented by
that bread bringing the victory! He used Gideon’s
men! What did the dream do for Gideon? It gave him
hope, courage. He worshipped God! What does
prophecy do for us? It cannot just be a theoretical
truth. It must become a living experience! The same
in the last days. Remember the prophecy in Daniel
chapter 2. Daniel 2:44-45: A stone cut out of a
mountain will roll down and hit the feet in the valley. All will then be destroyed. The feet of iron and
clay represent the unity of church and State in the last
days. 1 Corinthians 10:4—Christ is the Rock. Christ in
you, the hope of glory. He will return to bring deliverance and victory to his people.
“As God used Gideon’s men, He will use those
that take their stand upon the mountain. The law is
revealed on the mountain. The flag of the Sabbath is
there. We must start climbing! The majority link to
the world. Christians are compromising, conforming to
the Papacy—drunk with the wine of Babylon.
“Gideon’s men had torches of fire, pitchers
and a trumpet. The fire represents the Holy Spirit
working in the lives [vessels] of the last generation
of men. Many are in darkness [because the Papacy has
blocked the view.] Isaiah 60:1-3: ‘Isa 60:1 Arise,
shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the
LORD is risen upon thee. 2 For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people: but the LORD shall arise upon thee, and his
glory shall be seen upon thee. 3 And the Gentiles
shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of
thy rising.’ Glory is seen upon the remnant! The Gentiles will respond. The Loud Cry under the 4 th Angel
of Revelation 18:1-4. The trumpet is the sound of
the message. Isaiah 58:1. The seas will be converted.
Isaiah 60:4-6. The battle is already decided. Joel

2:20-22 are promises to us: ‘But I will remove far
off from you the northern army, and will drive him
into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east sea, and his hinder part toward the
utmost sea, and his stink shall come up, and his ill
savour shall come up, because he hath done great
things. 21 Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: for the
LORD will do great things. 22 Be not afraid, ye beasts
of the field: for the pastures of the wilderness do
spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree and the
vine do yield their strength.” Berry, Two Troubles, 2,3.
He Shall Come to His End; None Shall Help Him.—
“The ten horns that ‘helped’ the Papacy will
eventually forsake and hate her: “These …shall make
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire.” Rev. 17:16.
“She shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong
is the Lord God who judgeth her.” Rev. 18:8.
“Satan’s host and wicked men will surround
them, and exult over them, because there will seem to
be no way of escape for them. But in the midst of their
revelry and triumph, there is heard peal upon peal of
the loudest thunder. The heavens have gathered blackness, and are only illuminated by the blazing light and
terrible glory from heaven, as God utters His voice
from His holy habitation.
“The foundations of the earth shake; buildings
totter and fall with a terrible crash. The sea boils like a
pot, and the whole earth is in terrible commotion. The
captivity of the righteous is turned, and with sweet and
solemn whisperings they say to one another: ‘We are
delivered. It is the voice of God.’ With solemn awe
they listen to the words of the voice. The wicked hear,
but understand not the words of the voice of God.
They fear and tremble, while the saints rejoice. Satan
and his angels, and wicked men, who had been exulting
that the people of God were in their power, that they
might destroy them from off the earth, witness the glory conferred upon those who have honored the holy
law of God. They behold the faces of the righteous
lighted up and reflecting the image of Jesus. Those
who were so eager to destroy the saints cannot endure the glory resting upon the delivered ones, and
they fall like dead men to the earth. Satan and evil
angels flee from the presence of the saints glorified.
Their power to annoy them is gone forever.” 1 Testimonies, 354.
“That the phrase ‘he shall come to his end, and
none shall help him’ has reference to the overthrow of
modern Babylon is evident when compared with other
passages of Scripture which definitely refer to the
doom of Babylon. Concerning the doom of Babylon,
the prophet Isaiah wrote: ‘Mischief shall fall upon
thee; thou shall not be able to put it off. Let now the
astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognostica-

502

DANIEL 11
tors, stand up, and save thee from these things that
shall come upon thee ... None shall save thee.’ Isaiah
47: 1, 11-15.” Were, KONAJ, 16.

holy law will be fully ripe. But the true leader of all
this rebellion is Satan clothed as an angel of light. Men
will be deceived and will exalt him to the place of God,
and deify him. But Omnipotence will interpose, and
to the apostate churches that unite in the exaltation
of Satan, the sentence will go forth, ‘Therefore shall
her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning,
and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with
fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.’”
Testimonies to Ministers, 62.

“In v. 45 the prophet proceeds to the climax—
the end of this persecuting power. Then in Daniel
12:1 he connects up the activities of the king of the
north in his attacks upon ‘the holy city’—first, his
threatening attitude, then, secondly, his fury aroused to
slay the saints—with what the Lord will do on behalf
of His people in succoring their cause against the king
of the north-first, His commencing to reign and to exercise His Almighty power to plague their enemies, and
then, secondly, His intervention to destroy their adversaries: hence the two sets of events in the prophecy
Daniel 11: 45; 12: 1. ‘At that time’ [when the king of
the north masses his forces threateningly around Jerusalem] ‘shall Michael stand up.’ ‘At that time’
[when the king of the north passes the death decree
to slay the saints- to destroy ‘the holy city’] Michael
delivers His people and destroys the king of the
north: ‘he shall come to his end, and none shall help
him.’” Were, KONAJ, 90.

“These words express the utter failure of the enemy’s last campaign against the true church. Babylon’s power has depended upon the support of the deceived nations and peoples of the earth. The book of
Revelation describes how finally the powers of earth
will withdraw their support from Babylon, and the
‘woman’ of lies and force will perish by the hands of
those who have idolatrously carried her about (Revelation 17:16; 16:12).
“It must not be concluded from verse 45 that the
king of the north comes to his temporal end before the
close of probation, which is brought to view in the very
next verse. Rather, Daniel 12:1 describes the great
event that precipitates his final end.” Hiddekel, 89.

“In this age antichrist will appear as the true
Christ, and then the law of God will be fully made void
in the nations of our world. Rebellion against God’s

503

GEMS FROM DANIEL

DANIEL 11 CHART
VERSE

1
2

3

EMPIRE and/or EVENT
EMPIRE NO. 1 - BABYLON. (Already fallen).
EMPIRE NO. 2 - MEDO-PERSIA. Dan 11 begins.

DATE
606-538 BC
538 BC
334-331 BC

Persia battles with Grecia.

EMPIRE NO. 3 - GRECIA. Conquers Medo-Persia.

331 BC

4
5
6
7-8
9-13

Grecia falls --- divides into four.
Egypt aspires to become Empire No. 4.
Egypt and Syria form alliance, aspiring to become Empire No. 4.
Egypt and Syria at war.
Egypt punishes Syria, Egypt and Syria continue to struggle.

301 BC
301-249
249 BC
246 BC
246-168 BC

14-16

EMPIRE NO. 4 - PAGAN ROME. Conquers Syria & OT Israel.

168-63 BC

17
18-19
20
21
22
23
24

Rome conquers Egypt.
Julius Caesar expands Roman dominions.
Augustus Caesar, “Raiser of taxes.” (Luke 2:1 Jesus born)
Tiberius Caesar, “A vile person.”
Crucifixion of “The Prince of the Covenant" --- Christ.
Review of how Rome grew strong—League with Jewish nation
Rome enters the fattest places. Forecasts from Rome for a “time” (360
years) till Constantine moves capital from Rome in AD 330.
Battle of Actium; Augustus victorious.
Church hierarchy formed; Constantine corrupts church.
Rising power of Papal Rome—Battles on spiritual level.
Barbarian invasions cause the fall of Pagan Rome—AD 476.
“Daily taken away” ---Allegiance turned from Christ to Pope.

47 BC
44 BC
4 BC
AD 14-37
AD 31
158-161 BC
158-31 BC
31 BC-330 AD
31 BC
AD 323
AD 323-508
AD 395-476
AD 508-538

EMPIRE NO. 5 - PAPAL SUPREMACY NO. 1

AD 538-1798

32-33
34-35

Waldenses & others preserve truth; 1260 years of papal persecution begins.

AD 538-1500
AD 1500-1798

36-39

Description of Papal Power to deceive many into false worship.
EMPIRE NO. 6 –ATHEISTIC COMMUNISM;
gives Papacy “deadly wound.”

AD 1500-1798
AD 1798

40a
40b

a) Communism " pushes;” b ) Papacy struggles against USSR; fall of
many countries, using horses, chariots and ships (UNITED STATES
military and economic power).
Papacy enters “glorious land;” gains control of SDA church; Many fall.

AD 1798-1980
AD 1945-1991

25-27
28
29
30
31

41
42-43
44

45

European Reformation; The “time of the end” – “ a time appointed.”

Papacy controls all Atheistic countries and controls world financial powers.
“Seal ... from the east” (The Loud Cry) enrages the Papacy, brings
about the universal Death Decree; Rev 13:15.

EMPIRES NO. 7, 8 --UNITED STATES and PAPAL SUPREMACY NO. 2

AD 1903-1991
COMING
COMING

TILL 2ND
COMING

Papacy tries to block the view of Jesus in Most Holy Place from world;

Papacy comes to its end and none shall help him.
(See Daniel 12:1-3; Rev. 13)
The seven empires of Daniel 11 enables us to name with ease the Seven Heads
of the beast of Revelation 17. Daniel 2 clearly presents FOUR great empires,
Daniel 7 reveals the 5TH empire, but Dan 11 reveals all SEVEN.

504

DANIEL 12

DANIEL: CHAPTER TWELVE
1 And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a nation even to that same time: and at that
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be
found written in the book.
2 And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and everlasting contempt.
3 And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness
as the stars for ever and ever.
4 But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the
book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased.
5 Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other
two, the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the
other on that side of the bank of the river.
6 And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was
upon the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the
end of these wonders?

7 And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon
the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand
and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that
liveth for ever that it shall be for a time, times, and an
half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the
power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.
8 And I heard, but I understood not: then said I, O my
Lord, what shall be the end of these things?
9 And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are
closed up and sealed till the time of the end.
10 Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried;
but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked
shall understand; but the wise shall understand.
11 And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be
taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set
up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety
days.
12 Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.
13 But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt
rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.

DANIEL 12:1
And at that time shall Michael stand
up, the great prince which standeth for the
children of thy people: and there shall be a
time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a nation even to that same time:
and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written
in the book.

The voice of our Lord Jesus Christ. (John 5: 28.)
Tracing back the evidence with this fact as a basis, we
reach the following conclusion: The voice of the Son
of God is the voice of the Archangel; the Archangel,
then, must be the Son of God. But the Archangel is
called Michael; hence Michael must be the name
given to the Son of God. The expression in verse 1,
‘the great Prince which standeth for the children of
thy people,’ is sufficient alone to identify the one
here spoken of as the Saviour of men. He is the
‘Prince of life,’ and ‘a Prince and a Saviour.’ Acts
3:15, 5:31. He is the great Prince. He ‘standeth for the
children of thy people.’ He condescends to take the
servants of God in this poor mortal state, and redeem
them for the subjects of His future kingdom. He stands
for us who believe.” Smith, DR, 301,302.

At That Time.—
“A definite time is specified in this verse, not a
particular year or month or day, but a time made definite by the occurrence of a certain event with which it
is connected. ‘At that time.’ What time?—The time to
which we are brought by the closing verse of the preceding chapter—the time when the king of the north
shall plant the tabernacles of his palace in the glorious holy mountain. When this event takes place, he is
to come to his end; and then, according to this verse,
we look for the standing up of Michael, the great
Prince.” Smith, DR, 301.

Shall Michael Stand Up.—
“What is the standing up of Michael? The key
to the interpretation of this expression is given us:
‘There shall stand up yet three kings in Persia;’ ‘A
mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with
great dominion.’ Daniel 11: 2, 3. There can be no
doubt as to the meaning of these expressions in these
instances. They signify to take the kingdom, to
reign. This expression in the verse under consideration, must mean the same. At that time Michael shall
stand up, shall take the kingdom, shall begin to
reign.
“But is not Christ reigning now?—Yes, associated with His Father on the throne of universal dominion.

Who is Michael?—
“Who is Michael? Michael is called the ‘archangel’ in Jude 9. This means the chief angel, or the
head over the angels. There is but one. Who is he?—
He is the one whose voice is heard from heaven
when the dead are raised. (1 Thessalonians 4:16.)
Whose voice is heard in connection with that event?—

505

GEMS FROM DANIEL
(Ephesians 1:20-22; Revelation 3:21.) But this throne,
or kingdom, He gives up at His coming. (1 Corinthians
15: 24.) Then begins His reign, brought to view in the
text, when He stands up, or takes His own kingdom,
the long-promised throne of His father David, and establishes a dominion of which there shall be no end.
(Luke 1: 32, 33.)
“The kingdoms of this world shall become the
kingdom ‘of our Lord and of His Christ.’ His priestly robes are to be laid aside for royal vesture. The
work of mercy will be finished and the probation of the
human race ended. Then he that is filthy is beyond
hope of cleansing; and he that is holy is beyond the
danger of falling. All cases are forever decided. From
that time on until Christ comes in the clouds of heaven,
the nations are broken as with a rod of iron, and dashed
in pieces like a potter’s vessel, by an unparalleled time
of trouble. There will be a series of divine judgments
upon men who have rejected God. Then shall the Lord
Jesus Christ be revealed from heaven, ‘in flaming fire
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the gospel.’ 2 Thess. 1:8. (See also Rev.
11:15; 22:11, 12.)
“Momentous are the events introduced by the
standing up of Michael. He stands up, or takes the
kingdom, some length of time before He returns
personally to this earth. How important, then, that
we have a knowledge of His position, that we may be
able to trace the progress of His work, and understand
when that thrilling moment draws near which ends His
intercession in behalf of mankind, and fixes the destiny
of all forever.
“But how are we to know this? How are we to determine what is taking place in the sanctuary above?
God has been so good as to place in our hands the
means of knowing this. He has told us that when certain great events take place on earth, important decisions which synchronize with them are being made in
heaven. By these things which are seen, we thus learn
of things that are unseen. As we ‘look through nature
up to nature’s God,’ so through terrestrial phenomena
and events we trace great movements in the heavenly
kingdom. When the king of the north shall plant the
tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the
glorious holy mountain, then Michael our Lord
stands up, or receives from His Father the kingdom,
preparatory to His return to this earth. Or it might be
expressed in words like these: Then our Lord ceases
His work as our great High Priest, and the probation of the world is finished. The great prophecy of
the 2300 days gives us the definite beginning of the
final division of the work in the sanctuary in heaven.
The verse before us gives us data whereby we can discover approximately the time of its close.” Smith, DR,
302,303.

is Christ, and his standing up is his beginning to
reign. Michael is the name borne by our Lord as the
ruler of the angelic host. It signifies, ‘He who is like
God.’ This must be our Lord. See Heb.1:3. He is
called the archangel. Jude 9. This term signifies prince
of angels, or chief of the angelic host. But this is the
very office of our divine Lord. Hebrews 1. Michael is
the great prince that standeth for the children of God.
Also he is called our prince. See Dan.10:21; 12:1. But
this can be no other than Christ. Acts 5:31.
“The standing up of Michael is his assumption of
kingly power. See the use of this term in
Dan.11:2,3,4,7,20,21. But it is Jesus, and not an angel,
who takes the throne of the kingdom. Dan.7:13,14;
Ps.2:6-12. Our Lord receives his dominion at his
Father's judgment-seat. Daniel 7.
“The nature of the words addressed by the Father
to the Son when he crowns him king, shows that
coronation to be at the close of his priestly office.
“ ‘Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of
Zion. I will declare the decree; the Lord hath said unto
me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron;
thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.’
Ps.2:6-9.
“It is manifest that the giving of the heathen to the
Son by the Father is not for their salvation but for their
destruction. It could not, therefore, take place at the
ascension of Christ, when he entered upon his priesthood, but must be when the work of that priesthood
is finished. Daniel has placed the coronation of
Christ at the Father’s judgment-seat. And to this
fact the words of the second psalm perfectly agree.
The priesthood of Christ is closed when the scepter
of iron is placed in his hands. The number of his
people is made up, the work for their sins is finished,
and their salvation rendered certain, when all the rest of
mankind are delivered into his hands to be broken by
the scepter of his justice. But this cannot be till our
Lord, as priest, has blotted out our sins, at the tribunal
of his Father; for when the wicked are given into the
hands of Christ to be destroyed, it is plain that there is
no further salvation for sinners. When our Lord accepts the iron scepter of justice, he can no longer fill
the office of priest, to make atonement for sins. His
whole priestly office is finished when he is thus
crowned by his Father. But this coronation, which is
described in Dan.7:9-14, is simply the transition from
the priesthood of Christ to his kingly office. It is plain
that our Lord’s priesthood is brought to a conclusion at
the time when the Ancient of Days sits in judgment.”
Andrews, JEO, 33.
“Michael’s standing up (Daniel 12:1) to deliver
his people, is in the future. This, will not take place,
until Jesus has finished his priestly office in the
Heavenly Sanctuary, and lays off his priestly attire,

“The coronation of Christ at the judgment-seat
of the Father is the same event as the standing up of
Michael (compare Dan.7:13,14; 12:1); for Michael

506

DANIEL 12
and puts on his most kingly robes, and crown, to
ride forth on the cloudy chariot, to ‘thresh the heathen
in anger,’ and deliver his people. Then Jesus will have
the sharp sickle in his hand, (Revelation 14:14) and
then the saints will cry day and night to Jesus on the
cloud, to thrust in his sharp sickle and reap. This, will
be the time of Jacob’s trouble, (Jeremiah 30:5-8) out of
which, the saints will be delivered by the voice of
God.” Word to the Little Flock, 12.

is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be.’” 3 Spiritual Gifts, 134.
“I saw that the anger of the nations, the wrath of
God, and the time to judge the dead, were separate and
distinct, one following the other; also that Michael had
not stood up, and that the time of trouble, such as never
was, had not yet commenced. The nations are now
getting angry, but when our High Priest has finished
His work in the sanctuary, He will stand up, put on
the garments of vengeance, and then the seven last
plagues will be poured out. I saw that the four angels
would hold the four winds until Jesus’ work was
done in the sanctuary, and then will come the seven
last plagues.” Life Sketches, 117.

“ ‘At that time shall Michael stand up,….’
[Daniel 12:1 quoted.]
“When the third angel’s message closes, mercy
no longer pleads for the guilty inhabitants of the
earth. The people of God have accomplished their
work. They have received ‘the latter rain,’ ‘the refreshing from the presence of the Lord,’ and they are prepared for the trying hour before them. Angels are hastening to and fro in heaven. An angel returning from
the earth announces that his work is done; the final test
has been brought upon the world, and all who have
proved themselves loyal to the divine precepts have
received ‘the seal of the living God.’ Then Jesus
ceases His intercession in the sanctuary above. He
lifts His hands and with a loud voice says, ‘It is done;’
and all the angelic host lay off their crowns as He
makes the solemn announcement: ‘He that is unjust, let
him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.’ Rev.
22:11. Every case has been decided for life or death.”
Great Controversy, 613.

The Great Prince Which Standeth For the Children
of Thy People.—
“Christ died for His church, and ministers in the
sanctuary for it purification. It is the object of His supreme regard. When He stands up to rule, His first
concern is the deliverance of His people. They are
represented as standing on the glorious holy mountain,
the focal point of the king of the north’s furious attack.” Hiddekel, 90.
“There are two events brought to view in connection with the activities of the king of the north: (1) the
king of the north plants the tabernacles of his palace at
Jerusalem in readiness for the destruction of Jerusalem,
and (2) his furious onslaught upon ‘the holy city’
which ends in his total destruction. There are two
events brought to view in connection with the activities
of Michael on behalf of God’s ‘people’: (1) He stands
up, or commences His reign, in order to take kingly
command to deal with the adversaries of His ‘people,’ (2) He delivers His ‘people’ and destroys their
adversaries. The king of the north comes to his end
through the standing up of Michael.” Were, KONAJ,
87.

“Jesus cannot receive His kingdom until His
sanctuary is cleansed, for He cannot stand up as
King while He ministers as Priest. And He cannot
cleanse His sanctuary until He has perfected and sealed
His people. But when the moral image of Jesus is restored in His people, and the last soul has received the
seal of the living God, Jesus can throw down the censer, saying, ‘It is done.’ (See Early Writings,
pp.71,279.) Then He receives His kingdom and
stands up to rule.” Hiddekel, 90.

Stephen Saw Jesus Stand Up.—
“But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up
steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and
Jesus standing on the right hand of God, And said,
Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man
standing on the right hand of God.” Acts 7:55, 56.
“This is the only passage in the Bible that describes Christ as ‘standing’ on God’s ‘right hand,’ and
it is mentioned in the context of Stephen’s execution,
which took place in AD 34 and actually signified the
close of probation for ancient Israel—[the end of
the 70 week prophecy of Daniel 9]. Because Christ
was ‘standing’ and not ‘sitting’ when this event took
place, ‘standing’ up can be associated with a close of
probation. Therefore, as we apply this principle to
Daniel 12:1, when ‘Michael’ shall ‘stand up,’ it will
signify the close of probation for earth, and the

“Those professed believers who come up to the
time of trouble unprepared, will, in their despair, confess their sins before all in words of burning anguish,
while the wicked exult over their distress. The case of
all such is hopeless. When Christ stands up, and
leaves the most holy place, then the time of trouble
commences, and the case of every soul is decided,
and there will be no atoning blood to cleanse from
sin and pollution. As Jesus leaves the most holy, he
speaks in tones of decision and kingly authority, ‘He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let
him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be
holy still. And behold, I come quickly, and my reward

507

GEMS FROM DANIEL
commencement of the ‘time of trouble.’” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 236,237.

holy still.’ Rev. 22:11. Then the restraining Spirit of
God is withdrawn from the earth. As Jacob was threatened with death by his angry brother, so the people of
God will be in peril from the wicked who are seeking
to destroy them. And as the patriarch wrestled all night
for deliverance from the hand of Esau, so the righteous
will cry to God day and night for deliverance from the
enemies that surround them.” Patriarchs & Prophets,
201.

When Michael Stands Up, the Door is Shut.—
“Luke 13:25 When once the master of the
house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye
begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and
say unto you, I know you not whence ye are.” Luke
13:25.

“When He [Jesus] leaves the sanctuary, darkness covers the inhabitants of the earth. In that fearful time the righteous must live in the sight of a holy
God without an intercessor. The restraint which has
been upon the wicked is removed, and Satan has entire
control of the finally impenitent. God’s long-suffering
has ended. The world has rejected His mercy, despised
His love, and trampled upon His law. The wicked
have passed the boundary of their probation; the
Spirit of God, persistently resisted, has been at last
withdrawn. Unsheltered by divine grace, they have
no protection from the wicked one. Satan will then
plunge the inhabitants of the earth into one great,
final trouble. As the angels of God cease to hold in
check the fierce winds of human passion, all the
elements of strife will be let loose. The whole world
will be involved in ruin more terrible than that
which came upon Jerusalem of old.” Great Controversy, 614.

“The fact that all who are sealed at the commencement of this time of trouble are afterward
seen standing upon Mount Zion with the Lamb, is
proof that their probation closes with the commencement of this scene of trouble. Compare Rev.7:4; 14:1.
In other words, they are then accounted worthy to escape the things that are to come to pass, and to stand
before the Son of man. Luke 21:36. The very time
when they are thus accounted worthy to stand before
the Saviour, is at the close of our Lord’s priesthood;
and the time of trouble itself comes when that
priesthood is exchanged for his kingly office.” Andrews, JEO, 90,91.
“The close of Christ’s heavenly mediation
means that no more mercy will be extended to the enemies of His church. Then will commence the day of
vengeance: ‘For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance,
and the year of recompense for the controversy of Zion’ (Isaiah 34: 8), ‘and he put on the garments of
vengeance. According to their deeds, accordingly He
will repay, fury to His adversaries, recompense to His
enemies’ (Isaiah 59: 17, 18).
“When Christ commences His reign… it brings
great rejoicing to His persecuted people: ‘We give thee
thanks, O Lord God! Almighty, because Thou has taken Thy great power, and has reigned’ (Rev. 11: 17).”
Were, KONAJ, 88.

“The ‘time of trouble, such as never was,’ is soon
to open upon us; and we shall need an experience
which we do not now possess and which many are too
indolent to obtain. It is often the case that trouble is
greater in anticipation than in reality; but this is not
true of the crisis before us. The most vivid presentation cannot reach the magnitude of the ordeal.”
Great Controversy, 622.
“The Lord God will soon arise in His wrath,
and pour out His judgments upon those who are
repeating the sins of the inhabitants of the Noachic
world. Those whose hearts are fully set in them to do
evil, as were the hearts of the inhabitants of Sodom,
will like them be destroyed. The fact that God had
long forbearance, patience and mercy, the fact that His
judgments have been long delayed, will not make the
punishment any less severe when it does come. 4BC
1143.

There Shall Be a Time of Trouble.—
“Jacob’s experience during that night of wrestling
and anguish represents the trial through which the people of God must pass just before Christ’s second coming. The prophet Jeremiah, in holy vision looking
down to this time, said, ‘We have heard a voice of
trembling, of fear, and not of peace.... All faces are
turned into paleness. Alas! for that day is great, so that
none is like it: it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but
he shall be saved out of it.’ Jeremiah 30:5-7.
“When Christ shall cease His work as mediator
in man’s behalf, then this time of trouble will begin.
Then the case of every soul will have been decided,
and there will be no atoning blood to cleanse from sin.
When Jesus leaves His position as man’s intercessor
before God, the solemn announcement is made, ‘He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let
him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be

“These dreadful calamities which will come upon
our earth before the people of God are taken from it
may be mentioned as the loosing of the four winds,
the pouring out of the vials of God’s wrath in pestilence, famine, and earthquake, and in the battle of the
great day of God Almighty. It will be the hour of
temptation for all the wicked world, when Satan
shall exert his utmost power. To the wicked it will be
the time of trouble such as never was; to the righteous

508

DANIEL 12
it will be the time of Jacob’s trouble, at which, in answer to their cry day and night, like the importunate
widow, they will be delivered. Jer.30:5-7; Gen.32;
Luke 18:7,8.” Andrews, JEO, 93.

Preparation for Time of Trouble.—
“The ‘time of trouble, such as never was,’ is soon
to open upon us; and we shall need an experience
which we do not now possess and which many are too
indolent to obtain. It is often the case that trouble is
greater in anticipation than in reality; but this is not
true of the crisis before us. The most vivid presentation cannot reach the magnitude of the ordeal. In that
time of trial, every soul must stand for himself before
God. ‘Though Noah, Daniel, and Job’ were in the land,
‘as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither
son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own souls
by their righteousness.’ Ezekiel 14:20.
“Now, while our great High Priest is making the
atonement for us, we should seek to become perfect in
Christ. Not even by a thought could our Saviour be
brought to yield to the power of temptation. Satan
finds in human hearts some point where he can gain a
foothold; some sinful desire is cherished, by means of
which his temptations assert their power. But Christ
declared of Himself: ‘The prince of this world cometh,
and hath nothing in Me.’ John 14:30. Satan could find
nothing in the Son of God that would enable him to
gain the victory. He had kept His Father’s commandments, and there was no sin in Him that Satan could
use to his advantage. This is the condition in which
those must be found who shall stand in the time of
trouble.” Great Controversy, 622-623.

“Wonderful events are soon to open before the
world. The end of all things is at hand. The time of
trouble is about to come upon the people of God.
Then it is that the decree will go forth forbidding
those who keep the Sabbath of the Lord to buy or sell,
and threatening them with punishment, and even death,
if they do not observe the first day of the week as the
Sabbath.” R&H, 11/191908.
“His mediatorial work is over; the door from
whence has streamed those rays of light and mercy is
closed forever. Those who have been sealed must
now stand wholly by faith, clinging to God alone
during a ‘time of trouble such as never was since
there was a nation.’ Daniel had watched men pass
through trials. He had seen Israel tried, and men in all
ages who were true to God tested on the point of faith,
but in all previous instances the test had been lightened
by a mediator. Now there is no intercessor, and man
stands alone. Mercy is no longer sheltering him. It is
another night in Gethsemane, another day of Calvary.
“Again the words are uttered, not by one lone
man, but by multitudes, ‘My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me? The sweat drops of blood roll
from other foreheads; the crown of thorns can be
pressed unheeded into many a brow; Calvary’s nails
can be driven without added pain. The burden of heartsearching is great among the faithful few, as they remember that one unconfessed sin means death. The
mother of Zebedee’s children asked for her sons a
place on the right and on the left of the King on his
throne. The Saviour said that place belonged to him
who should drink of the cup of which he himself must
drink. That is the cup which is drained to the bitter
dregs by the remnant people in the time of trouble, for
they are the ones who shall occupy the position mentioned by the mother of James and John.
“The faithful, sealed followers are not the only
ones who know that probation has ended, for upon the
wicked the seventh plague is falling, and from it none
escape. The time of trouble to the wicked will be
terrible, for they drink to the dregs the cup of God’s
wrath. ‘A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand,’ but the righteous do not feel the
effects of the plague.” Haskell, SDP, 253-254.

Not the Same Tribulation As in Matthew 24.—
“In connection with the standing up of Michael,
there occurs a time of trouble such as never was. In
Matthew 24: 21 we read of a period of tribulation such
as never was before it, nor should be after it. This
tribulation, fulfilled in the oppression and slaughter
of the church by the papal power, is already past;
while the time of trouble of Daniel 12:1 is still future….” Smith, DR, 303,305.
“Almost the same language is used in describing
two different times of trouble. See Mt. 24:15, 20-22.
There is no contradiction in these texts because one
describes the persecutions of Papal Rome against
the saints of God during the middle ages, and the
other the wrath of God against the wicked as manifested in the seven last plagues. The persecution of
God’s people was ‘such as was not since the beginning
of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be,’ and the
distress that comes to the wicked world following the
close of probation will be ‘such as never was since
there was a nation even to that same time.’ Of course,
the righteous will pass through ‘great tribulation’
during the short period of the final time of trouble
which will be to them ‘the time of Jacob’s trouble.’
See Re. 7:14; Jer. 30:6,7. During this period the righteous will be under the sheltering wing of the Almighty
and their ‘bread and water shall be sure,’ while the
wicked will suffer from hunger and thirst and will
‘gnaw their tongues for pain.’” Bunch, BOD, 197.

“ ‘For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and
the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion.’—Isaiah 34:8. In Revelation 16 the outpouring of
wrath upon the nations is called the seven last plagues
(Revelation 16). Great Babylon is punished for all her
warfare on the saints from the beginning to the end of
time (Revelation 18:20-24).” Hiddekel, 91.

509

GEMS FROM DANIEL
to set our hearts in order, ready for the time of trouble.
Those only who have clean hands and pure hearts
will stand in that trying time. Now is the time for
the law of God to be in our minds, foreheads, and
written in our hearts.” Early Writings, 56,57,58.

“The similarity of language between Mt. 24:21
and Dan. 12:1 shows that the 1260 days [years] of papal oppression are very closely related to the Time of
Trouble after the Close of Probation. What causes that
similarity? At both times Satan was using church
systems to block the view of Christ’s work in the
heavenly sanctuary. First, during the Dark Ages Satan took away the ‘daily’—the tamiyd. For 1260 years
people on planet earth had, for the most part, lost the
knowledge of Christ’s continual ministry in the Holy
Place of the heavenly sanctuary. At the time of Dan.
12:1, Satan will unsuccessfully try to take away the
‘yearly’ by blocking the view of Christ’s yearly ministry in the Most Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary
on Mt. Zion. At both times ‘darkness [covered, and]
shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people.’
Is. 60:2.” PJ

“When tempted to sin, let us remember that Jesus
is pleading for us in the heavenly sanctuary. When we
put away our sins and come to Him in faith, He takes
our names on His lips, and presents them to His Father,
saying, ‘I have graven them upon the palms of my
hands; I know them by name.’ And the command
goes forth to the angels to protect them. Then in the
day of fierce trial He will say, ‘Come, my people,
enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors
about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.’ What are
the chambers in which they are to hide?—They are
the protection of Christ and holy angels. The people
of God are not at this time all in one place. They are in
different companies, and in all parts of the earth; and
they will be tried singly, not in groups. Every one must
stand the test for himself.” R&H, 11/19/1908.

“The time of trouble that occurs in connection
with Christ’s coming is the reverse of an earlier tribulation described in the words of Matthew 24:9, ‘They
will deliver you up to tribulation, and put you to death.’
In this earlier tribulation the saints are delivered to
death. In the final tribulation the saints are delivered from death. …Revelation 3:10 speaks of the
final tribulation. ‘Because you have kept my word of
patient endurance, I will keep you from the hour of trial
which is coming on the whole world.” Maxwell, 1GC,
289.

“[Dan. 12:1 quoted.] When this time of trouble
comes, every case is decided; there is no longer probation, no longer mercy for the impenitent. The seal of
the living God is upon His people. This small remnant, unable to defend themselves in the deadly conflict with the powers of earth that are marshaled by
the dragon host, make God their defense. The decree has been passed by the highest earthly authority
that they shall worship the beast and receive his mark
under pain of persecution and death. May God help
His people now, for what can they then do in such a
fearful conflict without His assistance!” 5 Testimonies,
512.

God’s People Make God Their Defense.—
“The Lord has shown me repeatedly that it is
contrary to the Bible to make any provision for our
temporal wants in the time of trouble. I saw that if
the saints had food laid up by them or in the field in the
time of trouble, when sword, famine, and pestilence are
in the land, it would be taken from them by violent
hands and strangers would reap their fields. Then will
be the time for us to trust wholly in God, and He
will sustain us. I saw that our bread and water will
be sure at that time, and that we shall not lack or
suffer hunger; for God is able to spread a table for
us in the wilderness. If necessary He would send
ravens to feed us, as He did to feed Elijah, or rain
manna from heaven, as He did for the Israelites.
“Houses and lands will be of no use to the saints
in the time of trouble, for they will then have to flee
before infuriated mobs, and at that time their possessions cannot be disposed of to advance the cause of
present truth. I was shown that it is the will of God
that the saints should cut loose from every encumbrance before the time of trouble comes, and make a
covenant with God through sacrifice. If they have their
property on the altar and earnestly inquire of God for
duty, He will teach them when to dispose of these
things. Then they will be free in the time of trouble
and have no clogs to weigh them down….
“Now is the time to lay up treasure in heaven and

“In the day of the Lord, all those whose names
have been retained in the Lamb’s book of life during
the judgment will find eternal deliverance from their
foes. The important point to notice is that God is able
to deliver His people at such a time because, in the
previous hour of the cleansing of the sanctuary, they
have been delivered eternally from sin. Having been
delivered from Satan’s power within (Daniel 11:44),
they are ready to be delivered from Satan’s power
without (Daniel 12:1).” Hiddekel, 91.
“It is impossible to give any idea of the experience of the people of God who will be alive on the
earth when past woes and celestial glory will be blended. They will walk in the light proceeding from the
throne of God. By the means of the angels there will
be constant communication between heaven and earth.
And Satan, surrounded by evil angels, and claiming
to be God, will work miracles of all kinds to deceive,
if possible, the very elect. God’s people will not find
their safety in working miracles, for Satan would coun-

510

DANIEL 12
terfeit any miracle that might be worked. God’s tried
and tested people will find their power in the sign spoken of in Exodus 31:12-18. They are to take their
stand on the living Word—‘It is written.’ This is the
only foundation upon which they can stand securely. Those who have broken their covenant with God
will in that day be without hope and without God in the
world.” 2 Selected Messages, 54,55.

water, while the wicked were suffering from hunger
and thirst. Then I saw the leading men of the earth
consulting together, and Satan and his angels busy
around them. I saw a writing, copies of which were
scattered in different parts of the land, giving orders
that unless the saints should yield their peculiar faith,
give up the Sabbath, and observe the first day of the
week, the people were at liberty after a certain time to
put them to death. But in this hour of trial the saints
were calm and composed, trusting in God and leaning
upon His promise that a way of escape would be made
for them. In some places, before the time for the decree to be executed, the wicked rushed upon the saints
to slay them; but angels in the form of men of war
fought for them. Satan wished to have the privilege of
destroying the saints of the Most High; but Jesus bade
His angels watch over them. God would be honored by
making a covenant with those who had kept His law, in
the sight of the heathen round about them; and Jesus
would be honored by translating, without their seeing
death, the faithful, waiting ones who had so long expected Him.
“Soon I saw the saints suffering great mental anguish. They seemed to be surrounded by the wicked
inhabitants of the earth. Every appearance was against
them. Some began to fear that God had at last left
them to perish by the hand of the wicked. But if their
eyes could have been opened, they would have seen
themselves surrounded by angels of God. Next came
the multitude of the angry wicked, and next a mass of
evil angels, hurrying on the wicked to slay the saints.
But before they could approach God’s people, the
wicked must first pass this company of mighty, holy
angels. This was impossible. The angels of God
were causing them to recede and also causing the
evil angels who were pressing around them to fall
back.
“It was an hour of fearful, terrible agony to the
saints. Day and night they cried unto God for deliverance. To outward appearance, there was no possibility of their escape. The wicked had already begun to
triumph, crying out, ‘Why doesn't your God deliver
you out of our hands? Why don’t you go up and save
your lives?’ But the saints heeded them not, Like Jacob, they were wrestling with God. The angels longed
to deliver them, but they must wait a little longer; the
people of God must drink of the cup and be baptized
with the baptism. The angels, faithful to their trust,
continued their watch. God would not suffer His
name to be reproached among the heathen. The time
had nearly come when He was to manifest His mighty
power and gloriously deliver His saints. For His
name’s glory He would deliver every one of those
who had patiently waited for Him and whose names
were written in the book.
“I was pointed back to faithful Noah. When the
rain descended and the flood came, Noah and his family had entered the ark, and God had shut them in. Noah had faithfully warned the inhabitants of the antedi-

Thy People Shall Be Delivered From the Plagues.—
“In the time of trouble just before the coming of
Christ, the righteous will be preserved through the
ministration of heavenly angels; but there will be no
security for the transgressor of God’s law. Angels
cannot then protect those who are disregarding one of
the divine precepts.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 256.
“But in the midst of the time of trouble that is
coming—a time of trouble such as has not been since
there was a nation—God’s chosen people will stand
unmoved. Satan and his angels cannot destroy them,
for angels that excel in strength will protect them.”
9 Testimonies, 17
“This fearful execution of God’s judgment is witnessed before the deliverance of the saints; for not
less than six of the plagues are poured out prior to the
advent of Christ. Rev.16:12-15.” Andrews, JEO, 90.
“The people of God will not be free from suffering; but while persecuted and distressed, while they
endure privation and suffer for want of food they will
not be left to perish. That God who cared for Elijah
will not pass by one of His self-sacrificing children.
He who numbers the hairs of their head will care for
them, and in time of famine they shall be satisfied.
While the wicked are dying from hunger and pestilence, angels will shield the righteous and supply their
wants. To him that ‘walketh righteously’ is the
promise: ‘Bread shall be given him; his waters shall
be sure.’ ‘When the poor and needy seek water,
and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst,
I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will
not forsake them.’ Isaiah 33:15,16; 41:17.” Great
Controversy, 629.
Thy People Shall Be Delivered From the Wicked.—
“In the time of trouble, Satan stirs up the
wicked, and they encircle the people of God to destroy them. But he does not know that ‘pardon’ has
been written opposite their names in the books of heaven. He does not know that the command has been
given, ‘Take away the filthy garments’ from them,
clothe them with ‘change of raiment,’ and set ‘a fair
miter’ upon their heads.” R&H, 11/19/1908.
“I saw the saints leaving the cities and villages,
and associating together in companies, and living in the
most solitary places. Angels provided them food and

511

GEMS FROM DANIEL
luvian world, while they had mocked and derided him.
And as the waters descended upon the earth, and one
after another was drowning, they beheld that ark, of
which they had made so much sport, riding safely upon
the waters, preserving the faithful Noah and His family. So I saw that the people of God, who had faithfully warned the world of His coming wrath, would
be delivered. God would not suffer the wicked to destroy those who were expecting translation and who
would not bow to the decree of the beast or receive his
mark. I saw that if the wicked were permitted to slay
the saints, Satan and all his evil host, and all who hate
God, would be gratified. And oh, what a triumph it
would be for his satanic majesty to have power, in the
last closing struggle, over those who had so long waited to behold Him whom they loved! Those who have
mocked at the idea of the saints’ going up will witness
“As the saints left the cities and villages, they
were pursued by the wicked, who sought to slay them.
But the swords that were raised to kill God’s people
broke and fell as powerless as a straw. Angels of God
shielded the saints. As they cried day and night for
deliverance, their cry came up before the Lord.
“It was at midnight that God chose to deliver
His people.” Early Writings, 282-285.

blood of Christ’s faithful witnesses were shed at this
time, it would not, like the blood of the martyrs, be as
seed sown to yield a harvest for God. Their fidelity
would not be a testimony to convince others of the
truth; for the obdurate heart has beaten back the waves
of mercy until they return no more. If the righteous
were now left to fall a prey to their enemies, it would
be a triumph for the prince of darkness. Says the
psalmist: ‘In the time of trouble He shall hide me in
His pavilion: in the secret of His tabernacle shall He
hide me.’ Psalm 27:5. Christ has spoken: ‘Come, My
people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little
moment, until the indignation be overpast. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of His place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity.’ Isaiah
26:20,21. Glorious will be the deliverance of those
who have patiently waited for His coming and
whose names are written in the book of life.
“When the protection of human laws shall be
withdrawn from those who honor the law of God, there
will be, in different lands, a simultaneous movement
for their destruction. As the time appointed in the decree draws near, the people will conspire to root out the
hated sect. It will be determined to strike in one night a
decisive blow, which shall utterly silence the voice of
dissent and reproof.
“The people of God—some in prison cells, some
hidden in solitary retreats in the forests and the mountains—still plead for divine protection, while in every
quarter companies of armed men, urged on by hosts of
evil angels, are preparing for the work of death. It is
now, in the hour of utmost extremity, that the God
of Israel will interpose for the deliverance of His
chosen. Saith the Lord; ‘Ye shall have a song, as in
the night when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness
of heart, as when one goeth... to come into the mountain of the Lord, to the Mighty One of Israel. And the
Lord shall cause His glorious voice to be heard, and
shall show the lighting down of His arm, with the indignation of His anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.’
Isaiah 30:29,30.
“With shouts of triumph, jeering, and imprecation, throngs of evil men are about to rush upon their
prey, when, lo, a dense blackness, deeper than the
darkness of the night, falls upon the earth. Then a
rainbow, shining with the glory from the throne of
God, spans the heavens and seems to encircle each
praying company. The angry multitudes are suddenly arrested. Their mocking cries die away. The
objects of their murderous rage are forgotten. With
fearful forebodings they gaze upon the symbol of
God’s covenant and long to be shielded from its overpowering brightness.
“By the people of God a voice, clear and melodious, is heard, saying, ‘Look up,’ and lifting their eyes
to the heavens, they behold the bow of promise. The
black, angry clouds that covered the firmament are

“Soon I heard the voice of God which shook the
heavens and the earth. ["The lord also shall roar out of
zion, and utter his voice from jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the lord will be the
hope of his people, and the strength of the children of
israel." joel 3:16. See also Hebrews 12:26; Revelation
6:17.] There was a mighty earthquake. Buildings were
shaken down, and fell on every side. I then heard a
triumphant shout of victory, loud, musical, and clear. I
looked upon this company, who, a short time before,
were in such distress and bondage. Their captivity
was turned. A glorious light shone upon them. How
beautiful they then looked! All weariness and marks of
care were gone; health and beauty were seen in every
countenance. Their enemies, the heathen around
them, fell like dead men. They could not endure the
light that shone upon the delivered, holy ones. This
light and glory remained upon them until Jesus was
seen in the clouds of heaven, and the faithful, tried
company were changed in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, from glory to glory.” 1 Testimonies, 182184.
“The eye of God, looking down the ages, was
fixed upon the crisis which His people are to meet,
when earthly powers shall be arrayed against them.
Like the captive exile, they will be in fear of death by
starvation or by violence. But the Holy One who divided the Red Sea before Israel, will manifest His
mighty power and turn their captivity. ‘They shall be
Mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make
up My jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth
his own son that serveth him.’ Malachi 3:17. If the

512

DANIEL 12
parted, and like Stephen they look up steadfastly into
heaven and see the glory of God and the Son of man
seated upon His throne. In His divine form they discern the marks of His humiliation; and from His lips
they hear the request presented before His Father and
the holy angels: ‘I will that they also, whom Thou hast
given Me, be with Me where I am.’ John 17:24. Again
a voice, musical and triumphant, is heard, saying:
‘They come! they come! holy, harmless, and undefiled.
They have kept the word of My patience; they shall
walk among the angels;’ and the pale, quivering lips
of those who have held fast their faith utter a shout
of victory.
“It is at midnight that God manifests His power for the deliverance of His people. The sun appears, shining in its strength. Signs and wonders follow
in quick succession. The wicked look with terror and
amazement upon the scene, while the righteous behold
with solemn joy the tokens of their deliverance. Everything in nature seems turned out of its course. The
streams cease to flow. Dark, heavy clouds come up and
clash against each other. In the midst of the angry
heavens is one clear space of indescribable glory,
whence comes the voice of God like the sound of
many waters, saying: ‘It is done.’ Rev. 16:17.
“That voice shakes the heavens and the earth.
There is a mighty earthquake, ‘such as was not
since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.’ Verses 17, 18. The firmament
appears to open and shut. The glory from the throne of
God seems flashing through. The mountains shake like
a reed in the wind, and ragged rocks are scattered on
every side. There is a roar as of a coming tempest.
The sea is lashed into fury. There is heard the shriek of
a hurricane like the voice of demons upon a mission of
destruction. The whole earth heaves and swells like the
waves of the sea. Its surface is breaking up. Its very
foundations seem to be giving way. Mountain chains
are sinking. …Prison walls are rent asunder, and God’s
people, who have been held in bondage for their faith,
are set free.
“Graves are opened, and ‘many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth. . . awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.’ Daniel 12:2.” Great Controversy, 634-637.

from among men; and there is heard, as the sound of
many waters, and as the sound of a great thunder, ‘the
voice of harpers harping with their harps.’ And they
sing ‘a new song’ before the throne, a song which no
man can learn save the hundred and forty and four
thousand. It is the song of Moses and the Lamb--a
song of deliverance. None but the hundred and forty-four thousand can learn that song; for it is the
song of their experience—an experience such as no
other company have ever had. ‘These are they which
follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.’ These, having been translated from the earth, from among the
living, are counted as ‘the first fruits unto God and to
the Lamb.’ Rev. 15:2, 3; 14:1-5. ‘These are they which
came out of great tribulation;’ they have passed
through the time of trouble such as never was since
there was a nation; they have endured the anguish of
the time of Jacob’s trouble; they have stood without an
intercessor through the final outpouring of God’s
judgments. But they have been delivered, for they
have ‘washed their robes, and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb.’ ‘In their mouth was found
no guile: for they are without fault’ before God.
‘Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve
Him day and night in His temple: and He that sitteth on
the throne shall dwell among them.’ They have seen
the earth wasted with famine and pestilence, the sun
having power to scorch men with great heat, and they
themselves have endured suffering, hunger, and thirst.
But ‘they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any
more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat.
For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes.’ Rev. 7:14-17.” Great Controversy, 648,649.
Every One Found Written in the Book.—
“There is a time for blotting out the names of
some from the book of life, and of confessing the
names of the others before the Father.
“ ‘He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed
in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of
the book of life, but I will confess his name before my
Father, and before his angels.’ Rev.3:5.
“The time of blotting out names from the book
of life precedes the deliverance of the saints. For at
the time of that event everyone shall be delivered ‘that
shall be found written in the book.’ Dan.12:1.
“Thus the fearful threatening of Ex.32:32, 33;
Ps.69:28; Rev.22:19, is executed in the removal of
names from this book before the coming of Christ.
Those who overcome are the ones who have their sins
blotted out. But those who fail to overcome have
their names stricken from the book of life. The examination of their record must, therefore, precede both
these acts of blotting out, for the express purpose of
determining whether they shall have their sins blotted
out, or have their names removed from the book of
life.” Andrews, JEO, 21.

“And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written,
There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob.” Romans 11:26.
Those Delivered are the 144,000.—
“Upon the crystal sea before the throne, that sea
of glass as it were mingled with fire—so resplendent is
it with the glory of God—are gathered the company
that have ‘gotten the victory over the beast, and
over his image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his name.’ With the Lamb upon Mount
Zion, ‘having the harps of God,’ they stand, the hundred and forty and four thousand that were redeemed

513

GEMS FROM DANIEL
bring with him’ (1 Thess. 4:14).” Youth Instructor,
8/4/1898.

“When we become children of God, our names
are written in the Lamb’s book of life, and they remain there until the time of the investigative judgment. Then the name of every individual will be
called, and his record examined, by Him who declares,
‘I know thy works.’ If in that day it shall appear that
all our wicked deeds have not been fully repented of,
our names will be blotted from the book of life, and our
sins will stand against us.” Signs, 8/6/1885.

“Nowhere in the Sacred Scriptures is found the
statement that the righteous go to their reward or the
wicked to their punishment at death. The patriarchs
and prophets have left no such assurance. Christ and
His apostles have given no hint of it. The Bible clearly
teaches that the dead do not go immediately to heaven.
They are represented as sleeping until the resurrection. 1 Thessalonians 4:14; Job 14:10-12. In the very
day when the silver cord is loosed and the golden bowl
broken (Ecclesiastes 12:6), man’s thoughts perish.
They that go down to the grave are in silence. They
know no more of anything that is done under the sun.
Job 14:21. Blessed rest for the weary righteous!
Time, be it long or short, is but a moment to them.
They sleep; they are awakened by the trump of God
to a glorious immortality. ‘For the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible.... So
when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then
shall be brought to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory.’ 1 Corinthians 15:5254. As they are called forth from their deep slumber they begin to think just where they ceased. The
last sensation was the pang of death; the last thought,
that they were falling beneath the power of the grave.
When they arise from the tomb, their first glad thought
will be echoed in the triumphal shout: ‘O death, where
is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?’ Verse 55.”
Great Controversy, 549,550.

“Christ says of the overcomer, ‘I will not blot out
his name out of the book of life.’ The names of all
those who have once given themselves to God are written in the book of life, and their characters are now
passing in review before Him. Angels of God are
weighing moral worth. They are watching the development of character in those now living, to see if
their names can be retained in the book of life. A
probation is granted us in which to wash our robes of
character and make them white in the blood of the
Lamb. Who is doing this work? Who is separating
from himself sin and selfishness?” 7BC, 960.

DANIEL 12:2
And many of them that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.
Them That Sleep in the Dust of the Earth.—
“Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I
may awake him out of sleep. 12 Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. 13 Howbeit
Jesus spake of his death: but they thought that he had
spoken of taking of rest in sleep. 14 Then said Jesus
unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead.” John 11:11-14.

Asleep in the Dust.—
“Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead
body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell
in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the
earth shall cast out the dead.” Isaiah 26:19.
Many Shall Awake—A Special Resurrection.—
“Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of
man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming
in the clouds of heaven.” Matthew 26:64.

“Christ represents death as a sleep to His believing children. Their life is hid with Christ in God,
and until the last trump shall sound those who die will
sleep in Him.” Desire of Ages, 527.
“Christ became one with humanity, that humanity
might become one in spirit and life with Him. By virtue of this union in obedience to the Word of God, His
life becomes their life. He says to the penitent, ‘I am
the resurrection, and the life’ (John 11:25). Death is
looked upon by Christ as sleep—silence, darkness,
sleep. He speaks of it as if it were of little moment.
‘Whosoever liveth and believeth in me,’ He says, ‘shall
never die’ (John 11:26). ‘If a man keep my saying, he
shall never taste of death’ (John 8:52). ‘He shall never
see death’ (John 8:51). And to the believing one,
death is but a small matter. With him to die is but
to sleep. ‘Them also which sleep in Jesus will God

“This verse reveals the importance of the standing
up of Michael, or the beginning of the reign of Christ,
for at this time shall be a resurrection of the dead.
Is this the general resurrection which takes place at the
second coming of Christ? Or is there to intervene between Christ’s reception of the kingdom and His revelation to earth in all His advent glory (Luke 21:27) a
special resurrection answering to the description here
given?
“Why may it not be the former, or the resurrection
which occurs at the last trump?—Because only the
righteous, to the exclusion of all the wicked, have part
in that resurrection. Those who sleep in Christ then
come forth, but the rest of the dead live not again for a

514

DANIEL 12
thousand years. (Rev. 20:5.) The general resurrection
of the whole race, then, is divided into two great
events—first, of the righteous exclusively at the coming of Christ; second, of the wicked exclusively, a
thousand years thereafter. The general resurrection
is not a resurrection of both the righteous and the
wicked at the same time. Each of these two classes is
set off by itself, and the time which elapses between
the respective resurrection is plainly stated to be a
thousand years.
“In the resurrection brought to view in the verse
before us, however, many, of both the righteous and
the wicked come up together. It cannot therefore be
the first resurrection, which includes the righteous only, nor the second resurrection, which is distinctly confined to the wicked….
“Is there, then, any place for a special, or limited,
resurrection? Is there elsewhere any intimation of such
an event, before the Lord appears? The resurrection
here predicted takes place when God’s people are delivered from the great time of trouble with which the
history of this world terminated, and it seems from
Revelation 22:11 that this deliverance is given before the Lord appears. The awful moment arrives
when he that is filthy and unjust is pronounced unjust
still, and he that is righteous and holy is pronounced
holy still. Then the cases of all are forever decided.
When this sentence is pronounced upon the righteous,
it must be deliverance to them, for then they are placed
beyond all reach of danger or fear or evil. But the Lord
has not at that time made His appearance, for He immediately adds, ‘Behold, I come quickly.’
“The utterance of this solemn fiat seals the righteous to everlasting life and the wicked to eternal death.
A voice goes forth from the throne of God, saying, ‘It
is done!’ Rev. 16:17. This is evidently the voice of
God, so often alluded to in descriptions of the scenes
connected with the last day. Joel speaks of it, and says:
‘The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter His
voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth
shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of His people, and the strength of the children of Israel.’ Joel
3:16. The margin reads instead of ‘hope,’ ‘place of
repair, or harbor.’ Then at this time, when God’s voice
is heard from heaven just previous to the coming of the
Son of man, God is a harbor for His people, or, which
is the same thing, provides them deliverance. The last
stupendous scene is about to open upon a doomed
world. God gives to the astonished nations another
evidence and pledge of His power, and raises from the
dead a multitude who have long slept in the dust of the
earth.
“Thus we see that there is a time and place for the
resurrection of Daniel 12:2. A verse in the book of
Revelation make it clear that a resurrection of this kind
must take place. ‘Behold, He cometh with clouds [this
is unquestionably the second advent]; and every eye
shall see Him [of the nations then living on the earth],
and they also which pierced Him [those who took an

active part in the terrible work of His crucifixion];
and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of
Him.’ Rev. 1:7. Those who crucified the Lord, would,
unless there was an exception made in their cases, remain in their graves until the end of the thousand years
and come up in the general assembly of the wicked at
that time.
“But here it is stated that they behold the Lord at
His second advent. There must, therefore, be a special resurrection for that purpose.
“It is certainly most appropriate that some who
were eminent in holiness, who labored and suffered
for their hope of a coming Saviour, but died without
seeing Him, should be raised a little before, to witness
the scenes attending His glorious epiphany; as, in like
manner, a goodly company came out of their graves at
His resurrection to behold His risen glory (Matt. 27:52,
53), and to escort Him in triumph to the right hand of
the throne of the Majesty on high (Eph. 4: 8, margin).
There will be also some, eminent in wickedness, who
have done most to reproach the name of Christ and
injure His cause, especially those who caused His cruel
death upon the cross, and mocked and derided Him in
His dying agonies, who will be raised, as part of their
judicial punishment, to behold His return in the clouds
of heaven, a celestial victor, in great majesty and
splendor endurable to them.” Smith, DR, 305-308.
“And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto
me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labours; and their works do follow
them.” Rev. 14:13.
“This verse does not refer to the general resurrection of the righteous at the second advent, but to a special resurrection at the voice of God under the outpouring of the seventh vial (Revelation 16:17; Joel
3:16). God’s people are delivered by the voice of God.
The Holy Ghost is poured upon the living saints, glorifying them before their enemies. (See Early Writings,
pp.15,285,286). Those who have died in the faith of
the third angel’s message are raised as glorified saints
to hear God’s covenant of peace with His people.
Those also who led out in the crucifixion of Jesus will
be resurrected to see Him come in glory. (See Revelation 1:7; The Great Controversy, p.637.)” Hiddekel,
91.
Special Resurrection Occurs at Voice of God.—
“The special resurrection takes place at the Voice
of God in the 7th plague because there is life in God’s
voice just as there is life in the voice of Jesus Christ.
“For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him
all things that himself doeth: and he will shew him
greater works than these, that ye may marvel. 21 For
as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth
them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will.
…25 Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is com-

515

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ing, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. 26 For
as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to
the Son to have life in himself.” John 5:20,21,25,26.
“ ‘The words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit and they are life.’ John 6:63. Just as there is
life in the voice of Jesus, there is life in the voice of
God the Father. When those who have died in the
blessing of Christ during the Third Angel’s Message
hear the Voice of God at the 7th plague, they will be
resurrected. The Son seeing this, will come in the
clouds soon thereafter to raise up the rest of the righteous dead.” PJ.

pierced Him’ (Rev. 1:7), those that mocked and derided Christ’s dying agonies, and the most violent
opposers of His truth and His people, are raised to
behold Him in His glory and to see the honor placed
upon the loyal and obedient.” Great Controversy, 637.
“Who are the unrighteous persons who are raised,
along with the righteous, in Daniel 12:1-2? We get a
hint from the answer Jesus returned to the high priest
when the high priest put Him on oath at His trial and
required Him to state whether or not He was the Son of
God. In His answer Jesus directed the high priest’s
attention to the Son of man in Daniel 7 and added,
‘Hereafter you will see the Son of man …coming on
the clouds of heaven.’ Matthew 26:64.” Maxwell,
1GC, 290.

“In the midst of the angry heavens is one clear
space of indescribable glory, whence comes the voice
of God like the sound of many waters, saying: ‘It is
done.’ Revelation 16:17.
“That voice shakes the heavens and the earth.
There is a mighty earthquake, ‘such as was not
since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.’ Verses 17, 18. The firmament
appears to open and shut. The glory from the throne of
God seems flashing through. The mountains shake like
a reed in the wind, and ragged rocks are scattered on
every side. There is a roar as of a coming tempest.
The sea is lashed into fury. There is heard the shriek of
a hurricane like the voice of demons upon a mission of
destruction. The whole earth heaves and swells like the
waves of the sea. Its surface is breaking up. Its very
foundations seem to be giving way. Mountain chains
are sinking. Inhabited islands disappear. The seaports
that have become like Sodom for wickedness are swallowed up by the angry waters. …Prison walls are rent
asunder, and God’s people, who have been held in
bondage for their faith, are set free.
“Graves are opened, and ‘many of them
that sleep in the dust of the earth. . . awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt.’ Daniel 12:2.” Great Controversy, 636,637.

“What is here said supposed by some to furnish
good evidence of the eternal conscious suffering of the
wicked, because those of this character who are spoken
of come forth to shame and everlasting contempt.
How can they forever suffer shame and contempt, unless they are forever conscious? It has already been
stated that shame implies their consciousness, but it
will be noticed that this is not said to be everlasting.
This qualifying word is not inserted until we come to
the contempt, which is an emotion felt by others
toward the guilty, and does not render necessary the
consciousness of those against whom it is directed.
Shame for their wickedness and corruption will burn
into their very souls as long as they are conscious.
When they pass away, consumed for their iniquities,
their loathsome characters and guilty deeds excite only
contempt on the part of all the righteous, as long as
they hold them in remembrance. The text therefore
furnishes no proof of the eternal suffering of the wicked.” Smith, DR, 308.

DANIEL 12:3
And they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and they that
turn many to righteousness as the stars for
ever and ever.

Some to Everlasting Life.—
And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me,
Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord
from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may
rest from their labours; and their works do follow
them.” Revelation 14:13.

They That be Wise Shall Shine.—
“Daniel 12:3 is Hebrew poetry. The ‘wise’ in the
first line, therefore, are the same as ‘those who turn
many to righteousness’ in the third line. Daniel 12:10
also speaks of the wise. It defines them as those who
‘understand,’ that is, as the people who understand the
practical meaning of the prophecies of the book of
Daniel. In a reverse parallelism known as a chiasm,
the same verse identifies the ‘wise’ as those who ‘purify themselves’ and ‘make themselves white’ and become ‘refined.’ So the wise of Daniel 12—those who
will shine like the stars forever and ever—are people
who study the prophecies of Daniel till they under-

“Graves are opened, and ‘many of them that sleep
in the dust of the earth... awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.’
Daniel 12:2. All who have died in the faith of the
third angel’s message come forth from the tomb
glorified, to hear God’s covenant of peace with
those who have kept His law.” Great Controversy,
637.
Some to Shame and Everlasting Contempt.—
“[Daniel 12:2 quoted.]
‘They also which

516

DANIEL 12
stand them, who share their understanding with others,
and who become pure.” Maxwell, 1GC, 295.

music of the spheres. The immensity of space is filled
with universes, and all revolve about the throne of
God; all are held in their orbits by rays of power from
his throne of life; each shines with a light reflected
from Him who is the fountain of life; each is guided in
its path by the eye of him who sits on the throne.
“This is the type of God’s order for his church
upon earth. The perfect order of the heavenly bodies is
a pattern for family and church organization. Each
little company should shine as a star. God looks
with pleasure upon the clusters of worshipers as they
move in perfect order, each bending to the influence of
the higher powers. As it is the power of God in the
sun which holds the earth in its course, so his power, working through the highest organization on
earth, controls those of smaller power. In the family, children should obey parents, and parents should
obey God, even as the earth follows the sun, and the
sun circles about its center–God’s throne.
“The perfection of this system will characterize
the last church, which will have developed the character which was looked for in ancient Israel. God’s people are a peculiar people, and their peculiarities will
live in the virtues of Christ, which they reflect; this fits
them to become a royal priesthood. To Daniel the angel said, ‘They that be teachers [margin] shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament.’ And so the prophet
had the privilege of seeing a nation or company of
teachers among the saved, who carried forward the
work which his own race might have done. As Christ
was a teacher, who spoke with authority which none
could resist, so the remnant church will be teachers by
virtue of the Christ life within them.
“It was a beautiful picture, that last scene which
fell upon the eyes of Daniel. So many times disappointment had been the outcome when the beginning
looked so promising, but in the end it is a glorious triumph. Those who are taken from the depths of sin will
shine as the stars in the firmament.” Haskell, SDP,
258,259.

“41 The Son of man shall send forth his angels,
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity; 42 And shall cast
them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth. 43 Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who
hath ears to hear, let him hear.” Matthew 13:41-43.
A Glorious Inheritance.—
“The margin reads ‘teachers’ in the place of
‘wise.’ ‘They that be teachers shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament.’ That is, of course, those
who teach the truth, and lead others to a knowledge of
it just previous to the time when the events recorded in
the foregoing verse are to be fulfilled. As the world
estimates loss and profit, it costs something to be
teachers of truth in these days. It costs reputation,
ease, comfort, and often property. It involves labors,
crosses, sacrifices, loss of friendship, ridicule, and not
infrequently, persecution.
“The question is often asked, How can you afford
to keep the true Sabbath, and perhaps lose a situation,
reduce your income, or even hazard your means of
support? Oh, what shortsightedness, to make obedience to what God requires a matter of pecuniary consideration! How unlike is this to the noble martyrs
who loved not their lives unto death! When God
commands, we cannot afford to disobey. If we are
asked, How can you afford to keep the Sabbath, and do
other duties involved in rendering obedience to the
truth? we have only to ask in reply, How can you afford not to do them?
“In the coming day, when those who have sought
to save their lives shall lose them, and those who have
been willing to hazard all for the sake of the truth and
its divine Lord, shall receive the glorious reward promised in the text, and be raised up to shine as the firmament, and as the imperishable stars forever and ever, it
will then be seen who have been wise, and who, on
the contrary, have made the choice of blindness and
folly. The wicked and worldly now look upon Christians as fools and madmen, and congratulate themselves upon their superior shrewdness in shunning what
they call their folly, and avoiding their losses. We
need make no response, for those who now render this
decision will soon themselves reverse it, and that with
terrible though unavailing earnestness.” Smith, DR,
309.

“The converted soul lives in Christ. His darkness passes away, and a new and heavenly light
shines into his soul. ‘He that winneth souls is wise.’
‘And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness
of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars forever and ever.’ What is
done through the co-operation of men with God is a
work that shall never perish, but endure through the
eternal ages. He that makes God his wisdom, that
grows up into the full stature of a man in Christ Jesus,
will stand before kings, before the so-called great men
of the world, and show forth the praises of Him who
hath called him out of darkness into His marvelous
light. Science and literature cannot bring into the
darkened mind of men the light which the glorious
gospel of the Son of God can bring. The Son of God
alone can do the great work of illuminating the soul.
No wonder Paul exclaims, ‘For I am not ashamed of

“Then it is that Daniel sees the language of the
heavens interpreted. The universe is composed of suns,
many of them mightier than our own, and each sun is
the center of a planetary system, and each planet is
accompanied by its satellites, a vast circle within a circle, moving in perfect order, performing its revolution
in its allotted time, making, to the ear of Jehovah, the

517

GEMS FROM DANIEL
the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believeth.’”
R&H,
12/15/1891.

O daughter of Zion, ‘Arise, shine; for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.’”
4BC, 1153.

“The messengers should watch for souls as they
that must give account. Theirs must be a life of toil and
anguish of spirit, while the weight of the precious but
often-wounded cause of Christ rests upon them. They
will have to lay aside worldly interests and comforts
and make it their first object to do all in their power
to advance the cause of present truth and save perishing souls.
“They will also have a rich reward. In their
crowns of rejoicing those who are rescued by them
and finally saved will shine as stars forever and ever. And to all eternity they will enjoy the satisfaction
of having done what they could in presenting the truth
in its purity and beauty, so that souls fell in love with
it, were sanctified through it, and availed themselves of
the inestimable privilege of being made rich, and being
washed in the blood of the Lamb and redeemed unto
God.” Early Writings, 61.

“The reward, the glories of heaven, bestowed upon the overcomers, will be proportionate to the degree
in which they have represented the character of Christ
to the world. ‘He which soweth sparingly shall reap
also sparingly.’ Thank God that it is our privilege to
sow on earth the seed that will be harvested in eternity.
The crown of life will be bright or dim, will glitter
with many stars, or be lighted by few gems, in accordance with our own course of action.
“Day by day we may be laying up a good foundation against the time to come. By self-denial, by the
exercise of the missionary spirit, by crowding all the
good works possible into our life, by seeking so to represent Christ in character that we shall win many souls
to the truth, we shall have respect unto the recompense
of reward. It rests with us to walk in the light, to make
the most of every opportunity and privilege, to grow in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and so we shall work the works of Christ, and ensure
for ourselves treasure in the heavens.” R&H,
1/29/1895.

“We should feel the responsibilities that rest upon
us as Christians, and labor as though we realized the
value of souls, remembering that one soul saved in the
kingdom of God is worth more than ten thousand
worlds like this.” R&H, 4/1/1880.

“The worth of a soul cannot be fully estimated by
finite minds. How gratefully will the ransomed and
glorified ones remember those who were instrumental
in their salvation! No one will then regret his selfdenying efforts and persevering labors, his patience,
forbearance, and earnest heart yearnings for souls that
might have been lost had he neglected his duty or become weary in well-doing. …How much more precious is heaven to those who have been faithful in
the work of saving souls! [Daniel 12:3 quoted].” 5
Testimonies, 620,621.

“The young have a wide sphere of usefulness, but
they see it not. Oh, that they would now exert their
powers of mind in seeking ways to approach perishing
sinners, that they might make known to them the path
of holiness, and by prayer and entreaty win even one
soul to Christ! What a noble enterprise! One soul to
praise God through eternity! One soul to enjoy happiness and everlasting life! One gem in their crown to
shine as a star for ever and ever! But even more than
one can be brought to turn from error to truth, from sin
to holiness. Says the Lord by the prophet: ‘And they
that turn many to righteousness [shall shine] as the
stars for ever and ever.’ Then those who engage with
Christ and angels in the work of saving perishing
souls are richly rewarded in the kingdom of heaven.” 1 Testimonies, 512.

“Some will have brighter crowns than others, but
there will be no jealous thoughts in any heart among
the redeemed. Each one will be perfectly satisfied, for
all will be rewarded according to their work; for ‘they
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the
stars forever and ever.’ Everyone will know that
those who have been instrumental in winning souls
to Jesus have engaged in the greatest work that ever
employed the powers of man.” Signs, 2/10/1888.

“By living a life of devotion and self-sacrifice in
doing good to others, you might have been adding
stars and gems to the crown that you will wear in
heaven, and laying up unfading, eternal treasures.”
4BC, 1174

“Brethren and sisters, there are souls to save.
And oh, when I think of those words in Daniel, I find
myself waking up in the night and repeating them
over and over, ‘And they that be wise shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn
many to righteousness as the stars forever and ever’
(Daniel 12:3). Look at the sun and the stars marshalled in the heavens and known by their names.
The Lord says, ‘They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars forever and ever.’ Well,

“Every shining star which God has placed in the
heavens obeys His mandate, and gives its distinctive
measure of light to make beautiful the heavens at night;
so let every converted soul show the measure of
light committed to him; and as it shines forth the
light will increase and grow brighter. Give out your
light,... pour forth your beams mirrored from heaven.

518

DANIEL 12
now I want to know if you will fold your hands and
take things easy? Will you sit down in the devil’s easy
chair, deceived, and say, ‘I have always had an easy
time and will take things easy now’?” 9MR, 258.

“The ‘words’ and ‘book’ here spoken of doubtless
refer to the things which had been revealed to Daniel in
this prophecy. These things were to be shut up and
sealed until the time of the end; that is, they were not to
be specially studied, or to any great extent understood,
until that time. The time of the end, as has already
been shown, began in 1798. As the book was closed
up and sealed to that time, the plain inference is
that at that time, or from that point, the book would
be unsealed. People would be better able to understand it, and would have their attention specially called
to this part of the inspired word. Of what has been
done on the subject of prophecy since that time, it is
unnecessary to remind the reader. The prophecies,
especially Daniel’s prophecy, have been under examination by all students of the word wherever civilization
has spread abroad its light upon the earth.” Smith, DR,
313.

“The face of the ‘wise’ is very similar to the glorified face of Jesus, whose ‘countenance was as the sun
shineth in his strength.’ Rev. 1:16. John saw the same
thing when he said in 1 John 3:2: ‘We know that,
when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we
shall see Him as He is.’” PJ.
They that Turn Many to Righteousness.—
“And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with
Levi, saith the LORD of hosts. 5 My covenant was
with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him for
the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before
my name.
“The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity
was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace
and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity.”
Malachi 2:4-6.

“Honored by men with the responsibilities of state
and with the secrets of kingdoms bearing universal
sway, Daniel was honored by God as His ambassador,
and was given many revelations of the mysteries of
ages to come. His wonderful prophecies, as recorded
by him in chapters 7 to 12 of the book bearing his
name, were not fully understood even by the prophet
himself; but before his life labors closed, he was given
the blessed assurance that ‘at the end of the days’—in
the closing period of this world’s history—he would
again be permitted to stand in his lot and place. It was
not given him to understand all that God had revealed
of the divine purpose. ‘Shut up the words, and seal the
book,’ he was directed concerning his prophetic writings; these were to be sealed ‘even to the time of the
end.’ ‘Go thy way, Daniel,’ the angel once more directed the faithful messenger of Jehovah; ‘for the
words are closed up and sealed till the time of the
end.... Go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt
rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.’ Daniel
12:4,9,13.
“As we near the close of this world’s history, the
prophecies recorded by Daniel demand our special attention, as they relate to the very time in which we are
living. With them should be linked the teachings of the
last book of the New Testament Scriptures. Satan has
led many to believe that the prophetic portions of the
writings of Daniel and of John the revelator cannot be
understood. But the promise is plain that special
blessing will accompany the study of these prophecies. ‘The wise shall understand’ (verse 10), was
spoken of the visions of Daniel that were to be unsealed in the latter days; and of the revelation that
Christ gave to His servant John for the guidance of
God’s people all through the centuries, the promise is,
‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words
of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein.’ Rev. 1:3.” Prophets & Kings, 547,548.

As the Stars Forever and Ever.—
“Those who are beloved of heaven because of
their righteousness and missionary zeal, are the only
ones who truly shine in this dark world, and will be
brilliant lights in the redeemed state. Jesus said: ‘Then
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father.’ Matt. 13:43. The stars or suns
are the most brilliant and permanent of all of God’s
created works and each one shines with a glory of its
own. See 1 Cor. 15:41. To these shining orbs God
likens the truly wise who are teachers of righteousness.” Bunch, BOD, 198,199.

DANIEL 12:4
But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words,
and seal the book, even to the time of the
end: many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased.
Book of Daniel Sealed.—
“The prophecies present a succession of events
leading down to the opening of the judgment. This is
especially true of the book of Daniel. But that part of
his prophecy which related to the last days, Daniel
was bidden to close up and seal ‘to the time of the
end.’ Not till we reach this time could a message concerning the judgment be proclaimed, based on the fulfillment of these prophecies. But at the time of the
end, says the prophet, ‘many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased.’ Daniel 12:4.”
Great Controversy, 356.

At the Time of the End, Many Shall Run to and Fro,

519

GEMS FROM DANIEL
barrier. But mere scientific knowledge has not made
the earth safer or the race happier. The knowledge
promised in Daniel 12:4 will enable God’s people to
break the sin barrier. This will be a step in human
experience that will dwarf every other human achievement. The people of God will be ‘men wondered
at.’—Zechariah 3:8. God says:
“ ‘Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand
of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy
God.’ ‘I will get them praise and fame in every land
where they have been put to shame.’ ‘And it shall be
to Me a name of joy, a praise and an honor before all
the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good
that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for
all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure
unto it.’—Isaiah 62:3; Zephaniah 3:19; Jeremiah 33:9.”
Hiddekel, 93,94.

and Knowledge Shall Be Increased.—
“The increase of Scriptural knowledge is marked
by the distribution of over one billion Bibles, testaments or portions of testaments beginning at the turn of
the nineteenth century and continuing into the twentieth century. The close of 1798 saw the establishment
of the London Religious Tract Society (1799). The
British And Foreign Bible Society was organized in
1804, the American Bible Society in 1816, and the
American Tract Society in 1825. Today, parts of the
Bible have been translated in over 1500 languages and
roughly 2.5 billion copies have been printed in the last
200 years.
“Before the ‘time of the end,’ Bibles in manuscript or in print, counting every version in every
land, were numbered as not many more than four
million. The various languages in which these four
million were written numbered about fifty.…
“Only as the Bible became available to the
masses could the prophetic prediction find fulfillment, ‘many shall run to and fro [in the Bible], and
knowledge [of Daniel’s prophecies] shall increase.’
This fulfillment, culminating in 1798, establishes the
beginning of the ‘time of the end.’
“The increased availability of the Bible brought in
its train worldwide interest in Bible prophecy and ‘increased’ knowledge of certain portions of prophecy
previously ‘sealed’ to human understanding.” Light
Bearers, UOD-14.

“That part of his prophecy which related to the
last days, Daniel was bidden to close up and seal ‘to
the time of the end.’ Not till we reach this time could
a message concerning the judgment be proclaimed,
based on the fulfillment of these prophecies. But at
the time of the end, says the prophet, ‘many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.’ Daniel
12:4.” Great Controversy, 356.
“By the increase of knowledge a people is to be
prepared to stand in the latter days.” 2 Selected
Messages, 105.

“This is the only book of the Bible that was ever
sealed and that only for a specified time. It was to be
sealed ‘to the time of the end’ which indicates that it
would at that time be unsealed, studied and understood.
At that time ‘many’ would study it, search or scrutinize its revelations, or ‘run to and fro’ through its
visions and their interpretations; and as a result, the
knowledge of God’s purposes as revealed in its
prophecies would be increased.
“…Fortunately the beginning of ‘the time of the
end’ is definitely located by the angel Gabriel in his
first interpretation of the vision of which chapters 1012 are a detailed explanation. See Daniel 8:14,17.
This language cannot be misunderstood. The 2300
prophetic days, constituting the greatest time prophecy
in the Bible, reach to and thus point out the beginning
of ‘the time of the end.’” Bunch, BOD, 199.

“’But thou, Daniel, shut up the words, and seal
the book, even to the time of the end.’ At that time
‘many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased.’ The portion of time known as ‘the time of
the end’ is as distinctly marked as any other prophetic
period. At its beginning the hand of oppression was
removed from the law of God, which had been
changed, and which, in the language of Revelation,
had prophesied clothed in sackcloth. At the same
time the persecution of the saints had ended. Civil
and religious liberty were standing full-fledged before
the world, and Gabriel, seeing the freedom granted to
man, explained the effects by saying, ‘Many shall run
to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.’”
Haskell, SDP, 259,260.
“In the Word of God is ‘spirit and life.’ And
‘Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.’ (John
6:63; 1 Cor. 3:17). When Daniel is opened up, a spring
of spiritual knowledge is opened. Its liberating effects
are seen in every aspect of life.” PJ.

“ ‘Run to and fro’ is a Hebrew expression signifying a diligent searching back and forth in the prophecies. At the appointed time ‘knowledge’ of the prophecies of Daniel would ‘be increased.’ In Revelation
10 is found the record of Christ unsealing the little
book of Daniel to the understanding of His people in
the last days.
“Paralleling the increased knowledge of the prophetic Word, an astonishing progress in scientific
knowledge has marked the present age. In this generation man has broken the sound barrier and the space

“It was Gabriel, the angel next in rank to the
Son of God, who came with the divine message to
Daniel. …As the message of Christ’s first advent announced the kingdom of His grace, so the message of
His second advent announces the kingdom of His glory. And the second message, like the first, is based on

520

DANIEL 12
the prophecies. The words of the angel to Daniel
relating to the last days were to be understood in
the time of the end. At that time, ‘many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.’ ‘The
wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked
shall understand; but the wise shall understand.’
Daniel 12:4, 10. The Saviour Himself has given signs
of His coming, and He says, ‘When ye see these things
come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh
at hand.’ ‘And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.’ ‘Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
the Son of man.’ Luke 21:31, 34, 36.
“We have reached the period foretold in these
scriptures. The time of the end is come, the visions
of the prophets are unsealed, and their solemn warnings
point us to our Lord’s coming in glory as near at hand.”
Desire of Ages, 234,235.

“The book that was sealed was not the book of
Revelation, but that portion of the prophecy of Daniel which related to the last days. The Scripture says,
‘But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the
book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased’ (Dan. 12:4).
When the book was opened, the proclamation was
made, ‘Time shall be no longer.’ (See Rev. 10:6.)
The book of Daniel is now unsealed, and the revelation
made by Christ to John is to come to all the inhabitants
of the earth. By the increase of knowledge a people
is to be prepared to stand in the latter days.” 2 Selected Messages, 105.
“The knowledge current in the world may be acquired; for all men are God’s property, and are worked
by God to fulfill His will in certain lines, even when
they refuse the man Christ Jesus as their Saviour. The
way in which God uses men is not always discerned,
but He does use them. God entrusts men with talents
and inventive genius, in order that His great work in
our world may be accomplished. The inventions of
human minds are supposed to spring from humanity, but God is behind all. He has caused that the
means of rapid traveling shall have been invented,
for the great day of His preparation.” Fundamentals
of Education, 409.

“The Bible was designed to be a guide to all who
wish to become acquainted with the will of their Maker. God gave to men the sure word of prophecy; angels
and even Christ Himself came to make known to Daniel and John the things that must shortly come to pass.
Those important matters that concern our salvation
were not left involved in mystery. They were not revealed in such a way as to perplex and mislead the
honest seeker after truth. Said the Lord by the prophet
Habakkuk: ‘Write the vision, and make it plain,... that
he may run that readeth it.’ Habakkuk 2:2. The word
of God is plain to all who study it with a prayerful
heart. Every truly honest soul will come to the light of
truth. ‘Light is sown for the righteous.’ Psalm 97:11.
And no church can advance in holiness unless its
members are earnestly seeking for truth as for hid
treasure.” Great Controversy, 521,522.

Knowledge Increases as the Bible is Exalted.—
“Concerning the two witnesses the prophet declares further: ‘And they heard a great voice from
heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they
ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies
beheld them.’ Revelation 11:12. Since France made
war upon God’s two witnesses, they have been honored
as never before. In 1804 the British and Foreign
Bible Society was organized. This was followed by
similar organizations, with numerous branches, upon
the continent of Europe. In 1816 the American Bible
Society was founded. When the British Society was
formed, the Bible had been printed and circulated in
fifty tongues. It has since been translated into many
hundreds of languages and dialects.
“For the fifty years preceding 1792, little attention was given to the work of foreign missions. No
new societies were formed, and there were but few
churches that made any effort for the spread of Christianity in heathen lands. But toward the close of the
eighteenth century a great change took place. Men
became dissatisfied with the results of rationalism and
realized the necessity of divine revelation and experimental religion. From this time the work of foreign
missions attained an unprecedented growth.
“The improvements in printing have given an
impetus to the work of circulating the Bible. The
increased facilities for communication between different countries, the breaking down of ancient barriers of
prejudice and national exclusiveness, and the loss of
secular power by the pontiff of Rome have opened the

“The end of all things is at hand. God is moving
upon every mind that is open to receive the impressions
of His Holy Spirit. He is sending our messengers that
they may give the warning in every locality. God is
testing the devotion of His churches and their willingness to render obedience to the Spirit’s guidance.
Knowledge is to be increased. The messengers of
Heaven are to be seen running to and fro, seeking in
every possible way to warn the people of the coming
judgments and presenting the glad tidings of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
R&H,
7/16/1895.
“The prediction of Daniel, ‘Many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased’ (Daniel 12:4), is
to be fulfilled in our giving of the warning message;
many are to be enlightened regarding the sure word
of prophecy.” Upward Look, 37.

521

GEMS FROM DANIEL
way for the entrance of the word of God. For some
years the Bible has been sold without restraint in the
streets of Rome, and it has now been carried to every
part of the habitable globe.
“The infidel Voltaire once boastingly said: ‘I am
weary of hearing people repeat that twelve men established the Christian religion. I will prove that one man
may suffice to overthrow it.’ Generations have passed
since his death. Millions have joined in the war upon
the Bible. But it is so far from being destroyed, that
where there were a hundred in Voltaire’s time,
there are now ten thousand, yes, a hundred thousand copies of the book of God. In the words of an
early Reformer concerning the Christian church, ‘The
Bible is an anvil that has worn out many hammers.’
Saith the Lord: ‘No weapon that is formed against
thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise
against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.’ Isaiah 54:17.
“ ‘The word of our God shall stand forever.’
‘All His commandments are sure. They stand fast
for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness.’ Isaiah 40:8; Psalm 111:7, 8. Whatever is
built upon the authority of man will be overthrown; but
that which is founded upon the rock of God’s immutable word shall stand forever.” Great Controversy, 287,288.

atoning blood of Christ, or an educational system
which exalts reason above faith, place themselves on
the very verge of a precipice, and the next step will
produce a repetition of the Terrors of France.” Haskell,
SSP, 202,203.

DANIEL 12:5,6
Then I Daniel looked, and, behold,
there stood other two, the one on this side
of the bank of the river, and the other on
that side of the bank of the river.
And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river,
How long shall it be to the end of these
wonders?
Daniel 12:5-13 Explains Vision of Dan. 11:2-12:4.—
“Current re-interpretations of the passage in Daniel 12:5-13 as a new vision that contains time prophecies for the future. This view ignores the basic structure of Daniel’s visions in which explanations always
follow the visions themselves.
“a. Daniel 2: vision (verses 31-35), explanation
(verses 36-46).
“b. Daniel 7: vision (verses 1-14), explanation
(verses 15-27).
“c. Daniel 8, 9: vision (Dan. 8:1-12), explanation
(verses 12-26; Dan. 9:24-27).
“d. Daniel 10-12: vision (Dan. 11:2-12:4), explanation (Daniel 12:5-13).
“While it is true that the vision in Daniel 11:212:4 is itself an explanation of the vision in Daniel 8,
we must not overlook the fact that in Daniel 7,8, and
10-12 the time prophecies are always situated within
the explanation section, not in the visions themselves.
In Daniel 7 the vision ends in verse 14, and the time
prophecy appears in verse 25. Daniel 8 has the vision
conclude in verse 12 and presents the time prophecy in
verse 14. Finally, in Daniel 10-12 the vision ends in
Daniel 12:4, and the time prophecies follow in verse 513. To interpret Daniel 12:5-13 as a new vision will
destroy the literary structure.” Pfandl, DTSOB, 112.

“The French Revolution of 1789 acted as a sort of
spark. Its antireligious attitude rebounded and encouraged the unfolding of a great awakening in the heart of
Christendom. In different countries, yet at the same
time, Bible students concluded that humanity had
reached the last phase of history and that the Second
Coming was near. To increase the dissemination of the
Scriptures, numerous Bible societies were formed.
…At the beginning of the nineteenth century a host
of missionaries carried the gospel to the ends of the
earth. One of the first, William Carey left for India in
1793. Robert Morrison went to China in 1807. Robert
Moffatt (1816) as well as David Livingstone (1841)
pioneered work in Africa. And hundreds of others followed in their footsteps.” Zurcher, COR, 53.
“Before all nations the Scriptures have since been
exalted. Those nations, which adhered most closely
to the truths developed in the withdrawal from Roman tyranny, have taken the lead in the work of
education, in invention, in judiciary matters, and in
all lines of progress. ...Millions of copies of the Word
have been printed. Its translation into hundreds of different languages has placed ignorance of the Scriptures
entirely out of the question.
“...The exaltation of the Scriptures is always
followed by a government which recognizes the
equal rights of all men, and by a religion which
grants the privilege to every man to worship according to the dictates of his own conscience. Men
who advocate a system of government that rejects the

Chapter

Vision

Explanation

Daniel 2
Daniel 7
Daniel 8, 9

Vss. 31-35
Vss. 1-14
Vss. 1-12

Vss. 36-46
Vss. 15-27
Vss. 12-26.

Time
Prophecy
none
Vs. 25
Vs. 14

Dan. 9:24-27

Dan. 9:24-27

Daniel
12:5-13

Daniel
12:7,11,12

Daniel 1012

11:2-12:4

There Stood Other Two. And One Said.—
“It is evident that Daniel’s whole attention had
been centered on the events which Gabriel, God’s historian, had related, and when the final triumph of truth

522

DANIEL 12
was given, it was shown that Christ himself was near
the prophet, and that angels of heaven were also listening to the record of events. So closely bound to
earth are these heavenly beings, and so strong are
the ties that unite their hearts and interests to man,
that when Gabriel ceased speaking, one angel called
to Christ, who was again seen on the waters of the
stream of time: ‘How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?’” Haskell, SDP, 262.

“Daniel likens the campaigns of the king of the
north to that of the overflowing of a mighty river—the
Euphrates (Daniel 11: 40, American Translation): ‘The
king of the north ... shall sweep through many lands
like an overwhelming flood.’ That ‘flood’ will again
surge ‘into the glorious land’ (v. 41)—where God’s
people dwell—and, as in the time of the Assyrians,
‘the waters of the river [the Euphrates] strong and
many... shall pass through Judah... even to the neck’
(Isaiah 8: 7, 8). As a man nearly drowned by the inundating flood, with his head only above the swirling
waters- so the city of Jerusalem, in the days of Hezekiah, seemed at the mercy of the invaders. But God intervened. The flooding waters were dried up. Thus
shall it be when the king of the north floods into the
anti-typical land of Israel and reaches to ‘the glorious
holy mountain.’
“The waters of the Babylonian ‘flood’—the
waters of the great river Euphrates—will flood the
land and threaten to engulf ‘the holy city’ (Daniel
11: 45; Rev. 11: 2). But the Lord Who gave Daniel
this prophecy ‘by the side of the great river.’ That Lord
Who stood ‘upon the waters of the river’ when He
made the solemn oath that He would end the persecution of His people (Daniel 12:5-7), will dry up the
waters of ‘the great river Euphrates’ (Rev. 16: 12).
The king of the north ‘shall come to his end, and
none shall help him’ (Daniel 11: 45).” Were,
KONAJ, 108,109.

“Daniel is permitted to hear one of the angels
conversing with Christ. They are just as anxious to
know about the time of the end as Daniel is. The
church on earth and the church in heaven constitute one
church. It is the body of Christ, and the angels realize
how much sorrow and humiliation the Saviour endures
on account of His defective ‘body.’ They long for the
sanctuary to be cleansed and for the whole church to be
eternally finished with the problem of sin. They weep
and sing with the saints below. Therefore they are vitally concerned about the final restoration. The prophecies of Daniel are ‘things the angels desire to look
into.’—1 Peter 1:12.” Hiddekel, 94.
“Thus we see that ‘the great river’ is not only
mentioned at the commencement of this prophecy
but is also brought in toward its close, where, for emphasis, it is mentioned four times, when dealing with
the king of the north coming to his end. Notice the
connection between the Lord standing upon the waters
of ‘the great river’ when taking the oath to comfort His
church concerning the time limit of Papal supremacy
(Daniel 12:5-7)—thus the conquests of the king of
the north are all under Christ’s supervision and
control. The prophecy declares that the king of the
north ‘shall sweep through many lands like an overwhelming flood’ (Daniel 11:40, The American Translation). Though the king of the north with all his hordes
shall sweep through ‘many countries’ and, entering
‘also into the glorious land’ of Israel, will threaten
to engulf Jerusalem with his gigantic tidal wave, the.
Lord will control that flood: in the final conflict, He
will deliver His people from seemingly imminent
death. The picture of a mighty angel on either side of
the river and with the Omnipotent Lord standing upon
the rushing waters surely indicates that they are under
Heavenly cognizance and control. Waters signify
people (Revelation 17: 15), and His standing upon
the waters denotes His dominion over all. ‘The Lord
sits upon the flood; yea, the Lord sits King for ever’
(Psalm 29: 10).” Were, KONAJ, 103,104.

How Long?—
“Then I heard one saint speaking, and another
saint said unto that certain saint which spake, How
long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice,
and the transgression of desolation, to give both the
sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?”
Daniel 8:13.
“And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How
long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?”
Revelation 6:10.
How Long Shall It Be to the End?—
“Daniel 12:5-13 is an epilogue to the preceding
vision and in a sense to the whole book. It is not a new
vision with a different topic, but an explanation of certain elements in the vision of chapter 11. This is evident from the question in Daniel 12:6: ‘How long shall
the fulfillment of these wonders be?’ The Hebrew
word pala’ for ‘wonders’ can be translated as ‘awesome events,’ or ‘something dreadful.’ Since verse 5
does not refer to any dreadful or awesome events, ‘these wonders’ can refer only to events in the vision in
Daniel 11. The word pala’, in fact, appears in Daniel 11:36, where it refers to the blasphemies spoken
by the king of the north. Daniel 8:24 employs it
when the verse speaks of the little horn destroying
‘fearfully [pala’].’

“Jesus showed that he had the power over the waters by His ability to curtail the papacy’s length of time
to persecute God’s people when He said: ‘And except
those days should be shortened, there should no flesh
be saved: but for the elect's sake those days shall be
shortened.’ Matthew 24:22.” PJ.

523

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“In Daniel 12:5-13 the prophet is still by the river
Tigris, where he was in 10:4. Now he overhears a conversation between two heavenly figures and eventually
joins in. This passage parallels Daniel 8:13, 14 in several ways. Both take place besides a river, both involve two anonymous heavenly beings, and both involve the question ‘How long?’
“‘How long shall be the fulfillment of these wonders?’ (12:6)—as indicated above, this refers back to
the vision in chapter 11. Gabriel had given Daniel this
long explanation to help him understand what will
happen to God’s people (10:14). Now two other
heavenly beings appear, and one of them, for Daniel’s information, asks Michael, the man clothed in
linen, a question.
“The answer in verse 7 defines the time of the end
as that which follows the 1260 years of papal supremacy and persecution. ‘In this answer Daniel was actually given the other half of the answer to the question asked by these same celestial attendants in 8:13.
That question concerned the trampling under foot by
the papal power of both sanctuary and host. In 8:14 the
answer given was that the sanctuary would be trampled
down till 1844. Now the answer is given that the
host will be trampled down till 1798. And in the ensuing enquiry by Daniel and answer by Michael will be
given the relationship between these two periods.’
[Ernest W. Marter, Daniel’s Philosophy of History, Bracknell, England: Newbold College, 1967, 115.]” Pfandl,
TPID12, 6.
HOW LONG?
Question
How Long Host
Trodden Under
Foot?
Answer
Daniel 12:7
1260 days
Date
1798

DANIEL 12:7
And I heard the man clothed in linen,
which was upon the waters of the river,
when he held up his right hand and his left
hand unto heaven, and sware by him that
liveth for ever that it shall be for a time,
times, and an half; and when he shall have
accomplished to scatter the power of the
holy people, all these things shall be finished.
Man Clothed in Linen.—
“Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were
girded with fine gold of Uphaz: His body also was
like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of
lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms
and his feet like in color to polished brass, and the
voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.”
Daniel 10:5,6.
“Christ was the One clothed in linen (Dan.
10:5,6), so the question was addressed to Him, and it is
He who will give the answer.” Thiele, OSID, 177.
“By comparing this passage with Revelation
10:1-6, it is found that Christ Himself is the Man
clothed in linen. In Daniel 12 He swore that the
book would be sealed up till the end of the 1260
days. (See Rev. 12:6,14.) In Revelation 10 He
swears that the book is unsealed.” Hiddekel, 95.

How Long Sanctuary
Trodden
Under Foot?
Daniel 8:14
2300 days
1844

“The description of Jesus being clothed in linen
points to His High Priestly ministry in the Most Holy
Place of the heavenly sanctuary [see Leviticus
16:4,32 below] and indicates that this message is
especially for those who live during the anti-typical
Day of Atonement.
“He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he
shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and
shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments;
therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put
them on. Leviticus 16:4.
“And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom
he shall consecrate to minister in the priest’s office in
his father’s stead, shall make the atonement, and shall
put on the linen clothes, even the holy garments.”
Leviticus 16:32.” PJ.

Why Prophetic Time Periods Are Given Here.—
“Daniel 12:5-13 is an epilogue, or an appendix, to
the prophecy of 11:2-12:4. What we have here is the
time calibration for the body of the prophecy that
has gone on before. This is a common way Daniel
treats this matter elsewhere in the book. For example,
the time element in Daniel 7 does not come until verse
25 even though the description of the vision is complete by verse 12, but the conversation between the two
angels regarding the time element of the 2,300 days
comes in verse 13,14. The same sort of thing takes
place here in Daniel 11 and 12. The body of the
prophecy is given in Daniel 11, but the times that go
with those events are given in Daniel 12. These
times are also connected by the events that they describe. They are not dating new events; they are dating events that have already been described in
Daniel 11.” Shea, DARG, 272.

“No less a personage than the Son of God appeared to Daniel. This description is similar to that
given by John when Christ was revealed to him upon
the Isle of Patmos. Our Lord now comes with another
heavenly messenger to teach Daniel what would take
place in the latter days. This knowledge was given to
Daniel and recorded by Inspiration for us upon whom

524

DANIEL 12
the ends of the world are come.” R&H, 2/8/1881.

of great tribulation for God’s people. ‘The mangled
forms of millions of martyrs cried to God for vengeance upon that apostate power.’ [Great Controversy,
59,60].
“And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How
long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge
and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth?’ Revelation 6:9,10.
“The answer to their question is the same as the
answer to Daniel’s question. Daniel 7:26 says that
soon after 1798, the termination of the 1260 days, the
judgment would begin, and God would work to first
judge, and then avenge their blood.” PJ

Held Up His Right and Left Hands to Heaven.—
“This was a solemn oath. See Ex. 6:8; Num.
14:30; Deut. 32:40; Ps. 106:26 ; Eze. 20:5,6; 36:7. In
Rev. 10 :5,6 a similar scene is given of Christ giving a
solemn oath with His right hand upraised to heaven.”
Thiele, OSID, 177.
“And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In
the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand
unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself
known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted
up mine hand unto them, saying, I am the LORD
your God; 6 In the day that I lifted up mine hand
unto them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt
into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with
milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands: 7
Then said I unto them, Cast ye away every man the
abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves
with the idols of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
Ezekiel 20:5-7.
“In Moses’ day, the Lord lifted up His hand and
swore to deliver His people from the Egyptians and
bring them to the Promised Land. In the time of Daniel, [a time when God’s people would be leaving Babylon to return to the earthly Promised Land to rebuild
Jerusalem], He lifted up His hands and swore that He
would in the future deliver His people from Papal oppression and bring them to the heavenly Promised
Land at the end of the 1260 days in 1798. When this
time occurred, Revelation 10 portrays Christ, the author and the finisher of our faith, lifting his hand up
and swearing again—He will now deliver His people
out of fallen spiritual Babylon and take them to the
heavenly Promised Land.” PJ from Unknown Source.

Scatter the Power of the Holy People.—
“This breaking of the power of the holy people refers to a time of persecution, and it must have been a
prolonged and intense time of persecution to have
worked this result. The only time of persecution that
is described in any detail in the preceding chapter is
the one given in verses 11:32-35. These three and a
half times must, therefore, be connected with that persecution.” Shea, DARG, 272.
“When Satan shall have accomplished his
work of ensnaring all who will subject themselves to
his deceptive influence, when he shall have finished
his work of scattering abroad, Christ will rise up and
bring deliverance to every one whose name is found
written in the book of life. Satan and his followers will
be destroyed. Then ‘they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.’ Upward
Look, 365.
“The question, ‘How long shall it be to the end of
these wonders?’ undoubtedly has reference to all that
has previously been mentioned, including the standing
up of Michael, the time of trouble, the deliverance of
God’s people, and the special resurrection of verse 2.
First a specific prophetic period is marked off, and
then an indefinite period follows before the conclusion of all these things is reached, just as we have it in
Daniel 8:13,14. When the question was asked, ‘How
long... the vision... to give both the sanctuary and the
host to be trodden underfoot?’ the answer mentioned a
definite period of 2300 days, followed by an indefinite period in the cleansing of the sanctuary. So in
the text before us, there is given the period of a time,
times, and a half, or 1260 years, and then an indefinite period for the continuance of scattering of the
power of the holy people, before the consummation.
“The 1260 years mark the period of papal supremacy. Why is this period here introduced?—
probably because this power is the one which does
more than any other in the world’s history toward scattering the power of the holy people, or oppressing the
church of God. But what shall we understand by the
expression, ‘When he shall have accomplished to scat-

1260 Days! The Answer to—How Long?—
“The great importance of the 1260 days is revealed in the fact that it is mentioned seven times.
What other prophetic period is so emphasized in sacred
scripture? Seven denotes perfection and no doubt indicates the special place this period has in the plan of
God.” Burnside, DPUF, 246.
“‘In this answer Daniel was actually given the
other half of the answer to the question asked by these
same celestial attendants in 8:13. That question concerned the trampling under foot by the papal power of
both sanctuary and host. In 8:14 the answer given was
that the sanctuary would be trampled down till
1844. Now the answer is given that the host will be
trampled down till 1798. And in the ensuing enquiry
by Daniel and answer by Michael will be given the
relationship between these two periods.’ [Ernest W.
Marter, Daniel’s Philosophy of History, Bracknell, England:
Newbold College, 1967, 115.]” Pfandl, TPID12, 6.

“The 1260 years of papal supremacy was a time

525

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ter the power of the holy people’? To whom does the
pronoun ‘he’ refer? According to the wording of this
scripture, the antecedent would at first seem to be ‘Him
that liveth forever,’ or Jehovah; but, as an eminent expositor of the prophecies judiciously remarks, in considering the pronouns of the Bible we are to interpret them according to the facts of the case, and
hence must frequently refer them to an antecedent understood, rather than to some noun which is expressed.
So here, the little horn, or man of sin, after being introduced by the particular mention of the time of his supremacy, 1260 years, may be the power referred to by
the pronoun ‘he.’ For 1260 years he had grievously
oppressed the church, or scattered its power. After his
supremacy is taken away, his disposition toward the
truth and its advocates still remains, his power is still
felt to a certain extent, and he continues his work of
oppression as far as he is able, until when?—Until
the last of the events brought to view in verse 1, the
deliverance of God’s people. When they are thus
delivered, persecuting powers are no longer able to
oppress them, their power is no longer scattered, the
end of the wonders prescribed in this great prophecy is
reached, and all its predictions are accomplished.”
Smith, DR, 320,321.

more Daniel found himself unable to comprehend just
what was involved.” Thiele, OSID, 178.
“Twice Daniel inquired, How long shall it be to
the end of time.” Testimonies to Ministers,115.
“In his introductory remarks, Daniel declares that
he ‘had understanding of the vision’—that is, he understood the meaning of the cleansing of the sanctuary and
the restoration of God’s people in the last days. But he
still did not understand the time element. Therefore
he inquired twice how long it would be to the time of
the end. Again he was told that the matter was sealed
until the time of the end.” Hiddekel, 95.
“By Daniel’s solicitude to understand fully all
that had been shown him, we are forcibly reminded of
Peter’s words where he speaks of the prophet’s inquiring and searching diligently to understand the
predictions concerning the sufferings of Christ and
the glory that should follow; as also of the fact ‘that
not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister.’ 1
Peter 1: 12. How little of what they wrote were some
of the prophets permitted to understand! But they did
not therefore refuse to write. If God required it, they
knew that in due time He would see that His people
derived from their writings all the benefit that He intended.” Smith, DR, 322.

All These Things Shall Be Finished.—
“When they [God’s people] are thus delivered,
persecuting powers are no longer able to oppress them,
their power is no longer scattered, the end of the
wonders prescribed in this great prophecy is reached,
and all its predictions are accomplished.” Smith, DR,
321.

The Book Sealed Until the Time of the End.—
“Daniel had heard this same period mentioned by
Gabriel [vs. 4], and now it was repeated by Christ,
but he says, ‘I heard, but I understood not.’ The
prophet’s heart was heavy as he followed the history of
nations to the end of time; and fearing he should still be
left in doubt as to the time for the fulfillment of all he
had seen, like Jacob who in his night of wrestling clung
to the angel, he pleaded, ‘O my Lord, what shall be
the end of these things?’ No request yet made by this
man of God had been passed by without an answer.
Neither was he now left in ignorance of the time. Gabriel answered the earnest inquiry in tender tones. Said
he: ‘Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are closed up
and sealed till the time of the end;’ and then it was
seen that ‘till the time of the end’ meant the same as
‘a time, times, and a half,’ at the end of which period the great persecution should cease.” Haskell,
SDP, 262,263.

DANIEL 12:8,9
And I heard, but I understood not:
then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the
end of these things?
And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for
the words are closed up and sealed till the
time of the end.
I Heard, But I Understood Not.—
“After the first revelation of the 1260-year period
of papal supremacy had been given to Daniel in
ch.7:25, he was exceedingly troubled (ch. 7:28). And
after the revelation of ch. 8:13,14, that it would be
2300 years before a tribunal would sit that would bring
justification to God and His people Daniel was again
exceedingly perturbed and did not understand the explanation that Gabriel had given him (ch. 8:27). The
distress that he was in is revealed by his earnest prayer
in ch. 9:3-19. Now in ch. 12:7 Christ Himself had reiterated the fact that there would be a period of 1260
years that God’s people would be repressed, and once

“Since 1798 the book of Daniel has been unsealed, knowledge of the prophecies has increased,
and many have proclaimed the solemn message of the
judgment near.” Great Controversy, 356.
“Daniel stood in his lot to bear his testimony
which was sealed until the time of the end, when the
first angel’s message should be proclaimed to our
world. These matters are of infinite importance in these last days; but while ‘many shall be purified, and

526

DANIEL 12
made white, and tried,’ ‘the wicked shall do wickedly:
and none of the wicked shall understand.’ How true
this is! Sin is the transgression of the law of God; and
those who will not accept the light in regard to the
law of God will not understand the proclamation of
the first, second, and third angel’s messages. The
book of Daniel is unsealed in the revelation to John,
and carries us forward to the last scenes of this earth’s
history. Those who eat the flesh and drink the blood of
the son of God will bring from the books of Daniel and
Revelation truth that is inspired by the Holy Spirit.
They will start into action forces that can not be repressed.” Testimonies to Ministers, 115,116.

refining and purifying the soul must go on until his
servants are so humbled, so dead to self, that when
called into active service, they may have an eye single to the glory of God. Then they will not move
rashly from impulse, and imperil the Lord’s cause because they are slaves to temptation and passion, because they follow their carnal desires; but they will
move from principle and in view of the glory of God.
The Lord brings his children over the same ground
again and again, increasing the pressure until perfect
humility fills the mind, and the character is transformed; then they are victorious over self, and in harmony with Christ and the Spirit of heaven.
“The purification of God’s people cannot be
accomplished without suffering. God permits the fire
of affliction to consume the dross, to separate the
worthless from the valuable, in order that the pure metal may shine forth. He passes us from one fire to another, testing our true worth. True grace is willing to
be tried. If we are loath to be searched by the Lord, our
condition is one of peril. God is the refiner and purifier
of souls. He places us in the heat of the furnace, that
the dross may be forever separated from the true gold
of Christian character. Jesus watches the test. He
knows just what fire of temptation and trial is needed
to purify the precious metal, in order that the radiance
of divine love may be reflected.
“…The trials of life are God’s workmen to remove the impurities, infirmities, and roughness from
our characters, and fit them for the society of pure,
heavenly angels in glory. Then as we pass through
trial, as the fire of affliction kindles upon us, shall we
not keep our eyes fixed upon the things that are unseen, on the eternal inheritance, the immortal life,
the far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory?
and while we do this, the fire will not consume us, but
only remove the dross, and we shall come forth seven
times purified, bearing the impress of the Divine.”
R&H, 4/10/1894.

The Book of Daniel Opened in Revelation 10.—
“The Being of Daniel 12:7 appears again in Revelation 10. Once more, with uplifted hand, He swears
by ‘him who lives for ever.’
“There are differences between Revelation 10 and
Daniel 12, as well as similarities. The same books
which in Daniel 12 is described as closed in Revelation 10 is seen to be open. And whereas the Being of
Daniel 12 states how long the book would be closed,
the Angel of Revelation 10 swears that there would be
‘no more delay.’ In other words, the Angel of Revelation 10 calls attention to the book of Daniel as finally
being opened for the last days.” Maxwell, 1GC, 291.
“The book of Daniel was opened and unsealed by
a world message calling attention to its prophecies.
This message and the opening of the only book of
Scripture ever sealed is pictured in Rev. 10:1-11. This
message was given to the world during the early part of
the 19th century.” Bunch, BOD, 2.

DANIEL 12:10
Many shall be purified, and made
white, and tried; but the wicked shall do
wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.

“God’s love for His church is infinite. His care
over His heritage is unceasing. He suffers no affliction
to come upon the church but such as is essential for her
purification, her present and eternal good. He will purify His church even as He purified the temple at the
beginning and close of His ministry on earth. All that
He brings upon the church in test and trial comes that
His people may gain deeper piety and more strength to
carry the triumphs of the cross to all parts of the
world.” 9Testimonies, 228.

Many Shall Be Purified, Made White, Tried.—
“Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know
that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this
hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.” 1
John 3:2,3.

“Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for
when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life,
which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.”
James 1:12.

“A refining, purifying process is going on among
the people of God, and the Lord of hosts has set his
hand to this work. This process is most trying to the
soul, but it is necessary in order that defilement may
be removed. Trials are essential in order that we
may be brought close to our heavenly Father, in
submission to his will, that we may offer unto the
Lord an offering in righteousness. God’s work of

“ ‘If any man will come after Me,’ said Christ,
‘let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow
Me.’ Will the convicted man take the path of obedi-

527

GEMS FROM DANIEL
ence to God’s commandments? Will he, with the
whole heart, with undivided purpose, seek after that
life which is eternal? If so, he will obtain the riches
that are imperishable, a life that measures with the life
of God. All the heavenly universe is looking on to see
which path he will take. Is it the way that is narrow? is
it the strait gate that he is aiming to enter? Then he has
taken the way of the cross, the path that leads to heaven. This decision will cut directly across his human
inclination, his selfish, worldly considerations, his
natural bias of character; but it will place him
among the company whom Daniel saw in vision, those
who are purified, made white, and tried.” Signs,
11/3/1898

wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand; but
the wise shall understand.’” Signs, 2/22/1899.
“We are living in the time of the end, a time
crowded with events in process of fulfillment, all working to bring about that great day when Christ shall be
revealed in the clouds of heaven with power and great
glory. The last years of probation are fast closing. The
signs of the times—the wars and rumors of wars, the
strikes, murders, robberies, and accidents—tell us that
the end of all things is at hand. Who can doubt the
truth of the prophet’s words. ‘The wicked shall do
wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand’?
Many of the inhabitants of the world have given
themselves into Satan's control. They co-operate
with him, helping him to carry out his plans against
the government of God. Under his guidance, men
have lost their horror of bloodshed and murder.”
R&H, 5/13/1902.

“The phraseology of verse 10 seems at first sight
to be rather peculiar: ‘Many shall be purified, and
made white, and tried.’ How, it may be asked, can they
be made white and then tried (as the language would
seem to imply), when it is by being tried that they are
purified and made white? The language doubtless describes a process which is many times repeated in the
experience of those, who, during this time, are being
made ready for the coming and kingdom of the Lord.
“They are purified and made white, as compared
with their former condition. Then they are again tried.
Greater tests are brought to bear upon them. If they
endure these, the work of purification is thus carried on
to a still greater extent until they attain to a purer character. After reaching this state, they are tried again,
and further purified and made white. Thus the process
goes on until characters are developed which will stand
the test of the day of judgment and a spiritual condition
is reached which needs no further trial.” Smith, DR,
321,322.

None of the Wicked Shall Understand.—
“Men professing to be ministers of God, raise
their voices against the investigation of prophecy, and
tell the people that the prophecies, especially of Daniel
and John, are obscure, and that we cannot understand
them. But some of the very men who oppose the investigation of prophecy because it is obscure, eagerly
receive the suppositions of geologists, which dispute
the Mosaic record.” 3 Spiritual Gifts, 95.
“‘The wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the
wicked shall understand.’ How true this is! Sin is the
transgression of the law of God; and those who will not
accept the light in regard to the law of God will not
understand the proclamation of the first, second,
and third angel’s messages.” Testimonies to Ministers, 115.

“Purified by the first angel’s message, which
cleanses us from our individual sins. Made white by
the second angel’s message, which involves separation
from corporate sin. Tried by the third angel’s message
and the temptation to receive the mark of the beast.”
Unknown Source.

“Every act of transgression, every neglect or rejection of the grace of Christ, is reacting upon yourself;
it is hardening the heart, depraving the will, benumbing the understanding, and not only making you less
inclined to yield, but less capable of yielding, to the
tender pleading of God’s Holy Spirit.” Steps to Christ,
33.

The Wicked Shall Do Wickedly.—
“There are but two parties in this world. All
rank either under the banner of the obedient or the banner of the disobedient. Those who have given their
allegiance to Satan make rigorous human enactments,
in opposition to God’s commands, and by precept and
example strive to lead their fellow-beings into sin.
They exalt the laws of men above the divine law.
Over them the condemnation of God is suspended.
The clouds of His justice are gathering. The material
of destruction has been piling up for ages; and apostasy, rebellion, and disloyalty are continually increasing. The remnant people of God will understand
the word spoken by Daniel, ‘Many shall be purified,
and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do

“Those who exalt their own ideas above the plainly specified will of God, are saying as did Pharaoh,
‘Who is the Lord, that I should obey His voice?’ Every rejection of light hardens the heart and darkens
the understanding; and thus men find it more and
more difficult to distinguish between right and wrong,
and they become bolder in resisting the will of God.”
1BC, 1100.
“Let us never forget that the denseness of ignorance is measured by the degree of wickedness, and
the depth of wisdom by the extent of purity and
righteousness.” Bunch, BOD, 205.

528

DANIEL 12
“God can teach you more in one moment by
his Holy Spirit than you could learn from the great
men of the earth.” R&H, 2/18/1890.

But the Wise Shall Understand.—
“Since 1798 the book of Daniel has been unsealed, knowledge of the prophecies has increased, and
many have proclaimed the solemn message of the
judgment near.
“…The advent movement appeared in different
countries of Christendom at the same time. In both
Europe and America men of faith and prayer were led
to the study of the prophecies, and, tracing down the
inspired record, they saw convincing evidence that the
end of all things was at hand. In different lands there
were isolated bodies of Christians who, solely by the
study of the Scriptures, arrived at the belief that the
Saviour’s advent was near.
“In 1821, three years after Miller had arrived at
his exposition of the prophecies pointing to the time of
the judgment, Dr. Joseph Wolff, ‘the missionary to the
world,’ began to proclaim the Lord’s soon coming.”
Great Controversy, 356,357.

“The Lord will not hide His truth from the faithful
watchman. Those who do the will of God shall know
of His doctrine. ‘The wise shall understand;’ but ‘the
wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall
understand.’
“Said Jesus to His disciples: ‘Learn of Me; for I
am meek and lowly in heart.’ I would plead with those
who have accepted the position of teachers, to first
become humble learners, and ever to remain as pupils
in the school of Christ to receive from the Master lessons of meekness and lowliness of heart.” 4 Testimonies, 527.
“As we near the close of this world’s history,
the prophecies recorded by Daniel demand our special attention, as they relate to the very time in
which we are living. With them should be linked the
teachings of the last book of the New Testament Scriptures. Satan has led many to believe that the prophetic
portions of the writings of Daniel and of John the revelator cannot be understood. But the promise is plain
that special blessing will accompany the study of these
prophecies. ‘The wise shall understand’ (verse 10),
was spoken of the visions of Daniel that were to be
unsealed in the latter days; and of the revelation that
Christ gave to His servant John for the guidance of
God’s people all through the centuries, the promise is,
‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words
of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein.’ Revelation 1:3.” Prophets & Kings,
547,548.

“In the year 1826 more than forty men began to
meet regularly to study the book of Daniel and they
came to the conclusion that the 2300 years would end
in 1843.
“About the same time [1828] Archibald Mason of
Scotland published a book entitled, ‘Two Essays on
Daniel’s Number of 2300 Days, and A Christian’s Duty to Inquire Into the Church’s Deliverance. His position was that the 2300 prophetic days would end in
1843.” Bunch, BOD, 206, 207.
“Daniel and Revelation must be studied, as well
as the other prophecies of the Old and New Testaments. Let there be light, yes, light, in your dwellings.
For this we need to pray. The Holy Spirit, shining
upon the sacred page, will open our understanding,
that we may know what is truth....” Testimonies,
112.

“True it is that ‘many shall be purified and made
white and tried,’ and that some will not understand, but
that does not disprove the prophecies, for "the wise
shall understand.’ In the time when all may understand
some will insist that the book of Daniel is still a sealed
book. The words of Christ and Gabriel witness
against all such. ‘Whoso readeth, let him understand.’ ‘He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches.’” Haskell, SDP, 264.

“Since only the pure in heart can see the truth
(Matthew 5:8), none of the wicked would profit by the
unsealing of the prophecies of Daniel in the time of the
end. ‘Light is sown for the righteous.’—Psalm
97:11.” Hiddekel, 95.
“God intends that, even in this life, truth shall be
ever unfolding to His people. There is only one way
in which this knowledge can be obtained. We can
attain to an understanding of God’s word only
through the illumination of that Spirit by which the
word was given. ‘The things of God knoweth no man,
but the Spirit of God;’ ‘for the Spirit searcheth all
things, yea, the deep things of God.’ And the Saviour's
promise to His followers was: ‘When He, the Spirit of
truth, is come, He will guide you into all truth.... For
He shall receive of Mine, and shall show it unto you.’
5 Testimonies, 703.

“And as God spoke the day and the hour of Jesus’ coming and delivered the everlasting covenant to
His people, He spoke one sentence, and then paused,
while the words were rolling through the earth. The
Israel of God stood with their eyes fixed upward, listening to the words as they came from the mouth of
Jehovah, and rolled through the earth like peals of
loudest thunder. It was awfully solemn. And at the
end of every sentence the saints shouted, ‘Glory! Alleluia!’ Their countenances were lighted up with the glory of God; and they shone with the glory, as did the
face of Moses when he came down from Sinai. The
wicked could not look on them for the glory. And

529

GEMS FROM DANIEL
when the never-ending blessing was pronounced on
those who had honored God in keeping His Sabbath
holy, there was a mighty shout of victory over the beast
and over his image.
“Then commenced the jubilee, when the land
should rest. I saw the pious slave rise in triumph and
victory and shake off the chains that bound him, while
his wicked master was in confusion and knew not what
to do; for the wicked could not understand the
words of the voice of God.” Early Writings, 34,35.

a result of that choice they had power in the area of
appetite to choose the best physical diet—a plant-based
diet and water to drink. As a result, God gave wisdom
to Daniel and his three companions.
“Daniel 12:3,10 tells us that God’s people in the
last days will also be wise. ‘None of the wicked shall
understand; but the wise shall understand.’ Dan. 12:10.
They, like Daniel, will have power to overcome in the
area of appetite. They will choose a vegan diet like
Daniel’s in preparation for translation to heaven,
where there will be no meat-eating. God will give
His last-day people wisdom as He did Daniel, for
their choice of spiritual and physical food.” PJ

“As the message of Christ’s first advent announced the kingdom of His grace, so the message of
His second advent announces the kingdom of His glory. And the second message, like the first, is based on
the prophecies. The words of the angel to Daniel relating to the last days were to be understood in the time of
the end. At that time, ‘many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased.’ ‘The wicked
shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.’ Daniel
12:4, 10. The Saviour Himself has given signs of His
coming, and He says, ‘When ye see these things come
to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at
hand.’ ‘And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.’ ‘Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
the Son of man.’ Luke 21:31,34,36.
“We have reached the period foretold in these
scriptures. The time of the end is come, the visions
of the prophets are unsealed, and their solemn warnings
point us to our Lord’s coming in glory as near at hand.
“The Jews misinterpreted and misapplied the
word of God, and they knew not the time of their visitation. The years of the ministry of Christ and His
apostles—the precious last years of grace to the
chosen people—they spent in plotting the destruction of the Lord’s messengers. Earthly ambitions
absorbed them, and the offer of the spiritual kingdom
came to them in vain. So today the kingdom of this
world absorbs men’s thoughts, and they take no note of
the rapidly fulfilling prophecies and the tokens of the
swift-coming kingdom of God.”
“ ‘But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that
day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of
the night, nor of darkness.’ While we are not to know
the hour of our Lord’s return, we may know when it is
near. ‘Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let
us watch and be sober.’ 1 Thessalonians 5:4-6.” Desire
of Ages, 234,235.

“As we near the close of this world’s history, the
prophecies recorded by Daniel demand our special attention, as they relate to the very time in which we are
living. With them should be linked the teachings of the
last book of the New Testament Scriptures. Satan has
led many to believe that the prophetic portions of the
writings of Daniel and of John the revelator cannot be
understood. But the promise is plain that special
blessing will accompany the study of these prophecies. ‘The wise shall understand’ (verse 10), was
spoken of the visions of Daniel that were to be unsealed in the latter days; and of the revelation that
Christ gave to His servant John for the guidance of
God’s people all through the centuries, the promise is,
‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of this prophecy, and keep those things which
are written therein.’ Revelation 1:3.” Prophets &
Kings, 547,548.

DANIEL 12:11
And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall
be a thousand two hundred and ninety
days.
From the Time.—
“If we can locate in history the approximate time
when the papal church began to establish its own desolating priesthood in the place of Christ’s healing mediation, then we will have the beginning point for the
1290-day and the 1335-day prophecies. The historical
records direct our attention to the period of time between 503-508.
“In as much as the taking away of the continual
mediation of Christ is made the beginning of a prophetic period, there must be some definite act at some definite time which, in form and intent, takes from Christ
His priestly work in the heavenly sanctuary. This act
was the official decree of an ecclesiastical counsel held
at Rome in 503 AD, by which it was declared ‘that the
pope was judge as God’s vicar, and could himself be
judged by no one.’ (see Hardouin’s Councils, vol. 2,

“ ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.’ Mt.
4:4. Daniel and his three friends made their choice to
daily eat the Word of God—to hide it in their heart. As

530

DANIEL 12
p. 983; Labbe and Cossart’s Councils, vol. 4, col. 1364;
and Bower’s History of the Popes, vol. 1, pp. 304,305).
“The work of Clovis, King of the Franks, who
earned for himself the title of the ‘eldest son of the
church’ by his campaigns to subdue the kingdoms
hostile to the Papacy, contributed much toward putting
into practical effect this claim of the Papacy, which
finally resulted in establishing the Pope as the head of
the Roman priesthood, which has usurped the priestly
work of Christ, and has established another system of
mediation in its place. The work of Clovis came to its
climax in the period 503 to 508, and this period
therefore becomes the natural one from which to
date the 1290 years of Daniel 12:11, which would
accordingly end in the period 1793-1798, at the same
time as the 1260 year of Daniel 7:25.’ (Bible Readings
for the Home Circle, p.229, 1914 ed.)
“By the year 508 AD, the ecclesiastical authority
of the church was established. Its earthly priesthood
was set up and the mediatorial ministry of Jesus Christ
began to be obscured. The daily was taken away and
the abomination that makes desolate set up.” Light
Bearers, UOD-15.

tion of the desolation, are connected they do not coincide. The first event prepares, and therefore precedes, the second, as the following literal translation
suggests: ‘from the time of the taking away of the
daily so as to give (to set up) the abomination of the
desolation’ (Daniel 12:11; cf. 11:31).” Doukhan,
DVE, 51.
“And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall
pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away
the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination
that maketh desolate.” Daniel 11:31.
The 1290 Prophetic Days.—
“1. 1290 days (12:11)—‘And from the time that
the daily sacrifice is taken away and the abomination of
desolation is set up, there shall be one thousand two
hundred and ninety days.’ The taking away of the tamid (the daily) is mentioned three times in the book of
Daniel:
“Daniel 8:11 No specific time is connected with
it.
“Daniel 11:31 Again no specific time or date is
given.
“Daniel 12:11 ‘From the time . . . 1290 days.’
“It is important to note the parallelism between
Daniel 11:31 and 12:11
“11:31 Forces shall be mustered by him [king of
the North] and they shall defile the sanctuary fortress:
then they shall take away the daily sacrifices, and place
there the abomination of desolation.
“12:11 And from the time that the daily sacrifice
is taken away, and the abomination of desolation is set
up, there shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety
days.
“The two texts are clearly parallel and refer to
the same events in history. Now if 11:31 refers to the
past so must 12:11, because ‘Scripture interprets Scripture.’ If the two events in 11:31 and 12:11 are not the
same, this principle becomes irrelevant. In Daniel
8:11 ‘the daily’ refers to Christ’s intercessory ministry which was usurped by the work of the priests
through the mass and the confessional. By sacrificing Christ anew in every mass, the papacy has removed Christ’s heavenly ministry in the thinking of
men. How long has this been going on?
“In May 1998, Pope John Paul II issued his pastoral letter Dies Domini in which he challenged Christians ‘to ensure that civil legislation respects their duty
to keep Sunday holy.’ [Pope John Paul II, ‘Dies Domini’ (May 31, 1998), section 67.
“In the same letter he speaks about the attendance
at Sunday mass. Early in the history of the Christianity, he says, people had to be reminded to attend mass.
Sometimes the Church had to resort to specific canonical precepts: ‘This was the case in a number of local
Councils from the fourth century onwards (as at the
Council of Elvira of 300, which speaks not of an obligation but of penalties after three absences) and most

The Daily Taken Away.—
“This refers back to Daniel 8:11,12 and Daniel
11:31. As has been seen, the support of Clovis, king of
the Franks, established the priesthood of the Catholic
Church in AD 508. Christ’ continual mediation in
the heavenly sanctuary was cast down in favor of an
earthly priesthood who blasphemously took upon
itself the prerogatives of Christ.” Hiddekel, 96.
“The ‘daily’ referred to in Daniel 8:11, 11:31 and
12:11 cannot be paganism. As previously documented,
paganism had been outlawed under Theodosius’
edicts under penalty of death 116 years before Clovis’
monarchy began in AD 508.” Heiks, Source, 24.
And the Abomination Set Up.-“We have here a new prophetic period introduced,
1290 prophetic days, which according to Bible authority would denote the same number of literal years.
From the reading of the text, some have inferred that
this period begins with the setting up of the abomination of desolation, or the papal power, in AD 538, and
consequently extends to 1828. We find nothing in the
latter year to mark its termination, but we do find evidence in the margin that it begins before the setting up
of the papal abomination. The margin reads ‘To set up
the abomination.’ With this reading the text would
stand thus: ‘From the time that the daily sacrifice
shall be taken away to set up [or in order to set up]
the abomination that maketh desolate, there shall
be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.’” Smith,
DR, 323.
“We must notice, however, that although the two
events, the taking away of the ‘daily’, and the abomina-

531

GEMS FROM DANIEL
especially from the sixth century onwards (as at the
Council of Agde in 506). These decrees of local Councils led to a universal practice, the obligatory character of which was taken as something quite normal.’
[Ibid., section 47.]
“Here the pope says that particularly from the beginning of the sixth century on there were universal
statutes which made it obligatory for people to attend
mass.
“…We say that in the sixth century the daily was
taken away and the abomination of desolation was established. We begin the 1290 years with 508. Why?
Primarily, because deducting 1290 from 1798, which is
understood to be the end of the 1260 and 1290 years,
brings us to 508.
“What happened in 508? In 496 Clovis, king of
the Franks became a Roman Catholic. All the other
Germanic tribes who had dismantled the Roman
Empire were Arians and therefore in opposition to
the pope in Rome. Clovis defeated the Visigoths and
became the first civil power to join up with the rising
Church of Rome. France, therefore, is called the oldest daughter of the Roman Catholic Church. ‘After his
great victory over the Goths in 507... together with his
Burgundian allies, Clovis came to Tours, probably in
the middle of 508, to hold a victory celebration. There
he met Byzantine envoys who presented to him the
decree naming him an honorary consul [of Rome].’
[Herwig Wolfram, The Roman Empire and Its Germanic Peoples (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1997), 222.] The joining of the civil and the
religious powers (Franks and papacy) at that time was
an important step in ‘setting up the abomination of
desolation,’ which refers to the unscriptural teachings
of the papacy and their enforcement through the union
of church and state. It is one of the ironies of history
that France, the power that helped the papacy at the
beginning of the 1290 years, was the same power that
brought about its demise at the end of this time period,
when Napoleon in 1798 had Pope Pius VI taken prisoner.” Pfandl, TPID12, 7,8.

“In 508, the Franks, who subsequently became
the French nation, were the first Arian tribe to adopt
Roman Catholic Christianity. This is why France
has been called the ‘eldest son of the papacy.’ It is
significant that the Roman Catholic ‘Byzantine
[Eastern
Roman]
emperor,
Anastasius
I,
…conferred upon Clovis [king of the Franks] the
honorary title and insignia of consul in 508.’ [Encyclopedia Americana—Int. Ed., 1998, art. ‘Clovis I.’]
“Subsequent to 508, ‘one after another [of]
these barbarian peoples …[submitted to the laws of
the Church of Rome and counted] it a glory to be
the Church’s children.’ By accepting the papal doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass in place of Christ’s
‘continual’ mediation on behalf of sinners in the heavenly sanctuary, the papacy ‘cast down the place of
…[Christ’s] sanctuary’ (Dan. 8:11) and ‘set up’ here on
earth ‘the abomination that maketh desolate’ (Dan.
12:11, Darby). The acceptance of this papal doctrine
by the Arian tribes prepared the way for the ascendancy of the ‘little horn’ in 538.” Mansell, OSOA, 73,74.
“After Clovis received the titles and dignity of
Roman Patricius and consul from the Greek Emperor
Anastasius, the diadem and purple robe in the Church
of St. Martin, and baptism at Rheims in 508, he was
then on his way to Paris, to his royal residence and
capital. Henceforth from his coronation in 508, it
was the Breviary law code that was in place and implemented as the official law code in the provinces
of the Gallo-Romans, and also in those provinces
that were conquered by the Franks. That same law
code remained in use until the twelfth century, as already established by legal historians.
“Thus there is indisputable historical confirmation
and legislative documentation that the one and true
Catholic faith was indeed being ‘set up,’ as prophesied.
Clovis had become the first Catholic king of the ten
divisions of the Western Roman Empire dating from
AD 476. His ascension to the throne in 508 brought
in its train the first instituted ‘National’ religion.
All other faiths were outlawed. Then began the long
chain reaction during 1290 years of prophetic history,
until every European nation accepted the one and
true Catholic faith and was led to follow the example of the Frank in using the civil power to enforce
the church’s dogmas!” Heiks, TDSB, 101.

“The 1290 days/years period is mentioned in
close connection with the 1,260 days/years, and the
events that were prophesied to take place at the
ends of these periods are the same, so they end at
the same time. Consequently, Daniel 12:11 should be
translated: ‘From the time of the taking away of the
continual [mediation of Christ in the heavenly sanctuary] in order to set up the abomination that maketh
desolate shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety
days.’ In other words, the little horn’s taking away of
Christ’s continual mediation preceded and prepared the
way for its own ascendancy in 538. This mean, then,
that the beginning point of the 1,290-year prophetic
period came thirty years before the beginning point of
the 1,260-year period. The 1,260 years began with
establishment of papal supremacy in AD 538; consequently, the 1,290 years began in 508.

“That the two prophetic periods which had so
puzzled the mind of the prophet might be more perfectly understood, Gabriel said, ‘From the time that the
daily is taken away,’ that is, from 508 AD, ‘there shall
be a thousand two hundred and ninety days’ until the
time of the end, 1798.” Haskell, SDP, 264.
The Year AD 508.—
{See Daniel 8:11 and Daniel 11:31
for additional comments.)

532

DANIEL 12
“In 508 AD, Clovis, the Catholic king of the
Franks, triumphed over his Arian rivals. ‘It was decided that the Franks, and not the Goths, were to direct the
future destinies of Gaul and Germany, and that the
Catholic faith, and not Arianism, was to be the religion of these great realms.’ Richard W. Church. The
Beginning of the Middle Ages, pp. 38,39.” Burnside,
DPUF, 247.

porting of such a crown would require time, being no
minor undertaking. Although Clovis died unexpectedly
in 511 at the age of forty-five, it would be only logical
that he had intended the crown for his fellow political
partner Pope Symmachus, whose reign was from 498514. The irony of it all is this: In 508 it was the
French who gave the golden crown to the pope, literally, although somewhat delayed, and in 1798 it was
the French again that took back the golden crown, literally, as well….
“The 1290-year prophecy of Daniel merits recognition of fulfillment. That prophecy of Daniel terminated in 1798). In AD 508, with Clovis, the union of
church and state was “set up”; the marriage [with
Rome] was consummated. In 1798 the union of
church and state was torn down; the marriage was annulled—exactly 1290 years later. [Richard Duppa, A
Brief Account of the Subversion of the Papal Government 1798, 2nd ed. (London: n.p., 1799), 63-4.]”
Heiks, AD508, 90-92.

“We will now demonstrate how Clovis wanted to
cement his position in the Church with the seat of Saint
Peter:
“ ‘After having laid down new foundations of understanding between the State and the Church, Clovis
wanted to complete his assumption of position in the
Church by forming links with the seat of Saint Peter.
The official chronicle of the Popes, the Liber pontificalis, notes that ‘a gift to the very happy Peter, the
apostle, a votive crown decorated with precious
stones, given by the king of the Franks, Clovis, a Christian’ arrived in Rome…. For Clovis, who was then
constructing a basilica in Paris dedicated to Saint Peter,
this recognition went without saying. His votive crown
was going to be suspended, from then on, above the
altar of Saint Peter of the Vatican. This veritable liturgical votive offering carried maybe the name of Clovis
in letters each separately attached to the diadem by
little rings: C.L.O.D.V.V.E.U.M., to the style of the
Visigothic votive crowns. We saw (chapter XI, p. 301)
how [Pope] Symmachus [AD 498-514] had thanked
God for the conversion of Clovis by dedicating a
church to Saint Martin, the final author of his conversion, a short time after having re-established his
prerogatives. Between 507 and 511, Clovis responded
to his initiative by this gift, a new indication of his personal faith (cf. document XIV, p. 492).” [Rouche,
Michel. Clovis. Fayard, 1996, 343-4.]
“The Liber Pontificalis, which is the earliest historical text of the papacy, adds this little gem of history
to our understanding:
“ ‘At that time there came a golden crown, (a diadem) set with precious stones, from the king of the
Franks, Cloduveus, for a gift to blessed Peter, the apostle.’ [Louise Ropes Loomis, The Book of the Popes
(Liber Pontificalis) (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1916), 130-1.]
“The footnote in Liber Pontificalis serves to clarify the just-quoted text:
“ ‘Clovis died in 511, [27th of November] three
years before the accession of Hormisdas. It is possible,
however, that there had been a delay in the transportation of his votive crown to Rome.’ [Louise Ropes
Loomis, The Book of the Popes (Liber Pontificalis) (New York: Columbia University Press, 1916),
131.]
“Pope Hormisdas (514-523) received this golden
crown at the beginning of his reign in 514.
“However, the recognized source of the golden
crown for the pope is Clovis. The making and trans-

“The Year A.D. 508.—We are not told directly to
what event these 1290 days reach; but inasmuch as
their beginning is marked by a work which takes
place to prepare the way for the setting up of the
papacy, it would be natural to conclude that their end
would be marked by the cessation of papal supremacy.
Counting back, then, 1290 years from 1798, we have
the year 508. This period is doubtless given to show
the date of the taking away of the daily, and it is the
only one which does this. The two periods, therefore,
the 1290 and the 1260 days, terminate together in 1798,
the latter beginning in 538, and the former in 508 thirty
years previous.
“Baptism of Clovis.—‘…Clovis, the first Christian king of the Franks, was baptized on Christmas Day
496, the very day, according to some, on which the
pope was ordained.’ [Archibald Bower, The History of
the Popes, Vol. I, p.295.]
“Thomas Hodgkin says: ‘The result of this ceremony was to change the political relations of every
state in Gaul. Though the Franks were among the
roughest and most uncivilized of the tribes that had
poured westwards across the Rhine, as Catholics they
were now sure of a welcome from the Catholic clergy of every city, and where the clergy led, the “Roman” provincials, or in other words the Latinspeaking laity, generally followed. Immediately after
his baptism Clovis received a letter of enthusiastic welcome into the true fold, written by Avitus, Bishop of
Vienne, the most eminent ecclesiastic of the Burgundian kingdom.’ [Thomas Hodgkin, Theodoric the Goth,
pp. 190,191.]
“ ‘It is observable, that Clovis was, at this time
[496], the only Catholic prince in the known world,
as the word Catholic was then understood. Anastasius,
Emperor of the East, was a professed Eutychian. Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths in Italy; Alaric, King of
the Visigoths, master of all Spain, and of the third part

533

GEMS FROM DANIEL
of Gaul; the kings of the Burgundians, Suevians, and
Vandals, in Gaul, Spain, and Africa; were all zealous
followers of Arius. As for the other kings of the
Franks settled in Gaul, they were still pagans. Clovis
was not only the sole Catholic prince at this time in
the world; but the first king that ever embraced the
Catholic religion; which has procured to the French
king the title of the “most Christian,” and that of “the
eldest son of the Church.” But were we to compare
the conduct and actions of Clovis, the Catholic, with
those of the Arian King Theodoric, such a comparison
would no ways redound to the honor of the Catholic
faith.’ [Archibald Bower, The History of the Popes,
Vol. I, p. 296, footnote. See also Henry Hart Milman,
History of Latin Christianity , Vol. I, pp. 381-388.]
“Popes Endangered by Arian Princes.—Ephraim
Emerton, former professor of history at Harvard University, says: ‘By the time of the Franks had fought the
battle of Strassburg the bishops of the city of Rome had
come to be looked up to as the leaders of the Church in
what had been the Western Empire. They had come to
be called popes, and were trying hard to govern the
Church of the West just as a king might govern his
people. We have seen how much respect a venerable
pope like Leo could command even from such rude
destroyers as Attila and Gaiseric. Now the popes had
always been devoted Catholics, opposed to Arianism
wherever it appeared. At the moment of the Frankish conversion they were in constant danger from
the Arian Ostrogoths who had just got a firm hold
upon Italy. Theodoric had not disturbed the religion
of Rome, but a new king might arise who should try to
force Arianism upon the whole of Italy. The pope was
therefore overjoyed to hear that the newly converted
Franks had taken his form of the Christian belief. He
was ready to bless every undertaking of theirs as the
work of God, if only it might be against the worse than
heathen Arians. Thus began as early as the year 500 an
understanding between the Roman Papacy and the
Frankish kingdom which was to ripen into an intimate
allegiance and to do very much towards shaping all the
future history of Europe.’ [Ephraim Emerton, Introduction to the Study of the Middle Ages, pp.65,66.]
“Clovis’s Conversion a Check on the Arians.—
‘The event which intensified the fears of all the Arian
kings, and which left to each one little more than the
hope that he might be the last to be devoured, was the
conversion to Catholicism of Clovis, the heathen king
of the Franks.’ [Thomas Hodgkin, Theodoric the Goth,
p. 186.]
“Barbarian League Against Clovis.—‘The kings
of the barbarians were... invited to join in a “League of
Peace,” in order to check the lawless aggressions of
Clovis which threatened danger to all.’ [Ibid., pp. 198,
199.]
“‘To form such a confederacy and to league together all the older Arian monarchies against this one
aspiring Catholic state which threatened to absorb them

all, was now the main purpose of Theodoric.’ [Ibid., p.
194.]
“Clovis Launches a Religious War.—‘The diplomatic action of Theodoric was powerless to avert the
war; possibly even it may have stimulated Clovis to
strike rapidly before a hostile coalition could be formed
against him. At an assembly of his nation (perhaps the
“Camp of March”) in the early part of 507, he impetuously declared: “I take it grievously amiss that these
Arians should hold so large a part of Gaul. Let us
go and overcome them with God’s help, and bring the
land into subjection to us.” The saying pleased the
whole multitude, and the collected army marched
southward to the Loire.’ [Ibid., p. 199.]
“Clovis Defeats the Visigoths.—‘The next campaign of the Frankish king was one of far greater importance and success. He was set on trying his fortune against the young king of the Visigoths, whose
personal weakness and unpopularity with his Roman
subjects tempted him to an invasion of Aquitaine. It
would seem that Chlodovech [Clovis] carefully chose
as a casus belli the Arian persecutions of the Alaric,
who, like his father Euric, was a bad master to his
Catholic subjects.... In 507 Chlodovech declared war
on the Visigoths .’ [Charles Oman, The Dark Ages, p.
62.]
“‘Why the explosion was delayed until the year
507 is unknown. That the king of the Franks was the
aggressor is certain. He easily found a pretext for beginning the war as a champion and protector of Catholic Christianity against the absolutely just measures
which Alaric took against his treacherous orthodox
clergy.... In the spring of 507 he [Clovis] suddenly
crossed the Loire and marched toward Poitiers....
“Ten miles from Poitiers, the Visigoths had taken
up their position. Alaric put off beginning battle because he was waiting for the Ostrogoth troops, but as
they were hindered by the appearance of a Byzantine
fleet in Italian waters he determined to fight instead of
beating a retreat, as it would have been wise to do.
After a short engagement the Goths turned and fled. In
the pursuit the king of the Goths was killed, it was said
by Clovis’s own hand (507). With this overthrow the
rule of the Visigoths in Gaul was ended forever.’
[The Cambridge Medieval History, Vol. I, p. 286.
Macmillan Company.]
“‘It is evident, from the language of Gregory of
Tours, that this conflict, between the Franks and Visigoths was regarded by the Orthodox party of his own
and preceding ages as a religious war, on which, humanly speaking, the prevalence of the Catholic or the
Arian creed in Western Europe depended .’ [Walter
C. Perry, The Franks, From Their First Appearance in
History to the Death of King Pepin, p. 85.]
“‘AD 508. A short time after these events, Clovis
receive the titles and dignity of Roman patricius and
consul from the Greek emperor Anastasius; who appears to have been prompted to this act more by motives of jealousy and hatred towards Theodoric the Os-

534

DANIEL 12
trogoth, than by any love he bore for the restless and
encroaching Frank. The meaning of these obsolete
titles, as applied to those who stood in no direct relation to either division of the Roman Empire, has never
been sufficiently explained.... The sun of Rome was
set, but the twilight of her greatness still rested on the
world. The German kings and warriors received with
pleasure, and wore with pride, a title which brought
them into connection with that imperial city, of whose
universal dominion, of whose skill in armies and arts,
the traces lay everywhere around them.’ [Ibid., pp. 88,
89.]
“‘In 508 Clovis received at Tours the insignia of
the consulship from the eastern emperor, Anastasius,
but the title was purely honorific. The last years of his
life Clovis spent in Paris, which he made the capital of
his kingdom.’ [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., art.
‘Clovis,’ Vol.VI, p.563.]
“End of Arian Resistance.—This disposed of the
Visigothic kingdom, but there yet remained the league
of Arian powers under Theodoric. Alaric had counted
on the assistance of Theodoric, but the latter failed him.
The next year, AD 508, however, Theodoric came
against Clovis and gained a victory, after which he
unaccountably made peace with him, and the resistance
of the Arian powers was at an end. [See Thomas
Hodgkin, Theodoric the Goth, pp. 202, 203; Nugent
Robinson, A History of the World, Vol. I, pp. 75-79,
81, 82.]
“Significance of Clovis’s Victories.—The eminence which Clovis had attained in the year 508, and
the significance of his victories to the future of Europe
and the church were so great that historians cannot
forbear commenting on them.
“‘Nor was his a temporary conquest. The kingdom of the West Goths and the Burgundians had become the kingdom of the Franks. The invaders had at
length arrived, who were to remain. It was decided
that the Franks, and not the Goths, were to direct the
future destinies of Gaul and Germany, and that the
Catholic faith, and not Arianism, was to be the religion of these great realms.’ [Richard W. Church, The
Beginning of the Middle Ages, pp. 38, 39.]
“‘Clovis was the first to unite all the elements
from which the new social order was to be formed—
namely, the barbarians, whom he established in power;
the Roman civilization, to which he rendered homage
by receiving the insignia of patrician and of consul
from the Emperor Anastasius; and finally, the Catholic
Church, with which he formed that fruitful alliance
which was continued by his successors." [Victor Duruy, History of the Middle Ages, p.32.
“Paved the Way for Alliance of Church and
State.—‘In him [Clovis] met two religions, and two
ages of the world. At his birth the Roman world was
still a power; his death marks the dawn of the Middle
Ages. He stepped into the vacant place of the Eastern
emperor, and paved the way for what Charlemagne
perfected—the fusion of Roman and German civiliza-

tion, the alliance of church and state.’ [Julius von
Pflugk-Harttung, in A History of all Nations, Vol. VII,
p.27.]
“Foundations of the Medieval Church.—‘the results of their [the Franks’] occupation of Gaul were so
important, the empire which they founded, their alliance with the church, their legal notions and political
institutions were all of such decisive influence upon the
future that their history deserves separate treatment....
It is to them that the political inheritance of the Roman
Empire passed; to them came the honor of taking up
and carrying on, roughly, to be sure, and far less extensively and effectively, but nevertheless of actually carrying on the political work which Rome had been doing. They alone represent that unity which Rome had
established, and so far as that unity was maintained at
all as a definite fact, it is the Franks who maintained it.
…It is only at the end of the fifth century that their
career really begins, and then, as so often in similar
cases, it is the genius of one man, a great leader, which
creates the nation.... Clovis ...appears as one of the
great creative spirits who give a new direction to the
currents of history. ...A third step of great importance
in this process of union was also to be taken by Clovis.
One institution, produced in the ancient world before
the Germans entered it, had continued with vigorous
life and wide influence, indeed, with slowly increasing
power, through all the changes of this chaotic period.
It was to be in the future a still greater power and to
exert an influence even wider and more permanent than
that of the Franks. . . . This was the Roman Church. It
was to be the great ecclesiastical power of the future. It was therefore a most essential question whether the Franks, who were to grow on their side into
the great political power of the future, should do so
in alliance with this other power or in opposition to
it....
“‘This question Clovis settled, not long after the
beginning of his career, by his conversion to Catholic
Christianity.... In these three ways, therefore, the work
of Clovis was of creative influence upon the future. He
brought together the Roman and German upon equal
terms, each preserving the sources of his strength, to
form a new civilization. He founded a political power
which was to unite nearly all the continent in itself, and
to bring the period of the invasions to an end. He established a close alliance between the two great controlling forces of the future, the two empires which
continued the unity which Rome had created, the political empire and the ecclesiastical.’ [George Burton
Adams, Civilization During the Middle Ages, pp. 137144.]
“Thus in AD 508 terminated united resistance
to the development of the papacy. The question of
supremacy between Frank and Goth, between the
Catholic and the Arian religions, had then been settled in favor of the Catholics.” Smith, DR, 323-330 .

535

GEMS FROM DANIEL
1335 days) are answers to the perplexity that arises
from the first measure (1260 days). The first lesson
one can draw from this connection is that these periods
have to be interpreted in terms of years. If the 1260
days are 1260 years, then it is the same for the 1290
days and 1335 days.
“Furthermore, the way the 1290 and the 1335
days are related indicates that these two periods are put
in the same perspective, and the second period extends
beyond the first one. (Daniel 12:12 quoted.) So the
1290 days and the 1335 days start together, but the
first period stops at the 1290 days while the second
period continues to 1335 days.
“If we assume that 1844 is intended to be the final
point of the 1335 days, then in order for us to find out
the starting point of the 1335 days, we must subtract
1335 not from the number 1844—which includes the
entire year 1844—but from the number of years which
elapse until 1844, namely 1843 years (1843-1335 =
508). According to our passage this date of 508 will
mark the time when the ‘daily’ …is discontinued, in
order ‘to set up the abomination of desolation’ (Daniel
12:11).
“Now, if the period of the 1290 days starts in
508, then it will end in 1798 (508 + 1290). We must
notice, however, that although the two events, the taking away of the ‘daily’, and the abomination of the
desolation, are connected they do not coincide. The
first event prepares, and therefore proceeds, the
second, as the following literal translation suggests:
‘from the time of the taking away of the daily so as to
give (to set up) the abomination of the desolation’
(Daniel 12:11; cf. 11:31).
“In the book of Daniel, the expression ‘the abomination of the desolation’ conveys the meaning of ‘oppressive power’ (8:11, 13), a power which the prophet
sees exerted for 1260 days-years. Since the oppressive
power lasts 1260 years and works until 1798, the starting point of its action is then in 538 (1798-1260).”
Doukhan, DVE, 51,52.

The 1290 Days and 1260 Days and the Three Horns
that Were Plucked Up.—
“With the defeat of the Visigoths as heretical
Arian Christians, the church came to use the military
power of the state to enforce its dogma. In this connection the three horns which the papal little horn plucked
from the head of the beast representing imperial Rome
(Daniel 7:8) can be seen as the following three powers:
the Vandals in 534, the Visigoths in 508, and the Ostrogoths in 538. These were victories for the Frankish
and Roman emperors, but they were also theological
victories for the bishop of Rome. The first of these
horns was plucked up in 508 at the beginning of the
1,290 days; the last of the three was plucked up in
538 at the beginning of the 1,260 days.
“…It is interesting to see in this connection that
the same power that started this process of the 1,290
days, the Franks, was also the power (France) that
brought that process to an end at the close of the
1,290 day-years. When France descended into the
revolution in 1789, the papacy lost its major supporter
in Europe. Not long afterwards this former supporter
turned upon the institution that it had formerly supported and brought it to a temporary end.” Shea, DARG,
275.

DANIEL 12:12
Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh
to the thousand three hundred and five and
thirty days.
He That Waiteth and Cometh To the 1335 Days.—
“Still another prophetic period is here introduced,
denoting 1335 years. Can we tell when this period
begins and ends? The only clue we have to the solution of this question, is the fact that it is spoken of in
immediate connection with the 1290 years, which began in 508 as shown above. From that point there shall
be, says the prophet, 1290 days. The very next sentence reads, ‘Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to
the 1335 days.’ From what point?—
“From the same point, undoubtedly, as that from
which the 1290 date, namely, AD 508. Unless they are
to be reckoned from this point, it is impossible to locate
them, and they must be excepted from the prophecy of
Daniel when we apply to it the words of Christ, ‘Whoso readeth, let him understand.’ Matthew 24:15”
Smith, DR, 330,331.

“With 508 being a year of adversity for the children of God and the world as the forces of darkness
came into power at the commencement of the 1290
days and the 1335 days, the years 1798 at the close of
the 1290 days when the power of the forces of darkness
was broken, and 1843 at the end of the 1335 days
when the light of the first angel’s message was proclaimed to the world, there is every reason for accepting 508-1798 and 508-1843 for these two prophetic
periods of Daniel 12:11,12.” Thiele, OSID, 183.

“Daniel states that the ‘wait’ extends another forty-five years beyond the 1290 years, to reach a total of
1335 years. It forcefully implies that they both have
a common starting point of AD 508. Adding 1335
years to 508 brings us to the AD 1843—forty-five
years after 1798.” Heiks, Source, 79.

“The end of the 1260 days was marked by the
pope being taken prisoner, on the 15th of February,
1798. But he did not die until one and a half years
later, still a prisoner, on the 19th of August, 1799.
“The end of the ‘1335 days’ brings us to the
Spring of 1843, when Christ was first expected to
come. But, interestingly, one and a half years later,

“The last two measures of time (1290 days and

536

DANIEL 12
we come to the total fulfillment of the 2300 days in
October 22, 1844.” PJ

Blessed is He that Waiteth and Cometh To.—
“What is this blessing? Looking at the year of
1843, when these years expired, what do we behold?
We see a remarkable fulfillment of prophecy in the
great proclamation of the second coming of Christ.
Forty-five years before this, the time of the end began,
the book was unsealed, and light began to increase.
About the year 1843, there was a grand culmination of
all the light that had been shed on prophetic subjects up
to that time. The proclamation went forth in power.
The new and stirring doctrine of the setting up of the
kingdom of God shook the world. New life was imparted to the true disciples of Christ. The unbelieving
were condemned, the churches were tested, and a spirit
of revival was awakened which has had no parallel
since.
“Was this the blessing? Listen to the Saviour’s
words: ‘Blessed are your eyes,’ said He to His disciples, ‘for they see; and your ears, for they hear.’ Matthew 13:16. Again He told His followers that prophets
and kings had desired to see the things which they saw,
and had not seen them. But ‘blessed,’ said He to them,
‘are the eyes which see the things that ye see.’ Luke
10: 23, 24. If a new and glorious truth was a blessing
in the days of Christ to those who received it, why was
it not equally so in AD 1843?
“It may be objected that those who engaged in
this movement were disappointed in their expectations;
so were the disciples of Christ at His first advent, in an
equal degree. They shouted before Him as He rode
into Jerusalem, expecting that He would then take the
kingdom. But the only throne to which He then went
was the cross, and instead of being hailed as king in a
royal palace, He was laid a lifeless form in Joseph’s
new sepulcher. Nevertheless, they were ‘blessed’ in
receiving the truths they had heard.
“It may be objected further that this was not a sufficient blessing to be marked by a prophetic period.
Why not, since the period in which it was to occur, the
time of the end, is introduced by a prophetic period;
since our Lord, in verse 14 of His great prophecy of
Matthew 24, makes a special announcement of this
movement; and since it is still further set forth in Revelation 14:6,7, under the symbol of an angel flying
through midheaven with a special announcement of the
everlasting gospel to the inhabitants of the earth? Surely the Bible gives great prominence to this movement.”
Smith, DR, 331, 332.

“It should be noted here that we are dealing with
historical events in western Europe that are measured
off by the Roman Julian-Gregorian calendar that begins
each year in January and ends in December.
“The time prophecies of Daniel 8 and 9, however,
have been figured according to the Jewish fall-to-fall
calendar because that was the calendar functioning in
the place and time when these time periods began
(Neh. 1:1; 2:1). When we come to the 1335 th day-year
of Daniel 12:12, therefore, its January-to-December
year in 1843 overlapped with the 2300th day-year of
Daniel 8:14 that extended from the fall of 1843 to the
fall of 1844. For practical purposes, therefore, we may
say that the 1335 days take us to the same year of 1844
as does the prophetic time period of Daniel 8:14.”
1SOR, 310
Spirit of Prophecy on the 1335 Days.—
“Ellen White quotes the 1290- and 1335-year
prophecies. It is critical to understand whether she located those prophecies in the past or in the future:
“‘ . . Many shall be purified, and made white, and
tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the
wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.
“And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall
be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and
ninety days. Blessed is he that waiteth, and
cometh to the thousand three hundred and five
and thirty days. But go thou thy way till the
end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the
end of the days.’ It was the Lion of the tribe of Judah
who unsealed the book and gave to John the revelation of what should be in these last days.
“Daniel stood in his lot to bear his testimony
which was sealed until the time of the end, when the
first angel’s message should be proclaimed to our
world. [“The prophecy of the first angel’s message,
brought to view in Revelation 14, found its fulfillment
in the Advent movement of 1840-1844.” Ellen G.
White, Spirit of Prophecy (Oakland: Pacific Press,
1884), 4:222.] These matters are of infinite importance
in these last days; but while ‘many shall be purified,
and made white, and tried,’ ‘the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand.’ How
true this is! Sin is the transgression of the law of God;
and those who will not accept the light in regard to the
law of God will not understand the proclamation of the
first, second, and third angel’s messages. The book of
Daniel is unsealed in the revelation to John, and carries
us forward to the last scenes of this earth’s history.”
[Ellen G. White, Testimonies to Ministers and Gospel
Workers (Nampa, ID: Pacific Press, 1962), 114-15.]
“Her statement ‘How true this is!’ could not have
been made unless the 1290 and 1335 time prophecies
had already had their application.” Heiks, AD508, 93.

“We know that the movement is “blessed.”
“We know that the movement is a waiting movement.
“We know that the movement has a time in mind.
They are coming to a date. We know the date is 1843
(1335 days plus a 508 start date).
“From the rest of Daniel 12 we know that the
movement is based on an understanding of the book of
Daniel opened in 1798.

537

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“So the book of Daniel concludes with a prophecy of the blessed Advent movement, the only movement rising in response to an understanding of the
book of Daniel to wait for an event in 1843.
“Why not 1844? The answer is plain. The 1335
days is not about an event at its termination. No
terminating event is even given in the text. The 1335 is
about the blessedness of a movement that was waiting for Christ’s coming based on an understanding
of Daniel. And what year were the Adventists looking
forward to during the years leading up to 1843? Not
1844, but 1843.” Cardona, 1335-AE, 3,4.

“Christ said, "Blessed are your eyes, for they see;
and your ears, for they hear. For verily I say unto you,
That many prophets and righteous men have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them;
and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them" [Matthew 13:16, 17]. Blessed are the
eyes which saw the things that were seen in 1843
and 1844.” 21Manuscript Releases, 437.
“This blessing includes those of 1844 as well as
those coming after 1844. To say, ‘Blessed are those
who come to 1844’ amounts to saying ‘Blessed are
those who reach the period which starts in 1844.’ If we
translate this language in spacial terms, ‘blessed are
those who reach point A’ would of course include
those who have gone beyond point A and may now be
in point B. Let us not forget that 1844 indicates the
point of termination of a period and not the date of a
definite event.” Doukhan, DVE, 130.

“Since the prophetic periods have ended, the special blessing of Christ’s final intercessory work is
available as soon as the church makes the necessary
response. The hour of His judgment for His people is
come. The door to the most holy place of the heavenly
sanctuary is open. It is time for the Advent people to
look up in faith, saying. ‘Thou shalt arise, and have
mercy upon Zion: for the time to favor her, yea, the set
time, is come.’—Psalm 102:13.
“…Even those who die in the faith of this judgment-hour message will receive the promised blessing.
Speaking of those who die during the sounding of
God’s last message, the Revelator says, ‘Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth.’—
Revelation 14:13. These will come forth in the special
resurrection mentioned in Daniel 12:2.” Hiddekel,
96,97.

“There were two major phases of the Millerite
movement—the initial, or ‘1843’ phase, and the later
and larger ‘1844’ phase, in which it reached its climax.
While inseparable connected, they were, nevertheless,
quite distinct. This dual aspect should be borne in
mind, as the dominating concept and expectation of the
one differed sharply from that of the other. Indeed, one
can scarcely understand the fundamental development,
and the progression of the movement as a whole, unless the motivating thought and action back of each of
these phases be understood.
“The first phase included all developments from
the time of Miller’s first humble sermon on the second
advent, given the second Sunday in August, 1831, up
to the revised expiration of the ‘Jewish sacred year
1843.’ In this preliminary ‘1843’ phase—covering
about thirteen years—Miller was the recognized leader,
at first laboring virtually alone, then joined by other
ministers and groups in ever-increasing numbers until
it became a large integrated movement, with others
sharing increasingly in the burdens, public expressions,
and responsibilities of leadership. It was no one-man
affair.
“On the other hand, the second, or ‘1844’
phase was short, intensive, climactic. This was largely in other hands, as Miller was now growing older and
was often ill, and was not an active participant in these
later developments. This ‘Jewish year 1844’ phase was
commonly called the ‘seventh month movement,’ because its climax of expectation was based upon the
well-known Day of Atonement type, of the ‘tenth day
of the seventh month’ (Tishri) of the Jewish sacred
year ‘1844.’ The 10th day of Tishri, the Millerites ascertained, would, according to the older Jewish method
of calendation, coincide with October 22, 1844, as the
civil equivalent in our common modern calendar.
“This seventh-month phase of the Millerite
movement was actually only a little over three months

“But, thank God, His church is no longer in bondage. To spiritual Israel have been restored the privileges accorded the people of God at the time of their deliverance from Babylon. In every part of the earth,
men and women are responding to the Heaven-sent
message which John the revelator prophesied would be
proclaimed prior to the second coming of Christ: ‘Fear
God, and give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment is come.’ Revelation 14:7.
“No longer have the hosts of evil power to keep
the church captive; for ‘Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
that great city,’ which hath ‘made all nations drink of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication;’ and to spiritual Israel is given the message, ‘Come out of her, My
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.’ Verse 8; 18:4. As the captive exiles heeded the message, ‘Flee out of the midst
of Babylon’ (Jeremiah 51:6), and were restored to the
Land of Promise, so those who fear God today are
heeding the message to withdraw from spiritual Babylon, and soon they are to stand as trophies of divine
grace in the earth made new, the heavenly Canaan.”
Prophets & Kings, 714,715.
“There is then a blessing pronounced upon those
who are [were] living in 1843 (508 + 1335 = 1843), for
the seal has been removed from the prophecies, and
they are understood.” Haskell, SDP, 264.

538

DANIEL 12
in length. Yet these months were so packed with swift,
intensive developments, and with such amazing
achievements and results, that it seems almost inconceivable that so much could take place in so short a
time. The records indicate that it shook the continent
from Maine to the Mississippi Valley and from Quebec
to New Orleans. It was the most conspicuous religious
development of the day.” Froom, 4PFOOF, 445,446.

goes beyond mere expectation since it is paired with
happiness. Moreover, the Hebrew verb hkh, for waiting, conveys a yearning for the best, a hope, which
characterizes those who will reach this time.
“It is also noteworthy that the period of 1335 is
the last time period to be mentioned. It is also the only
one to be marked by the feeling of arrival, after the
waiting tension implied in the question ‘how long?’
(Daniel 12:6).
“The text provides an additional clue which confirms this connection between Daniel 12:6 and Daniel
8. Both prophecies are an answer to the same question
‘how long?’ (ad-matay, literally: until when? [Daniel
12:6 and Daniel 8. Both are associated with the same
motif of ‘wonders’ (Daniel 8:13, 24; 12:6). This identical language indicates the same concern; both visions
point to the same time. Therefore, the 1335 days, like
the 2300 evenings and morning, should end at 1844.
“Thus, Daniel not only foretold 1844 through the
2300 evenings and mornings, but he also perceived this
time from another vantage point, after 1335 days. In
the prophecy of the 2300 evenings and mornings he
looks up into heaven, to take in the scene of judgment.
In the prophecy of the 1335 days, he looks down on
earth, to catch the happiness of waiting.” Doukhan,
DVE, 48.

Daniel and Revelation Connected by Blessing.—
“The blessing that introduces the reading of
Revelation (1:3) and concludes the reading of Daniel
(12:12) indicates the intention to couple the vision of
John precisely with that of Daniel, in the same ‘waiting’ for the end. The role played by the angel in the
communication of the prophecy (Rev. 1:1) reminds us
of the same process attested in chapters 8 and 9 of Daniel—showing again that the prophecy of Revelation
stands in the same line as the visions of the Hebrew
prophet.
“The way the first vision of John takes up the
thread of the last chapters of Daniel is also significant.
Here again we find the same description of the Son of
man (Rev. 1:13-15) as in Daniel (Daniel 7:13; 10:4-6;
12:7), dressed in His priestly robe, devoid of any sacred ornaments.” Doukhan, DVE, 56.
He That Waiteth.—
“Our soul waiteth for the LORD: he is our help
and our shield.” Psalms 33:20.
“They soon forgat his works; they waited not for
his counsel.” Psalms 106:13
“And I will wait upon the LORD, that hideth his
face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.”
Isaiah 8:17
“For since the beginning of the world men have
not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye
seen, O God, beside thee, what he hath prepared for
him that waiteth for him.” Isaiah 64:4.
“And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for
their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that
when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto
him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom
the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I
say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them
to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve
them.” Luke 12:36,37.

DANIEL 12:13
But go thou thy way till the end be: for
thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the
end of the days.
Go Thy Way Till the End Be; For Thou Shalt Rest.—
“After his long service and all his trying cares, the
word to Daniel was, ‘Thou shalt rest, and stand in thy
lot at the end of the days.’ The outcome of the Christian service of the disciples in the latter days is expressed in a similar strain by the apostle John in the
Revelation: ‘Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord from henceforth: yea, saith the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors; and their works do
follow them.’ Rev. 14: 13. To Daniel, ‘Go thou thy
way till the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in
thy lot at the end of the days.’ To John: ‘Surely I
come quickly;’ and ‘my reward is with me, to give
every man according as his work shall be.’ Rev.
22:20, 12. Rest follows the labor; and the end will
come. Then follows the remainder of the promise:
‘Thou shalt stand in thy lot.’ The rest is undisturbed,
and the lot is sure.” Haskell, SDP, vii.

“Daniel describes the time of the end as a Day of
Atonement…. Psalm 130, which draws its inspiration
from the Day of Atonement witnesses these feelings of
hope and waiting:
“I wait for the LORD, my soul doth wait, and
in his word do I hope.
“My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they
that watch for the morning: I say, more than they
that watch for the morning. (Psalm 130:5-7).
“ …‘Blessed is he who waits and comes to the
1335 days’ (Daniel 12:12). The waiting hinted at here

“For I know the thoughts that I think toward you,
saith the LORD, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to
give you an expected end.” Jeremiah 29:11.
Thou Shalt Stand in Thy Lot at End of the Days.—

539

GEMS FROM DANIEL
“Two more questions remain to be noticed briefly: What days are referred to in verse 13? What is
meant by Daniel’s standing in his lot? Those who claim
that the days are the 1335, are led to that application by
looking back no further than to the preceding verse,
where the 1335 days are mentioned; whereas, in making an application of these days so indefinitely introduced, the whole scope of the prophecy should certainly be taken in from Daniel 8. Chapters 9, 10, 11, and
12 are clearly a continuation and explanation of the
vision of Daniel 8; hence we may say that in the vision
of chapter 8, as carried out and explained, there are
four prophetic periods: the 2300, 1260, 1290, and 1335
days. The first is the principal and longest period;
the others are but intermediate parts and subdivisions of this. Now, when the angel tells Daniel at the
conclusion of his instructions that he shall stand in his
lot at the end of days, without specifying which period
was meant, would not Daniel’s mind naturally turn to
the principal and longest period, the 2300 days, rather
than to any of its subdivisions? If this is so, the 2300
are the days intended. the reading of the Septuagint
seems to look plainly in this direction: ‘But go thy way
and rest; for there are yet days and seasons to the full
accomplishment [of these things]; and thou shalt stand
in thy lot at the end of the days.’ This certainly carries
the mind back to the long period contained in the first
vision, in relation to which the subsequent instructions
were given.
“The 2300 days, as has been already shown, terminated in 1844, and brought us to the cleansing of the
sanctuary. How did Daniel at that time stand in his
lot? In the person of his Advocate, our great High
Priest, as He presents the cases of the righteous for
acceptance to His Father. The word here translated
‘lot’ does not mean a piece of real estate, a ‘lot’ of
land, but the ‘decisions of chance’ or the ‘determinations of Providence.’ At the end of the days, the lot, so
to speak, was to be cast. In other words, a determination was to be made in reference to those who should
be accounted worthy of a possession in the heavenly
inheritance. When Daniel’s case comes up for examination, he is found righteous, stands in his lot, and
is assigned a place in the heavenly Canaan.
“When Israel was about to enter into the Promised Land, the lot was cast, and the possession of each
tribe was assigned. The tribes thus stood in their respective ‘lots’ long before they entered upon the actual
possession of the land. The time of the cleansing of the
sanctuary corresponds to this period of Israel’s history.
We now stand upon the borders of the heavenly Canaan, and decisions are being made, assigning to some
a place in the eternal kingdom, and barring others forever. In the decision of his case, Daniel’s portion in
the celestial inheritance will be made sure to him.
With him all the faithful will also stand. When this
devoted servant of God, who filled up a long life with
the noblest deeds of service to his Maker, though cumbered with the weightiest cares of this life, shall enter

upon his reward for well-doing, we too may enter with
him into rest.
“…God is no respecter of person, and a reproduction of Daniel’s character will secure the divine favor
as signally even now. Let us emulate his virtues, that
we, like him, may have the approbation of God while
here, and dwell amid the creations of His infinite glory
in the long hereafter.” Smith, DR, 330-334.
“In his ‘lot’, and at the end of the 1335 years,
Daniel was to stand. ‘Lot’ is used seventy-seven times
and has two basic applications. The first application
given in the Bible is in casting ‘lots to determine who
would receive what allotment when the Israelites divided the land among themselves, according to their
tribes, before they entered the Promised Land. The
second application in the Old Testament was the casting of lots for the Lord’s goat or for the scapegoat.
That was done on the Day of Atonement, a day of
judgment or investigation. Thus in this usage, ‘lot’ is
associated with judgment and involves decision
making.
“…Since Oct. 22, 1844, when Jesus moved his
ministry from the Holy to the Most Holy Place, we
have been in the antitypical Day of Atonement. This
‘day’ of investigative judgment serves to vindicate both
God and the saints. It began with the righteous dead
from Adam on, and will at some point pass to the
righteous living. In 1899 Ellen White was given an
understanding of the proceedings of the investigative
judgment described in Daniel 7. She wrote just how
far that judgment process had progressed.
“ ‘The time has come for Daniel to stand in his
lot.’ 4BC, 1174.
“Daniel’s ‘lot’ in the judgment is not different
than that of other professed followers of Christ. We
will individually ‘stand’ at the judgment bar of God as
our Advocate, Jesus Christ, pleads our cases, just as he
did for Daniel.” Heiks, Source, 86,87
“The subject of the sanctuary and the investigative judgment should be clearly understood by
the people of God. All need a knowledge for themselves of the position and work of their great High
Priest. Otherwise it will be impossible for them to exercise the faith which is essential at this time or to occupy the position which God designs them to fill. Every individual has a soul to save or to lose. Each has a
case pending at the bar of God. Each must meet the
great Judge face to face. How important, then, that
every mind contemplate often the solemn scene when
the judgment shall sit and the books shall be opened,
when, with Daniel, every individual must stand in
his lot, at the end of the days.” Great Controversy,
488.
“Honored by men with the responsibilities of state
and with the secrets of kingdoms bearing universal
sway, Daniel was honored by God as His ambassador,

540

DANIEL 12
and was given many revelations of the mysteries of
ages to come. His wonderful prophecies, as recorded
by him in chapters 7 to 12 of the book bearing his
name, were not fully understood even by the prophet
himself; but before his life labors closed, he was given
the blessed assurance that ‘at the end of the days’—in
the closing period of this world's history—he would
again be permitted to stand in his lot and place. It
was not given him to understand all that God had revealed of the divine purpose. ‘Shut up the words, and
seal the book,’ he was directed concerning his prophetic writings; these were to be sealed ‘even to the time of
the end.’ ‘Go thy way, Daniel,’ the angel once more
directed the faithful messenger of Jehovah; ‘for the
words are closed up and sealed till the time of the
end.... Go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt
rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.’ Daniel
12:4, 9,13.” Prophets & Kings, 547.

“Daniel has been standing in his lot since the
seal was removed and the light of truth has been shining upon his visions. He stands in his lot, bearing the
testimony which was to be understood at the end of the
days.” 1 Sermons & Talks, 226.
“All that God has in prophetic history specified
to be fulfilled in the past has been, and all that is yet to
come in its order will be. Daniel, God’s prophet,
stands in his place. John stands in his place. In the
Revelation the Lion of the tribe of Judah has opened to
the students of prophecy the book of Daniel, and thus
is Daniel standing in his place. He bears his testimony, that which the Lord revealed to him in vision of the
great and solemn events which we must know as we
stand on the very threshold of their fulfillment.” 2 Selected Messages, 109.

541

GEMS FROM DANIEL

WORKS CITED IN GEMS FROM DANIEL
Andrews, J.N.. The Commandment to
Restore and to Build Jerusalem, SDA
Publ. Ass., Battle Creek, Mi, 1865.

1989.

the internet.

Ferrell, Vance. A Biblical Defense, Har-

LaRondelle, Hans. Light for the Last
Days, Pacific Press, 1999.

vestime Books, Altamont, TN, 2003.
Andrews, J.N.. The Judgment. Its
Events and Their Order, Pacific Press
Pub., Oakland, CA, 1890.
Anderson, R.A.. Unfolding Daniel’s
Prophecies, Pacific Press Pub. Ass.,
Mountain View, Ca, 1975.
Bates, Joseph. Waymarks and High
Heaps. EGW CD Rom. 1847.
Berry, Maurice. Two Troubles, Unpublished paper on Dan. 11:40-45.
Biblical Institute—Summary of lectures
by James White and Uriah Smith. SDA
Publ. Ass. 1878. (EGW CD-Rom Comprehensive Research Edition-2008).
Bible Research Institute, Symposium on
Daniel, Vol. 2, Review & Herald Pub.
Ass., Maryland, 1986.
Bohr, Stephen. Notes on Daniel 7.
Download from Internet.
Bohr, Stephen. Notes on Daniel 9.
Download from Internet.
Brinsmead, Robert D.. Vision by the
Hiddekel, International Health Inst.,
Denver, CO, 1970.
Bunch, Taylor G.. The Book of Daniel.
Leaves of Autumn Books, Inc. Box 440,
Payson, AZ 85547, 1986.
Burnside, George. Daniel, Prophecy
Unfolds the Future, Leaves of Autumn
Books, Inc., P.O. Box 440, Payson, AZ
85541.
Cardona, Alvin. The 1260, 1290, 1335
Day Prophecies—an Abbreviated Exposition. www.scribd.com.
Cardona, 1335-AE.
Crosier, O.R.L. Day Star Extra, 1846.
1846, reprinted in the Advent Review,
Sept. 1850.
Cox, Kenneth. Daniel, Remant Publications, Coldwater, MI, 2009.
Doukhan, Jacques B.. Daniel, Vision of
the End, Andrews University Press,
Berrien Springs, MI, 49104, 2nd edition,

French, Arthur J.. Daniel on Solid
Ground, Review & Herald Pub. Ass.,
Washington D.C. 21740, 1988.
Froom, LeRoy Edwin. Prophetic Faith
of our Fathers, Vol. 4, Review and Herald , Wash. D.C., 1954. .
Gane, Roy. Who's Afraid of the Judgment?, Pacific Press Pub. Ass., Boise,
Idaho, 2006.
Goldstein, Clifford. 1844 Made Simple,
Pacific Press Pub. Ass., Boise, Idaho,
1988.
Handwerk, Jean, The Significance of
Clovis: Christ’s Mediation Replaced,
Cornerstone Newsletter 2009 (Unpublished).
Haskell, Stephen N.. Story of Daniel
the Prophet, Bible Training School,
New York City, NY, 1904
Heiks, Heidi. AD 508. From website:
www.thesourcehh.org, 2008.
Heiks,
AD508.

Light Bearers Ministry, The Unsealing
of Daniel, Malo, WA 99150.
Mansell, Donald Ernest. Open Secrets
of the Anti-Christ. Pacific Press, Idaho,
2002.
Mason, Moses. King of the North and
South. Apocalypse Ministries, Pulaski,
TN
Maxwell, C. Merwyn. God Cares, Vol.
1 and 2, Pacific Press Pub. Ass., Mt.
View, CA, 1981.
Mellor, Barry. The False Doctrine of the
Trinity, Manuscript, ch. “The History of
Trinitarianism.”
Menzel, Donald H., Astronomy, Random House, NY, NY., 1974.
Miller, William. Evidence From Scripture and History of the Second Coming
of Christ about the Year 1843. Leaves
of Autumn Books, Inc. Box 440, Payson, AZ 85547, 2003.

Heiks, Heidi. AD 538 Source Book,
TeachServices, 2010.

Nichol, Francis D. The Seventh-day
Adventist Bible Commentary. Vol. 7.
Washington, D.C.: Review and Herald
Publishing Association, 1957.

Heiks, Heidi, 508, 538, 1798, 1843
Source Book (Preliminary), Hope International, 2007. Heiks, Source.
Heiks, Heidi, The “Daily” Source Book,
TEACH Services, Brushton, NY, 2008.
Heiks. TDSB.

Olsen, V. Norskov. Papal Supremacy
and American Democracy. Loma Linda
University
Press,
Loma
Linda/Riverside, California, 1987.

Heiks, Heidi, King of the North.
TEACH Services, Brushton, NY, 2009.

Paulien, Jon. Daniel and Revelation.
Pacific Press Pub. Ass.. Nampa, ID,
1998.

Jones, Alonzo Trevor. The Consecrated
Way to Christian Perfection, Mountain
View, CA, Pacific Press, 1905.

Pfandl, Gerhard. Daniel—The Seer of
Babylon. Review & Herald, Hagerstown, MD. 2004.

Jones, Alonzo Trevor. Gen. Conference,
The Daily Bulletin, 2/22/1899.

Pfandl, Gerhard. Daniel’s “Time of the
End”. Journal of the Adventist Theological Society, 7/1 (Spring 1996): 141158.

Jones, Alonzo Trevor. Individuality in
Religion, Battle Creek, MI.
Jones, Alonzo Trevor. Great Nations of
Today.

Pfandl, Gerhard. Time Prophecies in
Daniel 12. Biblical Research Institute,
May, 2005.

Knopper, Jan T.. Daniel 11:40-45. From

Pickle, Bob. When Were the Sabbatical

542

WORKS CITED
Years?
www.picklepublishing.com/papers/sabbatical-years
2007.
Pippenger, Jeff. Time of the End.
Rafferty, James. Prophetic Insights.
Light Bearers Resource Center, 1994.
Rafferty, James. Tidings of A Whirlwind. Pamphlet, Light Bearers Ministry,
1992.
Rosenvold, Lloyd and Leola. The King
of the North and God’s People. Rosenvold Publications, Inc. P.O. Box 330,
Hope ID, 83836, 1996.
Shea, William H.. Daniel, A Reader’s
Guide. Pacific Press Pub. Ass., Nampa,
ID, 2005.
Shea, William H.. Selected Studies on
Prophetic Interpretation, Review &
Herald Publ. Ass., Wash. D.C., 1982.
Smith, Uriah. Thoughts on Daniel and
Revelation, SDA Publ. Ass., Battle
Creek, MI, 1897.
Swearingen, Marc Alden. Tidings Out
of the Northeast. Remnant Publications,
2006.
Taylor, Robert. The Censer Still Burns.
Self-Published. Sacramento, CA,
TEACH Services, Studies on Daniel
and Revelation, Brushton, NY 12916,
1988.
Thiele, Edwin R.. Outline Studies in
Daniel.
Pacific Union College,
Angwin, CA.
Waggoner, Elliot J.. Prophetic Lights,
Pacific Press Pub. Ass., Oakland, CA,
1889.

White, Ellen G. (Author of the Following Books Used):
Acts of the Apostles, The
Adventist Home, The
Appeal to the Youth, An.
Battle Creek Letters
Bible Commentary, EGW
Comments, Vols. 1 to 7.
Bible Echo, The (Date).
Counsel on Diet and Foods
Child Guidance
Christian Temperance and Bible
Hygiene
Colporteur Ministry
Counsels on Health
Christ’s Object Lessons
Counsels on Stewardship
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and
Students
Counsels to Writers and Editors.
Desire of Ages, The
Education
Ellen White 1888 Materials, The
Evangelism
Early Writings
Faith and Works
Faith I Live By, The
Fundamentals of Christian
Education.
Great Controversy, The
Gospel Workers
Historical Sketches of the Foreign
Missions of the SDA (1886)
Practical Addresses.
Last Day Events
Letters, (Number, Date)
Life Sketches of Ellen G. White
Loma Linda Messages.
Manuscripts, (Number, Date)
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 1-21.
Medical Ministry
Ministry of Healing, The
My Life Today
Messages to Young People
Mount of Blessing, Thoughts From
My Life Today
Our High Calling

543

Pamphlet PH028
Pamphlet SpTB17a,
Patriarchs and Prophets
Prophets and Kings
Retirement Years, The.
SDA Bible Commentary, The
Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 2, 3.
Sermons and Talks, Vol. 1,2.
Sketches From the Life of Paul
Sons and Daughters of God
Southern Work, The
Spalding and Magan Collection
Special Testimonies for Ministers
and Workers, No. 7 (1897)
Special Testimonies for Ministers
and Workers, No. 10 (1897)
Spiritual Gifts, vol. 1 to 4.
Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 3, 4.
Steps to Christ
Temperance
Testimonies to Ministers and
Gospel Workers
Testimonies for the Church, vol. 1-9
Undated Manuscript 66.
Upward Look
Journals and Pamphlets
Day-Star, The, 3/14/1846.
General Conference Daily Bulletin,
Home Missionary, The
Lake Union Herald, 12/23/1908.
Review and Herald,
Signs of the Times
Word to the Little Flock, A (pamphlet)
Youth Instructor
White, James. Bible Adventism, SDA
Publishing Ass. (EGW CD-rom Comprehensive Research Edition—2008).
White, James and Smith, Uriah. The
Biblical Institute, SDA Publ. Ass. 1878.
(EGW CD-Rom Comprehensive Research Edition-2008).
Zurcher, J. R. Christ of the Revelation.
Nashville, Tennessee: Southern Publishing
Association,
1980.

