gems
from

revelation
Written by
Second Advent Believers
Compiled by
Patrick M. Jones

3 Angels Publishing
633 Pennwood Drive
Coalmont, TN 37313
United States of America
www.3angelspublishing.com

© 2012

GEMS FROM REVELATION

DEDICATION
TO

William Miller
Baptist Minister, 1782-1849,
This dedicated leader of the Second Advent Movement in America
had the following dream on December 3, 1847:
I dreamed that God, by an unseen hand, sent me a
curiously wrought casket about ten inches long by six
square, made of ebony and pearls curiously inlaid. To the
casket there was a key attached. I immediately took the
key and opened the casket, when, to my wonder and
surprise, I found it filled with all sorts and sizes of
jewels, diamonds, precious stones, and gold and silver
coin of every dimension and value, beautifully
arranged in their several places in the casket; and
thus arranged they reflected a light and glory equaled
only to the sun.
[The „casket‟ represents the great truths of the
Bible, relative to the second advent of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which were given Bro. Miller to publish to the
world. The‟“jewels, diamonds, etc.‟ of „all sorts and
sizes‟ so “beautifully arranged in their several places in
the casket” represent the children of God, (Mal. 3:17)
from all the churches, and from almost every station, and
situation of life, who received the advent faith, and were
seen to take a bold stand in their several stations, in the
holy cause of truth.—James White, 1849.]
I thought it was not my duty to enjoy this
wonderful sight alone, although my heart was overjoyed
at the brilliancy, beauty, and value of its contents. I
therefore placed it on a center table in my room and gave
out word that all who had a desire might come and see
the most glorious and brilliant sight ever seen by man in
this life.
The people began to come in, at first few in
number, but increasing to a crowd. When they first
looked into the casket, they would wonder and shout for
joy. But when the spectators increased, everyone would
begin to trouble the jewels, taking them out of the casket
and scattering them on the table.
I began to think that the owner would require the
casket and the jewels again at my hand; and if I suffered
them to be scattered, I could never place them in their
places in the casket again as before; and felt I should
never be able to meet the accountability, for it would be
immense. I then began to plead with the people not to
handle them, nor to take them out of the casket; but the
more I pleaded, the more they scattered; and now they
seemed to scatter them all over the room, on the floor
and on every piece of furniture in the room.
I then saw that among the genuine jewels and
coin they had scattered an innumerable quantity of
spurious jewels and counterfeit coin. I was highly
incensed at their base conduct and ingratitude, and
reproved and reproached them for it; but the more I
reproved, the more they scattered the spurious jewels
and false coin among the genuine.

I then became vexed in my physical soul and
began to use physical force to push them out of the room;
but while I was pushing out one, three more would enter
and bring in dirt and shavings and sand and all manner of
rubbish, until they covered every one of the true jewels,
diamonds, and coins, which were all excluded from
sight. They also tore in pieces my casket and scattered it
among the rubbish. I thought no man regarded my
sorrow or my anger. I became wholly discouraged and
disheartened, and sat down and wept.
While I was thus weeping and mourning for
my great loss and accountability, I remembered God,
and earnestly prayed that He would send me help.
Immediately the door opened, and a man entered
the room, when the people all left it; and he, having a dirt
brush in his hand, opened the windows, and began to
brush the dirt and rubbish from the room.
I cried to him to forbear, for there were some
precious jewels scattered among the rubbish.
He told me to “fear not,” for he would “take care
of them.”
Then, while he brushed the dirt and rubbish, false
jewels and counterfeit coin, all rose and went out of the
window like a cloud, and the wind carried them away. In
the bustle I closed my eyes for a moment; when I opened
them, the rubbish was all gone. The precious jewels, the
diamonds, the gold and silver coins, lay scattered in
profusion all over the room.
He then placed on the table a casket, much larger
and more beautiful than the former, and gathered up the
jewels, the diamonds, the coins, by the handful, and cast
them into the casket, till not one was left, although some
of the diamonds were not bigger than the point of a pin.
He then called upon me to “come and see.”
I looked into the casket, but my eyes were
dazzled with the sight. They shone with ten times
their former glory. I thought they had been scoured in
the sand by the feet of those wicked persons who had
scattered and trod them in the dust. They were arranged
in beautiful order in the casket, every one in its place,
without any visible pains of the man who cast them in. I
shouted with very joy, and that shout awoke me.
Early Writings, 81-84

i

PREFACE
symbolized in the book of Revelation as “a little book
open.” Daniel had been told to seal up his book (after
being written) until the „time of the end‟—1798. (John
was specifically told not to seal his book of Revelation,
and no other book of the Bible was ever closed up or
sealed.) But John saw that the book of Daniel would be
opened in Rev. 10:2. In 1798, this historically happened.
God‟s people saw the fulfillment of the 1260 day
prophesy and began to study the portion of Daniel that
had yet been unfulfilled—the 2300 day prophecy of
Daniel 8:14. Proof that the little book is indeed the book
of Daniel is seen in the fact that it is only after John
“eats” this once closed (but now open) little book, that all
the symbols and imagery from the book of Daniel
explode into the book of Revelation—even those same
time periods!

WHY DANIEL & REVELATION GO TOGETHER
Daniel, written in the sixth century BC, and
Revelation, written at the end of the first century AD,
contain some of the most important visions and dreams
to be found in the Bible. All of the visions are prophetic
and contain a train of events that occurred from the days
they were written to the last days.
There are many similarities to be found in these two
books. In fact, Revelation explains and complements the
book of Daniel, in just the same way that the New
Testament does to the Old Testament. This unity of
thought between two different writers over six hundred
years apart is remarkable and can only be explained by
the common source of inspiration—the Holy Spirit—
working on the minds of two men consecrated to God.
What are some of the similarities between these two
books?
“The blessing that introduces the reading of
Revelation (1:3) and concludes the reading of Daniel
(12:12) indicates the intention to couple the vision of
John precisely with that of Daniel….” Doukhan, DVE,
56.
Daniel and John had the same experience. Daniel
was one of many captives from Israel in the Babylonian
empire. John was one of many Christian prisoners in
the Pagan Roman empire. For their faith in God, both
were persecuted. Daniel was thrown into the den of
lions, John into a pot of boiling oil. Both came out alive.
Both lived to a great age. Both were beloved of God.
Both communicated with the angel Gabriel. Both saw
Jesus on the Sabbath day. See Dan. 10 and Rev. 1.
Both Daniel and Revelation mention the same
prophetic time period—the 1260 days. Daniel mentions
it two times in two prophecies and John mentions it five
times in three prophecies for a total of seven times! It
must be important!
God gave both Daniel and John visions that used
the same symbols! Notice:
God gave both Daniel and John visions that used
the same symbols! Notice that we find the symbols of a
lion, bear, leopard, and ten horns used in both Daniel
7:4-7 and Revelation 12:1,2. Notice also, that if you
add up the number of heads and horns they are the same!
7 and 10. There are two wings of an eagle used in both
Daniel 7:4 and Revelation 12:14.
Even when the same symbols are not used, there
are similarities. There is an interesting and very
important connection between both books in their
identification of the last persecuting power on Earth—the
anti-Christ. The “little horn” of Daniel 7 and the
“beast” of Rev. 13:1-10 have identical characteristics!
So necessary is it that these two books be studied
together is seen by the fact that the book of Daniel is

BOTH DANIEL AND REVELATION ARE VITAL
FOR GOD’S PEOPLE TO UNDERSTAND.
“Daniel and Revelation must be studied, as well
as the other prophecies of the Old and New
Testaments. Let there be light, yes, light, in your
dwellings. For this we need to pray. The Holy
Spirit, shining upon the sacred page, will open our
understanding, that we may know what is truth....
“There is need of a much closer study of the
word of God; especially should Daniel and the
Revelation have attention as never before in the
history of our work. We may have less to say in some
lines, in regard to the Roman power and the papacy;
but we should call attention to what the prophets and
apostles have written under the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit of God. The Holy Spirit has so shaped
matters, both in the giving of the prophecy and in the
events portrayed, as to teach that the human agent is
to be kept out of sight, hid in Christ, and that the
Lord God of heaven and His law are to be exalted.
Read the book of Daniel. Call up, point by point, the
history of the kingdoms there represented. Behold
statesmen, councils, powerful armies, and see how
God wrought to abase the pride of men, and lay
human glory in the dust....
“The light that Daniel received from God was
given especially for these last days. The visions he
saw by the banks of the Ulai and the Hiddekel, the
great rivers of Shinar, are now in process of
fulfillment, and all the events foretold will soon come
to pass. Consider the circumstances of the Jewish
nation when the prophecies of Daniel were given.
“Let us give more time to the study of the
Bible. We do not understand the word as we should.
The book of Revelation opens with an injunction to
us to understand the instruction that it contains.

ii

GEMS FROM REVELATION
‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of this prophecy,’ God declares, ‘and keep
those things which are written therein: for the time is
at hand.’ When we as a people understand what this
book means to us, there will be seen among us a
great revival. We do not understand fully the lessons
that it teaches, notwithstanding the injunction given
us to search and study it.
“In the past teachers have declared Daniel and
the Revelation to be sealed books, and the people
have turned from them. The veil whose apparent
mystery has kept many from lifting it, God’s own
hand has withdrawn from these portions of His word.
The very name ‘Revelation’ contradicts the statement
that it is a sealed book. ‘Revelation’ means that
something of importance is revealed. The truths of
this book are addressed to those living in these last
days. We are standing with the veil removed in the
holy place of sacred things. We are not to stand
without. We are to enter, not with careless, irreverent
thoughts, not with impetuous footsteps, but with
reverence and godly fear. We are nearing the time
when the prophecies of the book of Revelation are to
be fulfilled....
“We have the commandments of God and the
testimony of Jesus Christ, which is the spirit of
prophecy. Priceless gems are to be found in the
word of God. Those who search this word should
keep the mind clear. Never should they indulge
perverted appetite in eating or drinking. If they do
this, the brain will be confused; they will be unable to
bear the strain of digging deep to find out the
meaning of those things which relate to the closing
scenes of this earth’s history.
“When the books of Daniel and Revelation are
better understood, believers will have an entirely
different religious experience. They will be given
such glimpses of the open gates of heaven that heart
and mind will be impressed with the character that all
must develop in order to realize the blessedness
which is to be the reward of the pure in heart.
“The Lord will bless all who will seek humbly
and meekly to understand that which is revealed in
the Revelation. This book contains so much that is
large with immortality and full of glory that all who
read and search it earnestly receive the blessing to
those ‘that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep
those things which are written therein.’ One thing
will certainly be understood from the study of
Revelation—that the connection between God and
His people is close and decided.” Testimonies to
Ministers, pp. 112-114; Faith I Live By, p. 345.

HISTORICISM—is method of interpretation that
believes that from John`s day, there has been a
chronological fulfilment in history of the prophecies of
Daniel and Revelation. This commentary is based on
Historicist principles. In the ranks of Historicist
commentators are such illustrious names of the past as
Wycliffe, Martin Luther, John Knox, Newton, John
Wesley, etc. The Historicist Interpretation is based on
fulfilled prophecy—in following it we tread the solid
ground of accomplished facts. Prophecy is history
foretold. History is prophecy fulfilled. With the books
of Daniel and Revelation in the one hand and the History
book in the other hand, we are able to confirm the
chronological fulfilment of the events foretold in these
prophetic books.
The main reason why there is now so much
confusion about these two books today—almost 500
years since the Reformation first began—stems from the
fact that there are two other schools of interpretation now
being used.
1—PRETERISM—This school interprets on the
principal belief that all fulfilment of Revelation is past.
2—FUTURISM—This school believes that chapters 4 (or 6) to 22 of Revelation are still awaiting
fulfilment and that Daniel‟s 70th week and is still future.
How did these different ways of seeing come
about? Joseph Tanner, the Protestant writer, gives this
record:
“So great a hold did the conviction that the
Papacy was the Antichrist gain upon the minds of
men, that Rome at last saw she must bestir herself,
and try, by putting forth other systems of
interpretation, to counteract the identification of the
Papacy with the Antichrist.
“Accordingly, towards the close of the century
of the Reformation, two of the most learned doctors
set themselves to the task, each endeavoring by
different means to accomplish the same end,
namely, that of diverting men’s minds from
perceiving the fulfilment of the prophecies of the
Antichrist in the papal system. The Jesuit
Alcasar devoted himself to bring into prominence
the preterist method of interpretation,... and thus
endeavored to show that the prophecies of
Antichrist were fulfilled before the popes ever
ruled at Rome, and therefore could not apply to the
Papacy.
“On the other hand, the Jesuit Ribera tried to
set aside the application of these prophecies to the
papal power by bringing out the futurist system,
which asserts that these prophecies refer properly,
not to the career of the Papacy, but to that of some
future supernatural individual, who is yet to
appear, and to continue in power for three and a
half years. Thus, as Alford says, the Jesuit Ribera,
about AD 1580, may be regarded as the founder of
the futurist system in modern times. [This theory
was designed to throw dust in the eyes of the
Reformers, who recognized the Papacy as
Antichrist. Futurism was adopted and enlarged

METHODS OF INTERPRETATION
When the Bible was restored to God‟s people at
the beginning of the Reformation (1517 AD), there was
almost universal agreement among the Reformers that
the anti-Christ was papal Rome—the woman „drunken
with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus‟ (Rev 17: 6). This
is because the prophecies were interpreted historically.

iii

PREFACE
upon by J. N. Darby who organized the Plymouth
Brethren around 1830—and it is sad to say that,
today, a large body of Protestantism believes it.]
“It is a matter for deep regret that those who
hold and advocate the futurist system at the present
day, Protestants as they are for the most part, are
thus really playing into the hands of Rome, and
helping to screen the Papacy from detection as the
Antichrist. It has been well said that ‘futurism
tends to obliterate the brand put by the Holy
Spirit upon popery.‟ More especially is this to be
deplored at a time when the papal Antichrist seems
to be making an expiring effort to regain his former
hold on men‟s minds.—Daniel and the Revelation,
Rev. Joseph Tanner, B. A., pp. 16, 17. London:
Hodder and Stoughton, 1898.
The Historicist method of interpretation was the
key to understand the Bible prophecies which brought
about the Reformation and which will bring the
Reformation to completion. Careful and prayerful study
of Daniel and Revelation together will not only reward
the student with a flood of light upon the whole Bible.
Daniel and Revelation will also confirm the absolute
Sovereignty of the Lord God in the affairs of both
individuals and nations. The Word of God will truly
becoming „a lamp unto your feet and a light unto your
path.‟ Psalm 119:105.
“Great truths that have lain unheeded and
unseen since the day of Pentecost, are to shine from
God’s word in their native purity. To those who truly
love God the Holy Spirit will reveal truths that have
faded from the mind, and will also reveal truths that
are entirely new. Those who eat the flesh and drink
the blood of the Son of God will bring from the
books of Daniel and Revelation truth that is inspired
by the Holy Spirit. They will start into action forces
that cannot be repressed. The lips of children will
be opened to proclaim the mysteries that have been
hidden from the minds of men. The Lord has chosen
the foolish things of this world to confound the wise,
and the weak things of the world to confound the
mighty. Fundamentals of Christian Education, p. 474.

describes them as “those that keep the commandments of
God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.” Rev.
12:17. The “testimony of Jesus” is identified as “the
spirit of prophecy” in Rev. 19:10. The gift of prophecy
is included in the gifts that God bestows on His church as
prophesied in Joel 2, Ephesians 4. This gift was
bestowed upon the Second Advent movement in the
writings of Ellen G. White. This commentary holds that
her writings are inspired, and are used to bring light upon
the verses of Daniel and Revelation. She herself has said
of her writings:
“I recommend to you, dear reader, the
Word of God as the rule of your faith and
practice. By that Word we are to be judged. God
has, in that Word, promised to give visions in the
‘last days’; not for a new rule of faith, but for the
comfort of His people, and to correct those who
err from Bible truth. Thus God dealt with Peter
when He was about to send him to preach to the
Gentiles. (Acts 10.)” Early Writings, p. 78.
The final link between both books of prophecy is
their single purpose. Daniel expressed it this way: “
“My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the
lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as
before him innocency was found in me; and also
before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.” Daniel
6:22. Daniel was obedient to the ten commandments and
was innocent in God’s eyes (first four commandments)
and in the king’s eyes (last six commandments.)
The same thought is expressed by John: “Here is
the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.”
Revelation 14:12.
“The purpose of God in the prophetic books of
Daniel and John is simply to save every one from sin.
God wants every one on planet earth to be obedient to
the ten commandments by the power of Jesus Christ
through the indwelling presence of the Holy Spirit.
One thing is for sure—God’s last day church will
participate in the fulfillment of the last portions of the
prophecies of Daniel and Revelation. Today is the day
of opportunity to be part of that remnant body of
believers. It is vital that we correctly understand them to
guide our steps aright.

USE OF THE SPIRIT OF PROPHECY
The book of Revelation describes God’s last day
church as those that “keep the commandments of God
and the faith of Jesus.” Rev. 14:12. A parallel verse

May God bless this volume is our prayer.

iv

GEMS FROM REVELATION

ABBREVIATIONS USED IN GEMS FROM REVELATION
Anderson, UR—Anderson, Roy Allen,
Unfolding the Revelation.
Andrews, TAM— Andrews, John N. The
Three Messages of Revelation 14.
Andrews, JEO— Andrews, John N. The
Judgment. Its Events and Their Order.
Batchelor, Newsletter—Batchelor, Doug.
Amazing Facts Newsletter, p. 1, June, 2005.
Bates, Autobiography—Bates, Joseph.
Autobiography of Joseph Bates.
Bates, Seal of God—Bates, Joseph. Seal of
the Living God.
Bates, Waymarks—Bates, Joseph.
Waymarks and Highheaps.
Battistone, God’s Church—Battistone,
Joseph J. God’s Church in a Hostile World.
Bible Readings—Bible Readings for the
Home. Harvestime Books
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR—Symposium
on Revelation—Book 1, by the Biblical
Research Institute of SDA. (Ed. by Frank
Holbrook.)
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR—Symposium
on Revelation—Book 2, by the Biblical
Research Institute of SDA. (Ed. by Frank
Holbrook.)
Bohr, NR10—Bohr, Stephen P. Notes on
Revelation 10.

Revelation Verse by Verse.
Fitch, Charles, Midnight Cry, Letter,
3/14/1844—Fitch, Charles. The Midnight
Cry, Letter from Charles Fitch, March 14,
1844.
Gibbon, RAFRE—Gibbon, Rise and Fall of
the Roman Empire, Vol. 4.
Gilbert, MIHS—Gilbert, F.C.. Messiah in His
Sanctuary.
Goldstein, 1844MS—Goldstein, Clifford,
1844 Made Simple.
Haskell, CAIS—Haskell, Stephen N., The
Cross and Its Shadow.
Haskell, SSP—Haskell, Stephen N., The
Story of the Seer of Patmos.
Hawkins, SITS—Hawkins, Gerald. Splendor
in the Sky.
Heiks, AD538—Heiks, Heidi. AD 538
Source Book.
Henry, 6MHC—Henry, Matthew.
Commentary on the Whole Bible, Vol. 6.
Jones, GNOT—Jones, A.T., Great Nations of
Today,
Jones, Patrick, Our Firm Foundation—
Jones, Patrick. “‘Jericho, the Roman Empire,
and the Seven Trumpets,” Our Firm
Foundation, September, 2004,

Meltzer, They Came in Chains—Meltzer,
Milton, They Came in Chains.
Metcalf, GPDR—Metcalf, Harold E., The
Great Prophecies of Daniel and the
Revelation. Atlanta, Georgia, 1980.
Michaelson, Write the Vision—Michaelson,
Victor. Write the Vision, Make It Plain.
Vols. 1 and 2. Self-Published. 1986.
Midnight Cry, Letter from Charles Fitch,
March 14, 1844.
Miller, Evidence—Miller, William. Evidence
From Scripture and History of the Second
Coming of Christ, about the Year 1843.
Nelson, TA—Nelson, Lawrence. The
Antichrist.
Olsen, PSAD—Olsen, V. Norskov. Papal
Supremacy and American Democracy.
Paulien, End-Time—Paulien, Jon. What the
Bible Says About the End-Time.
Peck, PATH—Peck, Sarah Elizabeth. Path to
the Throne of God.
Pickle, STR—Pickle, Bob, The Seven
Trumpets of Revelation.
Price, Time of the End—Price, George
MacCready. Time of the End.
Prewitt, Worship Talk, 12/2003—Prewitt,
Eugene. Worship Talk, Covington, KY.
December, 2003.

Bunch, SEOC —Bunch, Taylor G. The
Seven Epistles of Christ.

Knight, AVNA—Knight, George. The
Apocalyptic Vision and the Neutering of
Adventism.

Rafferty, PI— Rafferty, James. Prophetic
Insights.

Bunch, TR—Bunch, Taylor G.. The
Revelation.

LaRondelle, LFTLD—LaRondelle, Hans.
Light for the Last Days, Pacific Press, 1999.

Rosenvold, SSAST—The Seven Seals and the
Seven Trumpets, by Lloyd Rosenvold, M.D.

Burnside, RWU—Burnside, G. Revelations
Wonders Unfolded.

Litch, Signs, 2/1/1841—Litch, Josiah. “Signs
of the Times,” February 1, 1841, Vol. 1, No.
21, front-page, Boston.

7SDA Bible Commentary—Nichol, Francis
D, ed.. The Seventh-day Adventist Bible
Commentary.

Josiah Litch. “THE ELEVENTH OF
AUGUST, 1840. Fall of the Ottoman
Empire.”

SDA Pub. Ass., TST—Seventh-Day Adventist
Publ. Ass., Steam Press of the. An Exposition
of The Seven Trumpets of Revelation 8 & 9.

Loughborough, GSAM. The Great Second
Advent Movement.

Skeete, CR16—Skeet, John, Commentary on
Revelation 16.

Magan, Vatican & the War—Magan, Percy
T.. The Vatican and the War.

Smith, DR (1897)—Smith, Uriah. Daniel and
the Revelation.

Mansell, OSOA—Mansell, Donald Ernest,
Open Secrets of the Anti-Christ.

Standish, Russell and Colin, TB14P—
Standish, Russell R. & Colin D. Two Beasts,
Three Deadly Wounds, & Fourteen Popes.

Clark, 1844—Clark, Jerome L.. 1844:
Religious Movements, Vol. 1.
Cooke, #1-UR—Cooke, Austin.
Understanding Revelation, 33 booklets.
Crews, TUSU—Crews, Joe. Three Unclean
Spirits Unmasked. Down-loaded from:
.amazingfacts.org/items
Dalrymple, “The Church of Laodicea,”
Signs, 11/14/1933—Dalrymple, Gwynne,
“The Church of Laodicea”, Signs of the
Times, Nov. 14, 1933.
Edson, Document File, 588—Hiram Edson
manuscript. Document File, 588,
Ferrell, WayMarks Tract 758, May, 1997—Ferrell,
Vance. Waymarks Tract 758, May, 1997.

Mason, KONAS—Mason, Moses, The King
of the North and South.
Maxwell, God Cares—Maxwell, C. Mervyn,
Ph.D., God Cares, Vol. 2.

Steel, Eclipse—Steel, Duncan. Eclipse: The
Celestial Phenomenon That Changed the
Course of History.
Straw, SR—Straw, SR,, Walter E. Studies in

Feyerabend, RVBV—Feyerabend, Henry,

v

ABBREVIATIONS
Revelation.

Gospel in Revelation.

Strong, DGT—Strong, James, S.T.D., LL.D.,
A Concise Dictionary of the Greek
Testament.

Wyley, HOP—Wyley, The History of
Protestantism, Vol. 1.

Swearingen, TOOTN—Swearingen, Marc
Alden.
Tidings Out of the Northeast.
Remnant Publications, 2006.
Thiele, OSIR— Thiele, Edwin R.,

Outline Studies in Revelation.
Treiyer, Apocalypse—Treiyer, Alberto.
Apocalypse: The Seals and Trumpets.
United Bible Societies—United Bible
Societies, Web Site, 6/2005.
Were, KONAJ—Were, Louis F.. The King of
the North at Jerusalem.
Were, KTCFS— Were, Louis F.. The Kings
That Come From the Sunrising.
Were, WATB—Were, Louis F.. The Woman
and the Beast.
Were, 144,000 Sealed!— Were, Louis F..
144,000 Sealed! When?
White, James,Bible Adventism—James
White, Bible Adventism.
White, James, Life—James White, Life’s
Incidents.
White, James, SST—James White, Sounding
of the Seven Trumpets of Rev. 8 & 9.
White, James, The 144,000, Advent Review,
9/1850.—James White, “The 144,000”, The
Advent Review, Vol. 1, No. 4, Sept., 1850.
White, James, The Seven Churches, R&H,
10/16/1856—James White, “The Seven
Churches”, Review & Herald, Oct. 16, 1856.
White, James, The Seventh Angel, R&H,
3/7/1854—James White. “The Seventh
Angel,” Review & Herald, Rochester, March
7, 1854.
White, James, The War and the Sealing,
R&H, 4/25/1865—James White, “The War
and the Sealing”, Review & Herald, April 25,
1865.
White, James et. al., The Biblical Institute,
Lesson 21, “The Seven Seals,” 1877—White,
James et. al.. The Biblical Institute. Lesson
21, “The Seven Seals,"
White, James, et. al., WTLF—White, James,
et. al., Word to the Little Flock.
Wieland, GIR—Wieland, Robert J., The

Zurcher, COR—Zurcher, J. R., Christ of the
Revelation.
Abbreviations of Books Authored
by Ellen G. White
Acts of the Apostles—The Acts of
the Apostles
Adventist Home—Adventist Home,
The
Appeal to Youth—Appeal to the
Youth, An.
Battle Creek Letters—Battle Creek
Letters.
1BC, (2BC, etc. to 7BC)—Bible
Commentary, EGW Comments,
Vol. 1 to 7.
Counsels on Diet & Foods—
Counsels on Diet and Foods
Child Guidance—Child Guidance
Christ’s Object Lessons—Christ’s
Object Lessons
Counsels of Health—Counsels on
Health
Colporteur Ministry—Colporteur
Ministry
Counsels on Stewardship—Counsels
on Stewardship
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and
Students—Counsels to Parents,
Teachers, and Students
Counsels to Writers—Counsels to
Writers and Editors.
Desire of Ages—The Desire of Ages
Education—Education
1888—Ellen White 1888 Materials,
The
Evangelism—Evangelism
Early Writings—Early Writings
Faith & Works—Faith and Works
Faith I Live By—Faith I Live By,
The.
Fundamentals of Christian Education—
Fundamentals of
Christian Education.
Great Controversy—The Great
Controversy Between Christ and
Satan
Gospel Workers—Gospel Workers
Historical Sketches— Historical
Sketches of the Foreign Missions
of the Seventh-day Adventists
(1886) Practical Addresses.
Last Day Events—Last Day Events
Letter—Letter, #, Date.
Life of Paul—Sketches From the
Life of Paul
Life Sketches—Life Sketches of
Ellen G. White
Loma Linda Messages—Loma Linda
Messages.
Manuscript—Manuscript (dated)
Manuscript Releases—Manuscript
Releases, Vol. 1-21.

vi

Mount of Blessing—Thoughts From
the Mount of Blessing
Medical Ministry—Medical Ministry
Ministry of Healing—Ministry of
Healing, The
My Life Today—My Life Today
Messages to Young People—
Messages to Young People
Our High Calling—Our High
Calling
Pamphlet PH028—Pamphlet PH028
Pamphlet SpTB17a—Pamphlet
SpTB17a, “The Unwise Use of
Money and The Spirit of
Speculation, 1911.
Patriarchs & Prophets—Patriarchs
and Prophets, The Story of
Prophets & Kings—Prophets and
Kings, The Story of
Retirement Years—Retirement
Years, The.
Sermons & Talks—Sermons and
Talks, Vol. 1 & 2
Son & Daughters—Sons and
Daughters of God
Selected Messages—Selected
Messages, Vol. 1, 2, 3.
Southern Work—Southern Work,
The.
Spalding & Magan—Spaulding and
Magan Collection
Special Testimonies—Special
Testimonies for Ministers and
Workers, No.7 and No.10, (1897)
Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 3, 4—Spirit
of Prophecy, Vol. 3, 4.
Spiritual Gifts, Vol. (1 to 4)—
Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 1 to 4.
Steps to Christ—Steps to Christ.
Temperance—Temperance.
Testimonies to Ministers—
Testimonies to Ministers and
Gospel Workers
1 Testimonies—Testimonies for the
Church, vol. 1 (2 Testimonies,
etc., for vols. 2 to 9)
This Day With God.
Undated Manuscript 66—Undated
Manuscript 66.
Upward Look—Upward Look
Ellen G. White, Periodicals
Bible Echo—Bible Echo, The
Day-Star—Day-Star, The, 1846.
Gen. Conf. Bulletin—General
Conference Daily Bulletin, The.
Home Missionary—Home
Missionary, The
Lake Union Herald, 12/23/1908—Lake Union
Herald.
Review & Herald—The Advent
Review and Sabbath Herald
Signs—Signs of the Times
Word to Little Flock—Word to the
Little Flock, A (pamphlet)

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 1

REVELATION 1
REVELATION 1:1-20

REVELATION 1: 1
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which
God gave unto him, to shew unto his
servants things which must shortly come to
pass; and he sent and signified it by his
angel unto his servant John.

1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to
shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass;
and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John:
2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of
Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw.
3 Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the
time is at hand.
4 John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be unto
you, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to
come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne;
5 And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the
first begotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth.
Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood,
6 And hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father;
to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
7 Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him,
and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth
shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen.
8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith
the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty.
9 I John, who also am your brother, and companion in
tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was
in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the
testimony of Jesus Christ.
10 I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and heard behind me a
great voice, as of a trumpet.
11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and,
What thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven
churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and
unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto
Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.
12 And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And being
turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks;
13 And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the
Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt
about the paps with a golden girdle.
14 His head and his hairs were like wool, as white as snow; and
his eyes were as a flame of fire.
15 And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a
furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters.
16 And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his
mouth went a sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance was as
the sun shineth in his strength.
17 And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid
his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first
and the last:
18 I am he that liveth and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for
evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.
19 Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which
are, and the things which shall be hereafter;
20 The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right
hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the
angels of the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks which
thou sawest are the seven churches.

The Revelation.—
“In the Revelation are portrayed the deep things of
God. The very name given to its inspired pages, ‘the
Revelation,’ contradicts the statement that this is a
sealed book. A revelation is something revealed. The
Lord Himself revealed to His servant the mysteries
contained in this book, and He designs that they shall be
open to the study of all.” Acts of the Apostles, 584.
“And he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings of
the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand.”
Revelation 22:10.
“The erroneous idea that this book is sealed has
been the chief factor in making it the neglected book of
the Bible, and also constitutes the principal excuse for
not studying it. Those who thus excuse their neglect are
described in Isaiah 29:11,12: ‘And the vision of all is
become unto you as the words of a book that is
sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned,
saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot;
for it is sealed: and the book is delivered to him that
is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he
saith, I am not learned.’ Here are the two principal
excuses for neglecting the study of the Revelation. The
learned say, ‘It is sealed,’ and the unlearned say, ‘I am
not learned.’ The minister hides behind what he thinks
makes it impossible for him to interpret the book, and
the laity behind their lack of theological knowledge and
training in the Scriptures. Nevertheless the divine
promise is: ‘In that day shall the deaf hear the words
of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of
obscurity, and out of darkness. The meek also shall
increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among
men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.’ Isaiah
29:18,19. Is this a prophecy of the universal study of the
Revelation resulting in the bestowal of the blessings
promised to those who read, hear, and obey?” Bunch,
SEOC, 39,40.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ.—
“Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he
will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of

1

GEMS FROM REVELATION
himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak: and he will shew you things to come. He shall
glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall
shew it unto you. John 16:13,14. The Revelation of
Jesus Christ occurs only through the Holy Spirit.” PJ.

produced by natural causes, but wholly depending
upon the will of God, could be the object only of divine
prescience, and must come ...only by revelation. Our
Lord Jesus is the great trustee of divine revelation; it is
to him that we owe the knowledge we have of what we
are to expect from God and what he expects from us.”
Henry, 6MHC, 1118.

“I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s Day, and
heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet.”
Revelation 1:10.

“In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge.” Col. 2:3.

“But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which
was preached of me is not after man. For I neither
received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.” Gal. 1:11,12.

To Shew Unto His Servants.—
“His servants—who are they? For whose benefit
was the Revelation given? Was it to be for any specified
persons, for any particular churches, for any special
period of time? No, it is for all the church in all time,
as long as any of the events predicted within the book
remain to be accomplished. It is for all those who can
claim the appellation, ‘His servants,’ wherever or
whenever they may live.” Smith, DR, 340.

“Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be
sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be
brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.”
1 Peter 1:13

“To John the Lord opened the subjects that He saw
would be needed by His people in the last days.
…Those who would be co-workers with our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ will show a deep interest in the
truths found in this book. With pen and voice they will
strive to make plain the wonderful things that Christ
came from heaven to reveal. (Rev. 1:1-3 quoted). The
solemn messages that have been given in their order in
the Revelation are to occupy the first place in the
minds of God’s people. Nothing else is to be allowed
to engross our attention.” 8 Testimonies, 301,302.

The Purpose of the Revelation.—
“Those things which are revealed belong unto us
and to our children forever, that we may do all the
words of this law.” Deuteronomy 29:29.
Which God Gave Unto Him.—
“I speak unto the world those things which I have
heard of Him.... As my Father hath taught me, I
speak these things.” John 8:26.
“For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father
which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I
should say, and what I should speak. And I know that
His commandment is life everlasting: Whatsoever I
speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I
speak.” John 12:49,50.

Things Which Must Shortly Come to Pass.—
“In one way or another the thought that the various
events foretold in the book of Revelation were to take
place in the not distant future is specifically stated seven
times—‘things which must shortly come to pass [or, ‘be
done’]” (chs. 1:1; 22:6), ‘the time is at hand’ (ch. 1:3),
and ‘Behold [or, ‘surely’], I come quickly’ (chs. 3:11;
22:7, 12, 20). ...The concept of the imminence of the
return of Jesus is thus both explicit and implicit
throughout the book.”
7SDA Bible Commentary,
728,729.

“I will raise them up a Prophet from among their
brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his
mouth and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him.” Deuteronomy 18:18.
“The Son is in all respects equal with and is indeed
one with the Father, but in the carrying out of the
‘counsel of peace,’ Jesus ‘emptied Himself’ of His
glory to become the Mediator between God and man.
In this voluntarily assumed status, God gave Him a
revelation that He might in turn communicate it to man.
Thus Revelation is called by the dual name of ‘the
Word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ.’
Revelation 1:2.” Burnside, RWU, 6,7.

“This revelation was given for the guidance and
comfort of the church throughout the Christian
dispensation. …Its truths are addressed to those living
in the last days of this earth’s history, as well as to those
living in the days of John. Some of the scenes depicted
in this prophecy are in the past, some are now taking
place; some bring to view the close of the great
conflict between the powers of darkness and the Prince
of heaven, and some reveal the triumphs and joys of the
redeemed in the earth made new.” Acts of the
Apostles, 583,584.

“Though Christ is himself God, and as such has
light and life in himself, yet, as he sustains the office of
Mediator between God and man, he receives his
instructions from the Father. The human nature of
Christ, though endowed with greatest sagacity,
judgment, and penetration, could not, in a way of
reason, discover these great events, which not being

“Write the things which thou hast seen, and the
things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter.” Rev. 1:19.

2

REVELATION 1
of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.
Luke 1:26,27.

“…And the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his
angel to shew unto his servants the things which must
shortly be done.” Rev. 22:6.

“...The truths to be revealed to Daniel were
committed exclusively to Christ, and to an angel whose
name was Gabriel.
Similar to the work of
communicating important truth to the ‘beloved prophet’
is the work of Christ in the book of the Revelation—
transmitting important truth to the ‘beloved disciple.’
Who in this work can be His angel but the one who was
engaged with Daniel in the former work of prophecy,
that is, the angel Gabriel? It would also seem most
appropriate that the same angel who was employed to
carry messages to the ‘beloved’ prophet of ancient times,
should perform the same office for the prophet John in
the gospel age.” Smith, DR, 341.

He Sent and Signified It—
“The Revelation was ‘signified’ by the angel to the
prophet. Signify means ‘to make signs or tokens; to
communicate by signs; to signify by symbols.’ The
messages of the book are revealed in signs and symbols.
Its prophecies are symbolic.” Bunch, SEOC, 28.
“The second commandment prohibits image
worship; but God himself employed pictures and
symbols to represent to his prophets lessons which he
would have them give to the people, and which could
thus be better understood than if given in any other
way. He appealed to the understanding through the sense
of sight. Prophetic history was presented to Daniel and
John in symbols, and these were to be represented
plainly upon tables, that he who read might
understand.” 2 Selected Messages, 319.

“It was Gabriel, the angel next in rank to the Son of
God, who came with the divine message to Daniel. It
was Gabriel, ‘His angel,’ whom Christ sent to open the
future to the beloved John.” Desire of Ages, 234.
“Wonderful thought—that the angel who stands
next in honor to the Son of God is the one chosen to
open the purposes of God to sinful men.” Desire of
Ages, 99.

“Like the book of Daniel, events, nations and
churches are represented by prophetic [symbols]. It
reveals great earthly powers used by Satan to war
against the church of God. These powers must be
revealed in symbols in order to protect God’s
servants from their enemies. Revelation exposes and
predicts the doom and downfall of all who oppose the
truth of God. For instance, had Pagan Rome been
described in plain language, the church could never have
survived the persecutions. If symbols had not been
used to describe the Papacy and its work, the Bible
might not have lived through the Dark Ages.
Apostate Protestantism might not be so keen to circulate
the Bible if symbols were not used. God in His wisdom
used symbols.” Burnside, RWU, 11,12.

Holy Spirit Involved.—
“Through the ministry of the angels the Holy
Spirit is enabled to work upon the mind and heart of
the human agent and draw him to Christ.” That I May
Know Him, 57.
“For the prophecy came not in old time by the will
of man: but holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.” 2 Peter 1:21.
“I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard
behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet.” Revelation
1:10.

“Had they [future events] been as clearly foretold
in all their circumstances as God could have revealed
them, the prediction might have prevented the
accomplishment; but they are foretold more darkly, to
beget in us a veneration for the Scripture, and to
engage our attention and excite our enquiry.” Henry,
6MHC, 1119.

Unto His Servant John.—
“The angels signified it to the apostle John. As the
angels are messengers of Christ, the ministers are the
messengers of the churches; what they receive from
heaven, they are to communicate to the churches.”
Henry, 6MHC, 1119.

His Angel.—
“Christ sent and made known the Revelation to
John by ‘His angel.’ A particular angel seems to be
brought to view here. What angel could appropriately
be called Christ’s angel?” Smith, DR, 340,341.

REVELATION 1:2
Who bare record of the word of God,
and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of
all things that he saw.

“And I heard a man’s voice between the banks of
Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to
understand the vision.” Daniel 8:16.

Who Bare Record.—
“God reveals Himself to man in various ways.
‘Nature is the mirror of divinity;’ the Word of God is
His character in human language; Christ was that Word
lived in human form, and the body of Christ—the

“And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent
from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,
To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph,

3

GEMS FROM REVELATION
church—has, in addition to these methods, the
providences, or leadings, of the Spirit. Thus John ‘bare
record of the Word of God,’ as written and as lived in
Christ; and he bare record also ‘of the testimony of
Jesus Christ,’ ‘which is the spirit of prophecy,’ and he
likewise bare record of the signs which Gabriel
presented to his vision—the ‘all things that he saw.’”
Haskel, SSP, 30.

REVELATION 1:3
Blessed is he that readeth, and they that
hear the words of this prophecy, and keep
those things which are written therein: for
the time is at hand.

“The Greek word for ‘bare record’ is martureo,
which means to be a witness, i.e. testify (lit. or fig.).”
[The English word, ‘martyr,’ is related to it.] Strong’s
Dictionary of the Greek Testament, #3140.

Blessed Is He That Readeth, And They that Hear.—
“Is there so direct and formal a blessing pronounced upon the reading and observance of any other
part of the word of God? What encouragement we have
for its study! Shall we say that it cannot be understood?
Is a blessing offered for the study of a book which it
can do us no good to study? God has pronounced His
blessing upon the reader of this prophecy, and has set the
seal of His approbation to an earnest study of its
marvelous pages.” Smith, DR, 341.

“That which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which
we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of
the Word of life; (For the life was manifested, and we
have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that
eternal life, which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us;) That which we have seen and
heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.” 1 Jn. 1:1-3.

“Let none think, because they cannot explain the
meaning of every symbol in the Revelation, that it is
useless for them to search this book in an effort to know
the meaning of the truth it contains. The One who
revealed these mysteries to John will give to the diligent
searcher for truth a foretaste of heavenly things. Those
whose hearts are open to the reception of truth will
be enabled to understand its teachings, and will be
granted the blessing promised to those who ‘hear the
words of this prophecy, and keep those things which
are written therein.’” Acts of the Apostles, 584.

“To this end was I born, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the
truth.” John 18:37.
“If God has given us light, it is that we may
reveal it to others.” 5 Testimonies, 743.

“None need be in darkness in regard to what is
coming upon the earth. Why, then, this widespread
ignorance concerning an important part of Holy Writ?
Why this general reluctance to investigate its teachings?
It is the result of a studied effort of the prince of
darkness to conceal from man that which reveals his
deceptions. For this reason, Christ the Revelator,
foreseeing the warfare that would be waged against the
study of Revelation, pronounced a blessing upon all
who should read, hear, and observe the words of the
prophecy.” Great Controversy, 342.

Of the Word of God.—
“In the Revelation all the books of the Bible
meet and end. Here is the complement of the book of
Daniel. One is a prophecy; the other a revelation.” Acts
of the Apostles, 585.
The Testimony of Jesus Christ.—
“The testimony of Christ, a testimony of the most
solemn character, is to be borne to the world. All
through the book of Revelation there are the most
precious, elevating promises, and there are also
warnings of the most fearfully solemn import. Will
not those who profess to have a knowledge of the truth
read the testimony given to John by Christ? Here is no
guesswork, no scientific deception. Here are the truths
that concern our present and future welfare. What is the
chaff to the wheat?” 8 Testimonies, 302.

“When we as a people understand what this book
means to us, there will be seen among us a great
revival.” Testimony to Ministers, p. 113
“When the books of Daniel and Revelation are
better understood, believers will have an entirely
different religious experience. They will be given such
glimpses of the open gates of heaven that heart and mind
will be impressed with the character that all must
develop in order to realize the blessedness which is to be
the reward of the pure in heart. The Lord will bless all
who will seek humbly and meekly to understand that
which is revealed in the Revelation. This book
contains so much that is large with immortality and full
of glory that all who read and search it earnestly
receive the blessing to those ‘that hear the words of

“John lived to be very aged. He witnessed the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the ruin of the stately
temple—a symbol of the final ruin of the world. To his
latest days John closely followed his Lord. The burden
of his testimony to the churches was, ‘Beloved, let us
love one another;’ ‘he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth
in God, and God in him.’ 1 Jn. 4:7, 16.” Desire of
Ages, 816.
(See additional comments under Rev. 1:9)

4

REVELATION 1
this prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein.’
One thing will certainly be
understood from the study of Revelation—that the
connection between God and His people is close and
decided.” Testimonies to Ministers, 114.

The Time is at Hand.—
“Time is short. The perils of the last days are
upon us, and we should watch and pray, and study and
heed the lessons that are given us in the books of Daniel
and the Revelation.” 6 Testimonies, 128.

Keep Those Things Which are Written Therein.—
“Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and
keep it.” Luke 11:28.

REVELATION 1: 4
John to the seven churches which are in
Asia: Grace be unto you, and peace, from
him which is, and which was, and which is
to come; and from the seven Spirits which
are before his throne.

“If a man love me, he will keep my words: and
my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him.” John 14:23.
“Says the prophet: ‘Blessed is he that readeth’—
there are those who will not read; the blessing is not for
them. ‘And they that hear’—there are some, also, who
refuse to hear anything concerning the prophecies; the
blessing is not for this class. ‘And keep those things
which are written therein’—many refuse to heed the
warnings and instructions contained in the Revelation;
none of these can claim the blessing promised. All who
ridicule the subjects of the prophecy and mock at the
symbols here solemnly given, all who refuse to
reform their lives and to prepare for the coming of
the Son of man will be unblessed.”
Great
Controversy, 341.

Seven.—
THE NUMBER SEVEN IN THE APOCALYPSE
Rev. 1:4
Seven churches
Rev. 1:4
Seven spirits
Rev. 1:12
Seven golden candlesticks
Rev. 1:16
Seven stars in Christ’s right hand
Rev. 4:5
Seven lamps of fire before throne
Rev. 5:1
Seven seals
Rev. 5:6
Seven horns & seven eyes
Rev. 8:2
Seven angels with seven trumpets
Rev. 10:3
Seven thunders
Rev. 12:3
Seven heads with seven crowns
Rev. 15:1
Seven angels with seven last plagues
Rev. 17:9
Seven mountains
Rev. 17:10
Seven kings
Thiele, OSIR, 21.

“Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any
time we should let them slip.” Hebrews 2:1.
“We have also a more sure word of prophecy;
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light
that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day star arise in your hearts.” 2 Peter 1:19.

“The number seven indicates completeness.” Acts
of the Apostles, 585.
Churches.—
“This book is not dedicated to cities, provinces, or
nations, but to the church and its members. Only
children of the kingdom can therefore grasp its
secrets, for to them it was written and dedicated.”
Bunch, SEOC, 58.

“But that on the good ground are they, which in an
honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it,
and bring forth fruit with patience.” Lk. 8:15.
The Seven Apocalyptic Beatitudes.—
“Like the Sermon on the Mount, the Revelation
breathes the benediction of heaven.
Note these
beatitudes:
[1] ‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that
hear.’ 1:3.
[2] ‘Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.’
14:13.
[3] ‘Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his
garments.’ 16:15.
[4] ‘Blessed are they which are called unto the
marriage supper.’ 19:9.
[5] ‘Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the
first resurrection.’ 20:6.
[6] ‘Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.’ 22:7.
[7] ‘Blessed are they that do His
commandments....’ 22:14.” Anderson, UR, 6,7.

“The word church means a company who have
been ‘called out of’ or ‘from among.’ It is an assembly
of those who have been called out of the world and
from among unbelievers and then sent back into the
world as Christ’s ambassadors.” Bunch, SEOC, 96.
“In the days of the Reformation, the gentle and
pious Melanchthon declared, “There is no other
church than the assembly of those who have the word
of God, and who are purified by it.” Spirit of
Prophecy, Vol. 4, 237.
“The church is God’s fortress—His city of
refuge, which He holds in a revolted world. Any
betrayal of the church is treachery to Him who has
bought mankind with the blood of His only-begotten

5

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Son.
From the beginning, faithful souls have
constituted the church on earth. In every age the Lord
has had His watchmen, who have borne a faithful
testimony to the generation in which they lived. These
sentinels gave the message of warning; and when they
were called to lay off their armor, others took up the
work. God brought these witnesses into covenant
relation with Himself, uniting the church on earth
with the church in heaven. He has sent forth His
angels to minister to His church, and the gates of hell
have not been able to prevail against His people.
“Through centuries of persecution, conflict, and
darkness, God has sustained His church. Not one
cloud has fallen upon it that He has not prepared for; not
one opposing force has risen to counterwork His work,
that He has not foreseen. All has taken place as He
predicted. He has not left His church forsaken, but has
traced in prophetic declarations what would occur, and
that which His Spirit inspired the prophets to foretell has
been brought about. All His purposes will be fulfilled.
His law is linked with His throne, and no power of evil
can destroy it. Truth is inspired and guarded by God;
and it will triumph over all opposition.
“During ages of spiritual darkness the church of
God has been as a city set on a hill. From age to age,
through successive generations, the pure doctrines of
heaven have been unfolding within its borders.
Enfeebled and defective as it may appear, the church
is the one object upon which God bestows in a special
sense His supreme regard. It is the theater of His
grace, in which He delights to reveal His power to
transform hearts.” Acts of the Apostles,11,12.

of Asia, which represented the people of God
throughout the world.”
(Manuscript 155, 1902).
Sermons and Talks, Vol. 2, 213.
“We should bear in mind that the message to the
churches is to God’s true people; while the horses of
the seals trace the apostasy as it developed in the
church.” Straw, SR, 17.
“The names of the seven churches are symbolic of
the church in different periods of the Christian Era.
The number 7 indicates complete-ness, and is symbolic
of the fact that the messages extend to the end of time,
while the symbols used reveal the condition of the
church at different periods in the history of the
world.” Acts of the Apostles, 585.
(See also the notes under Revelation 1:11.)
Grace.—
“Wherever there is an impulse of love and
sympathy, wherever the heart reaches out to bless and
uplift others, there is revealed the working of God's Holy
Spirit. In the depths of heathenism, men who have had
no knowledge of the written law of God, who have never
even heard the name of Christ, have been kind to His
servants, protecting them at the risk of their own lives.
Their acts show the working of a divine power. The
Holy Spirit has implanted the grace of Christ in the
heart of the savage, quickening his sympathies contrary
to his nature, contrary to his education. The ‘Light
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world’
(John 1:9), is shining in his soul; and this light, if
heeded, will guide his feet to the kingdom of God.”
Christ’s Object Lessons, 386.

“God has a church. It is not the great cathedral,
neither is it the national establishment, neither is it the
various denominations; it is the people who love God
and keep His commandments. ‘Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them’ (Matt. 18:20). Where Christ is even
among the humble few, this is Christ’s church, for the
presence of the High and Holy One who inhabiteth
eternity can alone constitute a church.” Upward Look,
315.

“Our characters are now forming for eternity. Here
on earth we are training for heaven.
We owe
everything to grace, free grace, sovereign grace.
Grace in the covenant ordained our adoption. Grace in
the Saviour effected our redemption, our regeneration,
and our adoption to heirship with Christ. Let this grace
be revealed to others.” 6 Testimonies, 268.

“Likewise greet the church that is in their
house.” Romans 16:5. “Aquilla and Priscilla salute
you much in the Lord, with the church that is in their
house.” 1 Cor. 16:19. “Salute the brethren which are
in Laodicea, and Mymphas, and the church which is in
his house.” Col. 4:15. “And to our beloved Apphia,
and Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church in
thy house.” Philemon 2.

“Grace be to you, and peace, from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.” Eph. 1:2.

“Christ would have a church that labors to
separate the evil from the good, whose members will
not willingly tolerate wrong-doing, but will expel it from
the heart and life.” Review & Herald, 12/4/1900.

Peace.—
“‘Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you; not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not
your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.’ Jn.
14:27. This peace is not the peace that comes through
conformity to the world. Christ never purchased peace
by compromise with evil. The peace that Christ left his
disciples is internal rather than external, and was ever
to remain with His witnesses through strife and
contention.”Acts of the Apostles, 84.

To the Seven Churches in Asia.—
“The Revelation was written to the seven churches

“Peace comes with dependence on divine power.
As fast as the soul resolves to act in accordance with the

6

REVELATION 1
light given, the Holy Spirit gives more light and
strength. The grace of the Spirit is supplied to cooperate
with the soul’s resolve, but it is not a substitute for the
individual exercise of faith.” Testimonies to Ministers,
518.

“‘These things saith He that hath the seven Spirits
of God….’ Rev. 3:1. ‘Let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the churches.’ Repeated seven times.”
Burnside, RWU, 62.
“To the end of time, the presence of the Spirit is to
abide with the true church.” Acts of the Apostles, 55.

Grace and Peace From the Godhead.—
“Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be
with you. …The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the communion of the Holy
Ghost, be with you all. Amen.” 2 Cor. 13:11,14.

His Throne.—
“This refers to the throne of God the Father, for
Christ has not yet taken His own throne. The seven
spirits being before the throne ‘may be intended to
designate the fact that the Divine Spirit was, as it were,
prepared to go forth, or to be sent forth ...to
accomplish important purposes in human affairs.’
Albert Barnes, Notes on Revelation, p.62.” Smith, DR,
345.

“One thing will certainly be understood from
the study of Revelation–that the connection between
God and His people is close and decided. John writes,
‘[Rev. 1:4,5 quoted]’. ‘Kings and priests unto God.’
What an exaltation this is.” (Letter 16, 1900).
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 18, 24.

A Throne of Grace.—
“The kingdom of grace is brought to view by Paul
in ...Hebrews.
After pointing to Christ the
compassionate intercessor who is ‘touched with the
feeling of our infirmities,’ the apostle says, ‘Let us
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace.’ The throne of
grace represents the kingdom of grace; for the
existence of a throne implies the existence of a
kingdom.” Great Controversy, 347.

Him Which Is, Which Was, Which Is to Come.—
“An expression which in this connection refers to
God the Father, since the Holy Spirit and Christ are
mentioned separately in the immediate context.” Smith,
DR, 345.
“Like the Hebrew [I AM], this expression implies
the eternal, timeless self-existence of God. …The
reference here to the Father sets forth His eternity and
states that the same One who now continually exists
has always existed and will always exist.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 732.

REVELATION 1:5,6
And from Jesus Christ, who is the
faithful witness, and the first begotten of the
dead, and the prince of the kings of the
earth. Unto him that loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood,
And hath made us kings and priests
unto God and his Father; to him be glory
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Seven Spirits.—
“The Holy Spirit, the third Person of the Godhead,
is described as ‘the seven Spirits which are before His
throne.’ Seven represents the fullness and perfection of
His power and the diversity of His operations. He is
known in the Scriptures as
(1) ‘the Spirit of God,’
(2) ‘the Spirit of His Son,’
(3) ‘the Spirit of holiness,’
(4) ‘the Spirit of wisdom,’
(5) ‘the Spirit of love,’
(6) ‘the Spirit of grace,’ and
(7) ‘the Spirit of glory.’ See Isaiah 11:1 and 2 for a
description of the sevenfold nature of the operations of
the Holy Spirit through the Messiah.” Bunch, SEOC,
47.

The Faithful Witness.—
“Some of the chief characteristics which pertain to
Christ are here mentioned. He is ‘the faithful Witness.’
Whatever He bears witness to is true. Whatever He
promises, He will surely fulfill.” Smith, DR, 345.
[The Revelation is] “a message that is
fundamentally ‘the testimony of Jesus.’ A close study
of John’s writings (Revelation, the fourth Gospel, and
the three epistles) is immediately impressive because of
the importance given to the concept of testimony.
Words such as witness, testimony, and testify recur
frequently under his pen, making this one of the chief
characteristics of the Johannine writings.” Zurcher,
COR, 17.

“And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem
of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots. And
the Spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him, the spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of
the LORD.” Isaiah 11:1,2.
“And there were seven lamps of fire burning before
the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.”
Revelation 4:5.

“The Greek word for ‘witness’ is marturia,

7

GEMS FROM REVELATION
meaning evidence. . . .It is translated into the English
KJV as: record, report, testimony, witness.” Strong’s
Dictionary, # 3141.

informs us, in Ephesians 1:20,21, that He has been set at
the right hand of God in the heavenly places, ‘far above
all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in
this world, but also in that which is to come.’ The
highest names in this world are those of princes, kings,
emperors, and potentates of earth. But Christ is placed
far above them. He is seated with His Father upon the
throne of universal dominion, and ranks equally with
Him in the overruling and the controlling of the
affairs of all nations of earth. (Revelation 3:21).
“In a more particular sense, Christ is to be Prince
of the kings of the earth when He takes His own
throne, and the kingdoms of the world become the
‘kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ,’ when they
are given by the Father into His hands, and He comes
forth bearing upon His vesture the title of ‘King of
kings and Lord of lords,’ to dash them in pieces like a
potter’s vessel. (Revelation 19:16; 2:27; Psalm 2:8,9.)”
Smith, DR, 346.

“Behold, I have given Him for a witness to the
people, a leader and commander to the people.” Isa.
55:4.
“A faithful witness will not lie.” Prov. 14:5.
The First Begotten of the Dead.—
“‘The first begotten of the dead’ is an expression
parallel to 1 Cor. 15:20,23; Heb. 1:6; Rom. 8:29; and
Colossians 1:15,18, where we find such expression
applied to Christ as ‘the first fruits of them that slept,’
‘the firstborn among many brethren,’ ‘the firstborn
of every creature,’ and ‘the firstborn from the dead.’
But these expressions do not denote that He was the first
in point of time to be raised from the dead; for others
were raised before Him. ...He was the chief and
central figure of all who have come up from the
grave, for it was by virtue of Christ’s coming, work,
and resurrection, that any were raised before His
time. In the purpose of God He was the first in point of
time as well as in importance, for it was not until after
the purpose of Christ’s triumph over the grave was
formed in the mind of God, who ‘calleth those things
which be not as though they were’ (Romans 4:17), that
any were released from the power of death by virtue of
that great purpose which was in due time to be
accomplished.” Smith, DR, 345,346.

“Originally, Adam was the prince or ruler of this
earth, but he lost it to Lucifer. Jesus, in His mission to
earth, won back this world at Calvary.” Cooke, #1UR, 6.
“ ‘Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than
the kings of the earth.’ Ps. 89:27. Jesus is the ‘Prince
of the host’ (His people). Daniel 8:11. He is the
‘Prince of princes.’ Dan. 8:25. He is ‘the great prince
which standeth for the children of thy people.’ Dan.
12:1. Here, He is the ‘Prince of the kings of the earth.’
Who are the ‘kings of the earth’? Just the same as in
Daniel. ‘He hath made us kings and priests unto God
and His Father.’ Rev. 1:6. ‘And Pilate wrote a title, and
put it on the cross. And the writing was, JESUS OF
NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.’ John
19:19.” Source Unknown.

“Christ arose from the dead as the first fruits of
those that slept. He was the antitype of the wave sheaf,
and His resurrection took place on the very day when
the wave sheaf was to be presented before the Lord.
For more than a thousand years this symbolic ceremony
had been performed. From the harvest fields the first
heads of ripened grain were gathered, and when the
people went up to Jerusalem to the Passover, the sheaf of
first fruits was waved as a thank offering before the
Lord. Not until this was presented could the sickle be
put to the grain, and it be gathered into sheaves. The
sheaf dedicated to God represented the harvest. So
Christ the first fruits represented the great spiritual
harvest to be gathered for the kingdom of God. His
resurrection is the type and pledge of the resurrection of
all the righteous dead. ‘For if we believe that Jesus
died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with Him.’ 1 Thess. 4:14.”
Desire of Ages, 785,786.

“The Apocalypse is a unified whole, centered in
Christ as the king and in His church as the new Israel
(Rev.1:5,6).” Biblical Research Inst.,2SOR, 157.
Unto Him that Loved Us.—
“Through the eternal ages, the song of the
ransomed ones will be: (Rev. 1:5,6 quoted).” Great
Controversy, 416.
“We have thought that earthly friends loved us—a
father, a mother, brothers and sisters, or bosom friends—
but we see that no love is worthy of the name compared
with the love of Christ for us. The following sentence
adds intensity of meaning to the previous words: ‘And
washed us from our sins in His own blood.’ What
love is this! ‘Greater love,’ says the apostle, ‘hath no
man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.’ John 15:13. But Christ has commended His
love for us in that He died for us ‘while we were yet
sinners.’” Smith, DR, 346,347.

“But now is Christ risen from the dead, and
become the firstfruits of them that slept.... For as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
But every man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits;
afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming.” 1
Corinthians 15:20, 22,23.
The Prince of the Kings of the Earth.—
“In a certain sense He (Christ) is that now. Paul

8

REVELATION 1
“As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you:
continue ye in my love.” Jn. 15:9.

that they sway is not carnal and temporal, but eternal.”
Haskel, SSP, 33.

“ ‘Unto Him that loved us,’ or ‘loveth us.’ (R.V.)
The love of Christ is not past only, but continuous. The
supreme act of dying for us did not extinguish His
affection.” Bunch, SEOC, 52.

“Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king
then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.
Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” John
18:37.

And Washed us From Our Sins in His Own Blood.—
“The blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us
from all sin.” 1 John 1:7.

“Having justified and sanctified them, he makes
them kings to his Father; that is, in his Father’s account,
with his approbation, and for his glory. As kings, they
overcome the world, mortify sin, govern their own
spirits, conquer Satan, have power and prevalency
with God in prayer, and shall judge the world. He
hath made them priests, given them access to God,
enabled them to enter into the holiest and to offer
spiritual and acceptable sacrifices, and has given
them an unction suitable to this character; and for
these high honors and favors they are bound to ascribe to
him dominion and glory for ever.” Henry, 6MHC, 1120.

“The life of the flesh is in the blood.” Lev. 17:11.
“It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth
nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life.” Jn. 6:63.
“It is by receiving the life poured out on Calvary’s
cross, that we can live the life of holiness. And this life
we receive by receiving His word, by doing those
things which He has commanded. Thus we become
one with Him.” Desire of Ages, 660.
“And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the
altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon
Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons,
and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he
shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and
his sons’ garments with him.” Ex. 29:21.

“In God’s eternal purpose the church is
commissioned to present all individuals and nations
before the throne of grace in intercession and
mediatorial ministry. The knowledge of the fact that
every genuine Christian has been divinely appointed as a
priest of the kingdom of God with direct access to Him
at all times should have a profound effect on his life and
conduct.” Bunch, SEOC, 55.

He Hath Made Us Kings and Priests.—
“Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual
house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. …Ye are
a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation,
a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises
of him who hath called you out of darkness into his
marvelous light.” 1 Peter 2:5,9.

“During the thousand years between the first and
the second resurrection, the judgment of the wicked
takes place. The apostle Paul points to this judgment as
an event that follows the second advent. ‘Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts.’
Daniel declares that when the Ancient of days came,
‘judgment was given to the saints of the Most High.’ At
this time the righteous reign as kings and priests unto
God. It is at this time that, as foretold by Paul, ‘the
saints shall judge the world.’ 1 Cor. 6:2. In union with
Christ they judge the wicked, comparing their acts with
the statute book, the Bible, and deciding every case
according to the deeds done in the body. Then the
portion which the wicked must suffer is meted out,
according to their works; and it is recorded against their
names in the book of death.” Great Controversy,
660,661.

“If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. 2 Tim.
2:12.
“And they made the plate of the holy crown of
pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the
engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.”
Exodus 39:30.
“From being leprous with sin, we are made clean in
His sight; from being enemies, we are not only made
friends, but raised to positions of honor and dignity.
What matchless love!” Smith, DR, 347.
“He ‘hath made us kings,’ to sit on thrones and
rule; ‘and priests’ to minister ‘unto God and His Father.’
And yet, when on earth, He had said, ‘He that is
greatest among you, let him be ...as he that doth
serve.’ The joint-heirs with Christ rule while still on
earth, but their authority here is by virtue of the ‘power
of an endless life,’ and they are leaders, not in a
physical sense, but in the spiritual realm. The scepter

REVELATION 1:7
Behold, he cometh with clouds; and
every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth
shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen.
9

GEMS FROM REVELATION
this is what forms the great white cloud enveloping
the Son of Man.” Cooke, #31-UR, 19.

Behold, He Cometh With Clouds.—
“Here John carries us forward to the second
advent of Christ in glory, the climax and crowning
event of His intervention in behalf of this fallen world.
Once He came in weakness, now He comes in power;
once in humility, now in glory. He comes with clouds,
in like manner as He ascended.” Smith, DR, 347,349.

Every eye shall see Him.—
“And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and
all flesh shall see it together:” Isaiah 40:5.
“‘For as the lightning cometh out of the east,
and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be.’ Mt. 24:27. This
coming there is no possibility of counterfeiting. It will
be universally known—witnessed by the whole world.”
Great Controversy, 625.

“While they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud
received Him out of their sight. And while they looked
stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men
stood by them in white apparel, which also said, Ye men
of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This
same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go
into heaven.” Acts 1:9-11.

“When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and
all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
throne of his glory: And before him shall be gathered all
nations.” Matthew 25:31,32.

“Soon there appears in the east a small black
cloud, about half the size of a man’s hand. It is the
cloud which surrounds the Saviour, and which seems in
the distance to be shrouded in darkness. The people of
God know this to be the sign of the Son of man. In
solemn silence they gaze upon it as it draws nearer the
earth, becoming lighter and more glorious, until it is a
great white cloud, its base a glory like consuming
fire, and above it the rainbow of the covenant. Jesus
rides forth as a mighty conqueror. …And ‘the
armies which were in heaven’ (Revelation 19:11, 14)
follow Him. With anthems of celestial melody the
holy angels, a vast, unnumbered throng, attend Him
on His way. The firmament seems filled with radiant
forms—‘ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands
of thousands.’ No human pen can portray the scene; no
mortal mind is adequate to conceive its splendor.”
Great Controversy, 640,641.

“And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man
in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth
mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in
the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.”
Matt. 24:30.
“No human pen can portray the scene…. ‘His
glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of
His praise. And His brightness was as the light.’
Habakkuk 3:3,4. As the living cloud comes still
nearer, every eye beholds the Prince of life. No crown
of thorns now mars that sacred head; but a diadem of
glory rests on His holy brow. His countenance outshines
the dazzling brightness of the noonday sun.” Were,
WATB, 126.
“Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth
not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when
he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see
him as he is.” 1 John 3:2.

“This is not the ordinary cloud that we see in the
heavens, but the cloud or group of angels that make up
the celestial chariot. In Isaiah 19:1 we are told that ‘the
Lord rideth upon a swift cloud,’ and in Ps. 104:3,4,
that He ‘maketh the clouds His chariot’ and ‘walketh
upon the wings of the wind.’ He also ‘maketh His
angels spirits; His ministers a flaming fire.’
“In Psalm 68:17 it is said that ‘the chariots of God
are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels,’ and
that ‘the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy
place.’ In other words the cloud covering Mount Sinai
at the time of the giving of the law and the cloud of
glory over the Mosaic sanctuary were composed of the
group of mighty angels that constitute the chariot of
God. In Psalm 18:10 and Ezekiel 1:1-14; 10:9, 13-15,
we are told that these chariot angels are the cherubim
and seraphim who surround the throne and are the
special ministers and messengers of the Almighty.”
Bunch, SEOC, 69.

They Also Which Pierced Him.—
“They also (in addition to the ‘every eye’ before
mentioned) who were chiefly concerned in the tragedy
of His death shall behold Him returning to earth in
triumph and glory. But how is this? They are not now
living, and how then shall they behold Him when He
comes? There will be a resurrection from the dead.
This is the only possible avenue to life to those who
have once been laid in the grave. But how is it that these
wicked persons come up at this time, since the general
resurrection of the wicked does not take place until a
thousand years after the second advent? (Rev. 20:1-6.)
On this point Daniel says further:
“‘At that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince which standeth for the children of thy people:
and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation even to that same time: and at
that time thy people shall be delivered, everyone that
shall be found written in the book. And many of them
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to

“The holy angels in number amount to hundreds of
millions, plus!
‘The number of them was ten
thousand times ten thousands [100 million] and
thousands of thousands.’ Rev. 5:11. Undoubtedly,

10

REVELATION 1
Him in blasphemous mockery. The men who smote and
spit upon the Prince of life now turn from His piercing
gaze and seek to flee from the overpowering glory of
His presence. Those who drove the nails through His
hands and feet, the soldier who pierced His side, behold
these marks with terror and remorse.
“With awful distinctness do priests and rulers recall
the events of Calvary. With shuddering horror they
remember how, wagging their heads in satanic
exultation, they exclaimed: ‘He saved others; Himself
He cannot save. If He be the King of Israel, let Him
now come down from the cross, and we will believe
Him. He trusted in God; let Him deliver Him now, if
He will have Him.’ Matthew 27:42,43.
“Vividly they recall the Saviour’s parable of the
husbandmen who refused to render to their lord the fruit
of the vineyard, who abused his servants and slew his
son. They remember, too, the sentence which they
themselves pronounced: The lord of the vineyard ‘will
miserably destroy those wicked men.’ In the sin and
punishment of those unfaithful men the priests and
elders see their own course and their own just doom.
And now there rises a cry of mortal agony. Louder
than the shout, ‘Crucify Him, crucify Him,’ which rang
through the streets of Jerusalem, swells the awful,
despairing wail, ‘He is the Son of God! He is the true
Messiah!’ They seek to flee from the presence of the
King of kings. In the deep caverns of the earth, rent
asunder by the warring of the elements, they vainly
attempt to hide.” Great Controversy, 637,641,643,
644.

everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt.’ Daniel 12:1,2.
“Here a partial resurrection is brought to view, a
resurrection of a certain group of both righteous and
wicked. This takes place before the general resurrection
of either group. Many, not all, that sleep shall awake—
some of the righteous, not all of them, to everlasting life,
and some of the wicked, not all of them, to shame and
everlasting contempt. This resurrection takes place in
connection with the great time of trouble such as never
was, which precedes the coming of the Lord. May not
“they also which pierced Him” be among those who then
come up to shame and everlasting contempt? What
could be more appropriate than that those who took part
in our Lord’s humiliation, and other special leaders in
crime against Him, should be raised to behold His
terrible majesty as He comes triumphantly in flaming
fire to take vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not His gospel?” Smith, DR, 349,350.
“Those who ‘pierced him’ include all who
contributed directly to His crucifixion. But does the
term include any others? In Acts 9:5 Jesus told Saul the
Persecutor—the man who later became Paul the
Apostle—that in persecuting Christians he was
persecuting Him.
‘I am Jesus, whom you are
persecuting,’ Jesus said. This leads us to the somber
concept that the principal persecutors of God’s people
through the centuries may also be included in the
number of those who ‘pierced him’ and who will arise
from the dead in time to witness the second coming.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 81.

“The triumphal ride of Christ into Jerusalem was
the dim foreshadowing of His coming in the clouds of
heaven with power and glory, amid the triumph of
angels and the rejoicing of the saints. Then will be
fulfilled the words of Christ to the priests and Pharisees:
‘Ye shall not see Me henceforth, till ye shall say,
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.’
Matt. 23:39. In prophetic vision Zechariah was shown
that day of final triumph; and he beheld also the doom of
those who at the first advent had rejected Christ: ‘And
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and
they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only
son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn.’ Zech. 10:12.” Desire of
Ages, 580.

“Graves are opened, and ‘many of them that sleep
in the dust of the earth... awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.’
Daniel 12:2. All who have died in the faith of the third
angel’s message come forth from the tomb glorified, to
hear God's covenant of peace with those who have kept
His law. ‘They also which pierced Him’ (Rev. 1:7),
those that mocked and derided Christ’s dying agonies,
and the most violent opposers of His truth and His
people, are raised to behold Him in His glory and to see
the honor placed upon the loyal and obedient.... The
King of kings descends upon the cloud, wrapped in
flaming fire.... There are those who mocked Christ in
His humiliation. With thrilling power come to their
minds the Sufferer’s words, when adjured by the high
priest, He solemnly declared: ‘Hereafter shall ye see
the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of heaven.’ Matthew 26:64.
Now they behold Him in His glory, and they are yet to
see Him sitting on the right hand of power.
“Those who derided His claim to be the Son of
God are speechless now. There is the haughty Herod
who jeered at His royal title and bade the mocking
soldiers crown Him king. There are the very men who
with impious hand placed upon His form the purple
robe, upon His sacred brow the thorny crown, and in His
unresisting hand the mimic scepter, and bowed before

“Caiaphas and those who pierced the Saviour will
die three times—once when they died long ago, a second
time after their special resurrection, and the third and
final time in the ‘second death’ at the end of the
thousand years (see chapter 20, verse 14).” Wieland,
GIR, 130.
All Kindreds of the Earth Shall Wail.—
“Those who have turned from Him to the trivial
things of this earth, seeking selfish interests and
worldly honor, will in the day of His coming
acknowledge their mistake. These are the ones spoken

11

GEMS FROM REVELATION
of by the Revelator as ‘all kindreds of the earth,’ who
‘shall wail because of Him.’ Let us not be content to be
numbered among the ‘kindreds of the earth.’
Remembering that our citizenship is in heaven, let us lay
hold on the hope set before us in the Gospel.” Signs,
1/28/03.
.
Even So, Amen.—
“The response of the church is, ‘Even so, Amen.’
Though this coming of Christ is to the wicked a scene of
terror and destruction, it is to the righteous a scene of joy
and triumph. This coming, which is with flaming fire,
and for the purpose of taking vengeance on the wicked,
is to recompense all those who believe.
(2
Thessalonians 1:6-10.) Every friend and lover of Christ
will hail every declaration and every token of His return
as glad tidings of great joy.” Smith, DR, 350.

Christ is the Alpha and the Omega—the First and
the Last.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 367.
“All the great truths of the Scriptures center in
Christ; rightly understood, all lead to Him. Let Christ
be presented as the alpha and omega, the beginning
and the end, of the great plan of redemption.”
Review and Herald, 6/13/1912.
“You cannot have a thought without Christ.
You cannot have an inclination to come to Him unless
He sets in motion influences and impresses His Spirit
upon the human mind. And if there is a man on the face
of the earth who has any inclination toward God, it is
because of the many influences that are set to work to
bear upon his mind and heart. Those influences call for
the allegiance to God and an appreciation of the great
work that God has done for him.
“Then don’t let us ever say that we can repent of
ourselves, and then Christ will pardon. No, indeed. It is
the favor of God that pardons. It is the favor of God that
leads us by His power to repentance. Therefore, it is all
of Jesus Christ, everything of Him, and you want to just
give back glory to God. Why don’t you respond more
when you meet together in your meetings? Why don’t
you have the quickening influence of the Spirit of God
when the love of Jesus and His salvation are presented to
you? It is because you do not see that Christ is first
and last and best, and the Alpha and the Omega, the
beginning and the end, the very Author and Finisher
of our faith. You don’t realize this, and therefore you
remain in your sins. Why is this? It is because Satan is
here wrestling and battling for the souls of men. He casts
his hellish shadow right athwart our pathway, and all
that you can see is the enemy and his power.
“Look away from his power to the One that is
mighty to save to the utmost. Why doesn’t your faith
plow through the shadow to where Christ is?” Faith
& Works, 73.

“And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our
God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is
the LORD; we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation.” Isaiah 25:9.
“He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I
come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.”
Rev. 22:20.

REVELATION 1:8
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty.
Alpha and Omega.—
“When the students of prophecy will set their
hearts to know the truths of Revelation, they will realize
what an importance is attached to this search. Christ
Jesus is the Alpha and the Omega, the Genesis of the
Old Testament, and the Revelation of the New. Both
meet together in Christ.” (Manuscript 33, 1897).
6BC, 1092.

Which Is, and Which Was, and Which Is to Come.—
“What a Saviour we have! It was he that revealed
himself to John on the Isle of Patmos, and proclaimed, ‘I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,
saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty.’ None but just such an
everliving, mighty God, could pay the ransom to save
sinners from going down into the pit of death.” Review
&Herald, 2/18/1896.

“Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel, and his
redeemer the LORD of hosts; I am the first, and I am
the last; and beside me there is no God.” Isa. 44:6.
“Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I
am he; I am the first, I also am the last.” Isa. 48:12.
“I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end, the first and the last.” Rev. 22:13.

Almighty.—
“All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth.” Matthew 28:18.

“Jesus was the light of His people—the Light of
the world—before He came to earth in the form of
humanity. The first gleam of light that pierced the
gloom in which sin had wrapped the world, came from
Christ. And from Him has come every ray of
heaven’s brightness that has fallen upon the
inhabitants of the earth. In the plan of redemption

REVELATION 1: 9
I John, who also am your brother, and
companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was
12

REVELATION 1
In Tribulation.—
“The rulers of the Jews were filled with bitter
hatred against John for his unwavering fidelity to the
cause of Christ. They declared that their efforts against
the Christians would avail nothing so long as John’s
testimony kept ringing in the ears of the people. In order
that the miracles and teachings of Jesus might be
forgotten, the voice of the bold witness must be silenced.
“John was accordingly summoned to Rome to be
tried for his faith. Here before the authorities the
apostle’s doctrines were misstated. False witnesses
accused him of teaching seditious heresies. By these
accusations his enemies hoped to bring about the
disciple’s death.
“John answered for himself in a clear and
convincing manner, and with such simplicity and
candor that his words had a powerful effect. His hearers
were astonished at his wisdom and eloquence. But the
more convincing his testimony, the deeper was the
hatred of his opposers. The emperor Domitian was
filled with rage. He could neither dispute the reasoning
of Christ’s faithful advocate, nor match the power that
attended his utterance of truth; yet he determined that
he would silence his voice.
“John was cast into a caldron of boiling oil; but
the Lord preserved the life of His faithful servant,
even as He preserved the three Hebrews in the fiery
furnace. As the words were spoken, Thus perish all
who believe in that deceiver, Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
John declared, ‘My Master patiently submitted to all
that Satan and his angels could devise to humiliate
and torture Him. He gave His life to save the world. I
am honored in being permitted to suffer for His sake. I
am a weak, sinful man. Christ was holy, harmless,
undefiled. He did no sin, neither was guile found in His
mouth.’ These words had their influence, and John
was removed from the caldron by the very men who had
cast him in.
“Again the hand of persecution fell heavily upon
the apostle. By the emperor’s decree John was banished
to the Isle of Patmos, condemned ‘for the word of God,
and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.’ Rev. 1:9.
Here, his enemies thought, his influence would no
longer be felt, and he must finally die of hardship and
distress.” Acts of the Apostles, 569,570.

in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word
of God, and for the testimony of Jesus
Christ.
I John.—
“When John was old and gray-headed, he was
given a message to bear to the persecuted churches. The
Jews made several attempts to take his life, but the
Lord said: ‘Let him live. I who created him will be with
him and will guard him.’ Constantly this aged disciple
bore testimony for the Master. In beautiful language,
with a musical voice, speaking in a way that impressed
the hearts of all who heard him, he told of the words and
works of Christ. He was sent as an exile to Patmos, but
Christ visited him in his exile, and communicated to him
the grand truths found in the Revelation.”
7
Testimonies, 288.
Your Brother, and Companion.—
“It was through one who declared himself to be a
‘brother, and companion in tribulation’ (Rev. 1:9),
that Christ revealed to His church the things that
they must suffer for His sake. Looking down through
long centuries of darkness and superstition, the aged
exile saw multitudes suffering martyrdom because of
their love for the truth.” Acts of the Apostles, 588.
“He was their brother, though an apostle; he seems
to value himself upon his relation to the church,
rather than his authority in it. ...He was their
companion:
the children of God should choose
communion and society with each other.” Henry,
6MHC, 1121.
“I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and
of them that keep thy precepts.” Psalm 119:32.
“John was sent to the Isle of Patmos, where,
separated from his companions in the faith, his enemies
supposed he would die from hardship and neglect. But
John made friends and converts even there. They
thought that they had at last placed the faithful witness
where he could no longer trouble Israel or the wicked
rulers of the world.
“But all the heavenly universe saw the result of the
conflict with the aged disciple and his separation from
his companions in the faith. God and Christ and the
heavenly host were John’s companions on the Isle of
Patmos. From them he received instruction which he
imparted to those separated with him from the world.
There he wrote out the visions and revelations he
received from God, telling of the things which would
take place in the closing period of this earth’s history.
When his voice would no longer witness for the truth,
when he could no longer testify of the One he loved and
served, the messages given to him on that rocky, barren
coast were to go forth as a lamp that burneth.”
(Manuscript 150,1899). 7BC, 954.

“In all ages God’s appointed witnesses have
exposed themselves to reproach and persecution for
the truth’s sake. Joseph was maligned and persecuted
because he preserved his virtue and integrity. David, the
chosen messenger of God, was hunted like a beast of
prey by his enemies. Daniel was cast into a den of lions
because he was true to his allegiance to heaven. Job
was deprived of his worldly possessions, and so afflicted
in body that he was abhorred by his relatives and
friends; yet he maintained his integrity. Jeremiah could
not be deterred from speaking the words that God had
given him to speak; and his testimony so enraged the
king and princes that he was cast into a loathsome pit.
Stephen was stoned because he preached Christ and

13

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Him crucified. Paul was imprisoned, beaten with rods,
stoned, and finally put to death because he was a faithful
messenger for God to the Gentiles. And John was
banished to the Isle of Patmos ‘for the word of God,
and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.’
“These examples of human steadfastness bear
witness to the faithfulness of God’s promises—of His
abiding presence and sustaining grace. They testify to
the power of faith to withstand the powers of the world.
It is the work of faith to rest in God in the darkest hour,
to feel, however sorely tried and tempest-tossed, that our
Father is at the helm. The eye of faith alone can look
beyond the things of time to estimate aright the worth
of the eternal riches.
“Jesus does not present to His followers the hope
of attaining earthly glory and riches, of living a life free
from trial. Instead He calls upon them to follow Him in
the path of self-denial and reproach. He who came to
redeem the world was opposed by the united forces of
evil. In an unpitying confederacy, evil men and evil
angels arrayed themselves against the Prince of Peace.
His every word and act revealed divine compassion, and
His unlikeness to the world provoked the bitterest
hostility.
“So it will be with all who will live godly in Christ
Jesus. Persecution and reproach await all who are
imbued with the Spirit of Christ. The character of the
persecution changes with the times, but the principle—
the spirit that underlies it—is the same that has slain the
chosen of the Lord ever since the days of Abel. In all
ages Satan has persecuted the people of God. He has
tortured them and put them to death, but in dying they
became conquerors. They bore witness to the power of
One mightier than Satan. Wicked men may torture and
kill the body, but they cannot touch the life that is hid
with Christ in God. They can incarcerate men and
women in prison walls, but they cannot bind the spirit.
“Through trial and persecution the glory—the
character—of God is revealed in His chosen ones.
The believers in Christ, hated and persecuted by the
world, are educated and disciplined in the school of
Christ. On earth they walk in narrow paths; they are
purified in the furnace of affliction. They follow Christ
through sore conflicts; they endure self-denial and
experience bitter disappointments; but thus they learn
the guilt and woe of sin, and they look upon it with
abhorrence. Being partakers of Christ’s sufferings, they
can look beyond the gloom to the glory, saying, ‘I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us.’ Romans 8:18.” Acts of the Apostles,
574-577.

“There is another and more important question that
should engage the attention of the churches of today.
The apostle Paul declares that ‘all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.’ 2 Timothy
3:12. Why is it, then, that persecution seems in a
great degree to slumber? The only reason is, that the
church has conformed to the world’s standard, and
therefore awakens no opposition. The religion which
is current in our day is not of the pure and holy character
that marked the Christian faith in the days of Christ and
His apostles. It is only because of the spirit of
compromise with sin, because the great truths of the
word of God are so indifferently regarded, because there
is so little vital godliness in the church, that Christianity
is apparently so popular with the world. Let there be a
revival of the faith and power of the early church, and
the spirit of persecution will be revived, and the fires of
persecution will be rekindled.” Great Controversy, 48.
“For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.”
Phil. 1:29.
“If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him.” 2
Timothy 2:12.
In the Kingdom.—
“‘The time is fulfilled, the kingdom of God is at
hand’…. And the ‘kingdom of God’ which they [the
disciples] had declared to be at hand was established by
the death of Christ. This kingdom was not, as they had
been taught to believe, an earthly empire. Nor was it
that future, immortal kingdom which shall be set up
when ‘the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness
of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be
given to the people of the saints of the Most High;’
that everlasting kingdom, in which ‘all dominions shall
serve and obey Him.’ Daniel 7:27. As used in the
Bible, the expression ‘kingdom of God’ is employed to
designate both the kingdom of grace and the kingdom of
glory. The kingdom of grace is brought to view by
Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews. After pointing to
Christ, the compassionate intercessor who is ‘touched
with the feeling of our infirmities,’ the apostle says:
‘Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace.’
Hebrews 4:15,16. The throne of grace represents the
kingdom of grace; for the existence of a throne implies
the existence of a kingdom. In many of His parables
Christ uses the expression ‘the kingdom of heaven’ to
designate the work of divine grace upon the hearts of
men.
“The kingdom of grace was instituted
immediately after the fall of man, when a plan was
devised for the redemption of the guilty race. It then
existed in the purpose and by the promise of God; and
through faith, men could become its subjects. ” Great
Controversy, 346,347.

“Beloved, think it not strange concerning the
fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange
thing happened unto you.” 1 Pt. 4:12.
“We must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God.” Acts 14:22.

“In order to enter the kingdom of glory, we must
first be in the kingdom of grace, sharing all its

14

REVELATION 1
privileges and blessings. The faithful John bears
testimony: (Rev. 1:9 quoted.) John was in the
kingdom of grace.” White, James, Bible Adventism, 99.

friend; but no circumstance, no distance, can separate us
from the heavenly Comforter. Wherever we are,
wherever we may go, He is always at our right hand to
support, sustain, uphold, and cheer.” Desire of Ages,
669,670.

Patience.—
“That is, remaining patient in Jesus in the
present kingdom of grace. When we abide in Christ,
enabling power is given to patiently endure. ‘We must
through much tribulation enter the kingdom of God.’
Acts 14:22.” Cooke, #1-UR, 14.
“If injuries and insults are meekly borne, if
insulting words are responded to by gentle answers, and
oppressive acts by kindness, this is evidence that the
Spirit of Christ dwells in the heart, that sap from the
living Vine is flowing to the branches.” 5 Testimonies,
344.
John Was In the Isle that is Called Patmos.—
“Patmos is a small, barren island off the west coast
of Asia Minor, between the island of Icaria and the
promontory of Miletus, where in John’s day was located
the nearest Christian church. It is about ten miles long,
six miles wide at its greatest breadth. ...On account of
the stern and desolate character of this island, it was
used under the Roman Empire as a place of banishment.
This accounts for the exile of John there.
The
banishment of the apostle took place under the
emperor Domitian about the year A.D. 94; and from
this supposition the date assigned to the writing of the
Revelation is A.D. 95 or 96.” Smith, DR, 351.

John exiled on the island of Patmos, AD 97.
“The man who exiled John was not released
from responsibility in the matter. But he became the
instrument in the hands of God to carry out his eternal
purpose; and the very effort to extinguish light placed
the truth in bold relief.” Youth Instructor, 4/5/1900.
For the Word of God & Testimony of Jesus Christ.—
“There is only one witness, or testimony, ‘the
testimony of Jesus.’ This typical expression recurs
seven times in Revelation. First of all, referring to
himself, John declared that he ‘bore witness to the
word of God and to the testimony of Jesus Christ’
(1:2, RSV). He further explained that he was exiled on
the isle of Patmos ‘on account of the word of God and
the testimony of Jesus’ (1:9, RSV).
“Nevertheless, John was not alone in possessing
‘the testimony of Jesus.’ The angel who appeared to
him insisted, ‘I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy
brethren that have the testimony of Jesus’ (19:10).
Again, the Christians of the remnant church are said to
‘keep the commandments of God and bear testimony
to Jesus’ (12:17, RSV). Finally, on two other occasions,
John stated that the souls who were slain or beheaded
were killed ‘for the witness of Jesus, and for the word
of God’ (20:4; 6:9).
“It is clear from these texts that ‘the testimony of
Jesus’ is the distinctive mark of Jesus’ true followers,
carried by the prophet of Patmos as well as by his
brethren in the Apostolic Church. And according to the
prophetic word, the remnant church must be
characterized by ‘the testimony of Jesus’ as well as by
obedience to God’s commandments. Of the church
members, as of the prophet, it is said that they ‘have the
testimony of Jesus.’
“But what exactly does having the testimony of
Jesus mean? According to the Greek, this expression
could very well be translated ‘the testimony given by
Jesus’ or ‘the testimony which comes from Jesus.’ That
is why He is presented as the first wit-ness, the witness
par excellence, the only one to give a testimony that is

“To the servant of God this gloomy abode
[Patmos] became the gate of heaven.” Acts of the
Apostles, 570
“‘Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?’
John 1:46. Yet out of Nazareth came the Son of God.
So out of the Patmos prison came Christ’s gleams of
glory, Revelation’s wonders. While a fugitive from the
anger of proud Pharaoh, Moses wrote Genesis and
probably Job. As Tyndale and Luther, when fugitives
from Papal Rome produced translations of the Bible, as
John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress came out of Bedford
Prison, as Daniel wrote his prophecies in Babylonian
captivity, so out of Patmos came Scripture’s ‘crown of
glory,’—the Revelation.” Burnside, RWU, 10.
“The Lord knows all about His faithful servants
who for His sake are lying in prison or who are
banished to lonely islands. He comforts them with His
own presence. When for the truth’s sake the believer
stands at the bar of unrighteous tribunals, Christ stands
by his side. All the reproaches that fall upon him, fall
upon Christ….
“At all times and in all places, in all sorrows and in
all afflictions, when the outlook seems dark and the
future perplexing, and we feel helpless and alone, the
Comforter will be sent in answer to the prayer of faith.
Circumstances may separate us from every earthly

15

GEMS FROM REVELATION
perfectly ‘faithful and true.’ He Himself declared to
His judges: ‘To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth’ (John 18:37).
“...There is an important difference,... between the
testimony given by Jesus to His servant John and the
testimony given by the prophet of Patmos ‘to the seven
churches which are in Asia.” John receives ‘the
testimony of Jesus’ directly from heaven through a
supernatural revelation, whereas the church and its
members receive the same testimony through the
prophet’s inspired pen: ‘Write the things which thou
hast seen, and the things which are, and the things
which shall be hereafter’ (1:19).
“...The same Spirit who inspires the prophets to
write down their testimony also sheds His influence on
those who read, understand, and keep the prophetic
words. Whoever has ‘the testimony of Jesus’ must
necessarily possess ‘the spirit of prophecy’ to a greater
or lesser degree, either as a prophet or as a disciple.
“One of the characteristics of the Apostolic
Church was that it had ‘the testimony of Jesus,’ that is,
the ‘spirit of prophecy.’ This was manifested at first by
the gift of prophecy within the church and then by the
testimony given to the world by its members, many of
whom did so at the cost of their lives. Ellen White
confirmed this when she wrote: ‘When the fifth seal
was opened, John the Revelator in vision saw beneath
the altar the company that were slain for the Word of
God and the testimony of Jesus Christ.’ (Manuscript
39, 1906; found in 7BC, 968.)
“According to the revelations given to John, the
believers who constitute ‘the remnant of her [the
woman’s] seed’ are indicated as possessing the same
characteristics.
The remnant church is not only
distinguished by its observation of ‘the commandments
of God’ but also by the ‘testimony of Jesus’ (12:17),
that is, the ‘spirit of prophecy’ (19:10)….” Zurcher,
COR, 18-23.

truth that distinguishes faithful worshipers from
apostates in every epoch of the church age. (See 1:2,
9; 6:9; 12:17; 14:12; 20:4.)” LaRondelle, LFTLD, 45.

REVELATION 1:10
I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day,
and heard behind me a great voice, as of a
trumpet,
I Was in the Spirit.—
“Before one book of the New Testament was
written, before one gospel sermon had been preached
after Christ’s ascension, the Holy Spirit came upon the
praying apostles.” Desire of Ages, 671.
“Though John was exiled from all of like faith, and
almost from the world, he was not exiled from God, nor
from Christ, nor from the Holy Spirit, nor from angels.
He still had communion with his divine Lord. The
expression ‘in the Spirit’ seems to denote the highest
state of spiritual elevation into which a person can be
brought by the Spirit of God. It marked the beginning of
his vision.” Smith, DR, 353.

“The persecutions visited for many centuries upon
this God-fearing people [the Waldenses] were endured
by them with a patience and constancy that honored their
Redeemer. Notwithstanding the crusades against them,
and the inhuman butchery to which they were subjected,
they continued to send out their missionaries to
scatter the precious truth. They were hunted to death;
yet their blood watered the seed sown, and it failed not
of yielding fruit. Thus the Waldenses witnessed for God
centuries before the birth of Luther. Scattered over
many lands, they planted the seeds of the Reformation
that began in the time of Wycliffe, grew broad and deep
in the days of Luther, and is to be carried forward to
the close of time by those who also are willing to
suffer all things for ‘the word of God, and for the
testimony of Jesus Christ.’
Rev. 1:9.”
Great
Controversy, 78.

“The Holy Spirit is Christ’s representative, but
divested of the personality of humanity, and independent
thereof. Cumbered with humanity, Christ could not be
in every place personally. Therefore it was for their
interest that He should go to the Father, and send the
Spirit to be His successor on earth. No one could then
have any advantage because of his location or his
personal contact with Christ. By the Spirit the Saviour
would be accessible to all. In this sense He would be
nearer to them than if He had not ascended on high.
“‘He that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father,
and I will love him, and will manifest Myself to him.’
Jesus read the future of His disciples. He saw one
brought to the scaffold, one to the cross, one to exile
among the lonely rocks of the sea, others to persecution
and death. He encouraged them with the promise that
in every trial He would be with them. That promise
has lost none of its force.” Desire of Ages, 669.

“He [John] uses this twofold phrase, with some
variations, six times, presenting it as the standard of

16

REVELATION 1
Eden, was as precious to John on the lonely isle as
when he was with his companions in the cities and
towns. The precious promises that Christ had given
regarding this day he repeated and claimed as his own.
It was the sign to him that God was his.... On the
Sabbath day the risen Saviour made His presence known
to John. [Rev. 1:10-13, 17, 18 quoted.]
“The persecution of John became a means of grace.
Patmos was made resplendent with the glory of a risen
Saviour. John had seen Christ in human form, with the
marks of the nails, which will ever be His glory, in His
hands and His feet. Now he was permitted again to
behold his risen Lord, clothed with as much glory as a
human being could behold, and live. What a Sabbath
was that to the lonely exile, always precious in the
sight of Christ, but now more than ever exalted!
Never had he learned so much of Jesus. Never had he
heard such exalted truth.” (Youth Instructor, 4/5/1900).
7BC, 955.

“I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of
truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he
shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to
come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of
mine, and shall shew it unto you.” John 16:12-14.
On the Lord’s Day.—
“What day is intended by this designation?
...When God gave to man in the beginning six days of
the week for labor, He expressly reserved the seventh
day to Himself, placed His blessing upon it, and claimed
it as His holy day. (Genesis 2:1-3.) Moses told Israel in
the wilderness of Sin on the sixth day of the week,
‘Tomorrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord.’ Exodus 16:23.
“We come to Sinai, where the great Lawgiver
proclaimed His moral precepts in awful grandeur; and in
that supreme code He thus lays claim to His hallowed
day: ‘The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God: ...for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day:
wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.’ By the prophet Isaiah,
about eight hundred years later, God spoke as follows:
‘If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from
doing thy pleasure on My holy day,... then shalt thou
delight thyself in the Lord.’ Isaiah 58:13.
“We come to New Testament times, and He who is
one with the Father declares expressly, ‘The Son of
man is Lord also of the Sabbath.’ Mark 2:28. Can
any man deny that that day is the Lord’s day, of which
He has emphatically declared that He is the Lord? Thus
we see that whether it be the Father or the Son whose
title is involved, no other day can be called the Lord’s
day but the Sabbath of the great Creator.... By
calling it the Lord’s day, the apostle has given us, near
the close of the first century, apostolic sanction for the
observance of the only day which can be called the
Lord’s day, which is the seventh day of the week.
“When Christ was on earth, He clearly designated
which day was His day by saying, ‘The Son of man is
Lord even of the Sabbath day.’ Matthew 12:8. If He
had said instead, ‘The Son of man is Lord of the first day
of the week,’ would not that now be set forth as
conclusive proof that Sunday is the Lord’s day?—
Certainly, and with good reason. Then it ought to be
allowed to have the same weight for the seventh day, in
reference to which it was spoken.” Smith, DR, 355,356.

“The expression, ‘the Lord’s day,’ is found only
once in the Scriptures. The phrase is arresting. …It
comes to us from momentous times, when the death
decree hung over that expression. The Book of
Revelation was written in prison. The writer was there
because of the Lord, and John’s loyalty to Him.
“By the time Revelation was written, Caesar
worship was the one religion which covered the whole
Roman Empire; and it was because of their refusal to
conform to its demands that Christians were persecuted
and killed. The essence of Caesar worship was that the
reigning Roman Emperor, as embodying the spirit of
Rome, was divine. Once a year everyone in the
Empire had to appear before the magistrates in
order to burn a pinch of incense to the godhead
Caesar, and to say: ‘Caesar is Lord.’
“Thus to refuse to burn the pinch of incense, and to
refuse to say ‘Caesar is Lord,’ was treason, in addition to
being evidence of open opposition to the established
religion. The worship of the Emperor began with the
worship of the Caesar after his death. However, the
Roman Emperor Domitian, who died in AD 96, was
most probably the emperor who sent John into exile
on the Isle of Patmos. In AD 96 Domitian put to death
Florius Clemens (his own cousin) who was consul, and
exiled his wife Foria Domitalia, niece of Domitian, and
both were charged with ‘atheism.’ They were probably
Christians, for many Christians were thrown to the lions,
charged with atheism, for refusing to sacrifice to the
Emperor, who claimed to be God.
“Domitian was the first Emperor who arrogated
divine honors in his lifetime and caused himself to be
styled, ‘Our Lord and God,’ in public documents.... He
informed all governors that government announcements
and proclamations must begin ‘Our Lord and God
Domitian commands.’ ...They must call Domitian
God—or die. Thus the issue was clear. It was a matter
of gods. Either the Lord Jesus Christ or the emperor
of Rome was Lord-God. It was Jesus or Caesar. Who
was Lord? That was the issue. The Scriptures clearly

“The Lord’s day is the seventh day, the Sabbath
of creation. On the day that God sanctified and blessed,
Christ signified ‘by His angel unto His servant John’
things which must come to pass before the close of the
world’s history, and He means that we should become
intelligent with regard to them.” 6 Testimonies, 128.
“The Sabbath, which God had instituted in

17

GEMS FROM REVELATION
show why the writer was banished: Revelation 1:9: ‘I
John, who also am your brother, and companion in
tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus
Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the
word of God.’
“Domitian claimed to be lord. His day, the
Emperor’s day, was thus claimed to be the lord’s
day. John was banished ‘for the Word of God,’ which
claimed only one ‘Lord’s day.’ He rejoiced in that day,
the true Lord’s day. That holy day belonged to his
Lord, and in defiance of a pagan day, he wrote ‘the
Lord’s day’ in Rev. 1:10. For the Emperor’s day was
in contrast to the true Lord’s day.” Burnside, RWU,
15,16.

REVELATION 1:11
Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last: and, What thou seest,
write in a book, and send it unto the seven
churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus,
and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and
unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto
Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.
I am Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last.—
“We must have a better and deeper teaching than
man can give us. There must be a deep conviction in our
own souls that forms and ceremonies are as nothing
without Christ. He is the Alpha and Omega. Truth is
the only panoply for the covering of any soul.” “1888”,
1626.

“ ‘In the year 325 AD, Sylvester, Bishop of Rome,
314-337 AD, officially changed the title of the first
day, calling it the Lord’s Day.’ Lucien, ‘Historia
Ecclesiastica’, p.145.” Cooke, #1-UR, 17.

“Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his
redeemer the Lord of hosts; I am the first, and I am the
last; and beside me there is no God.” Is. 44:6.

Key To Understanding Book of Revelation.—
“It has been suggested that just as John was in the
Spirit on the Lord’s day in receiving the visions of
Revelation, so the believer likewise in rightly
understanding Revelation must also possess the spirit
of truth on the Lord’s Day. In other words, if we do
not recognize the significance of the true sabbath, we
will fail to discern the import of certain issues in the
great controversy, which is the theme of the book.”
Cooke, #1-UR, 18.

What Thou Seest, Write in a Book.—
“We have been given a message exceeding in
importance any other message ever entrusted to
mortals. This message Christ came in person to the Isle
of Patmos to present to John. He told him to write down
what he saw and heard during his vision, that the
churches might know what was to come upon the
earth.” Medical Ministry, 37,38.

A Voice Behind Me.—
“Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind
me a voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the
glory of the LORD from his place.” Ezekiel 3:12.
“And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to
the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.” Isaiah
30:21.

“Write the things which thou hast seen, and the
things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter.” Rev. 1:19.
“Write the vision, and make it plain upon
tables, that he may run that readeth it.” Hab. 2:2.
“In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon
Daniel had a dream and visions of his head upon his
bed: then he wrote the dream and told the sum of the
matters.” Daniel 7:1

I Heard a Great Voice, as of a Trumpet.—
“And it came to pass on the third day in the
morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a
thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the
trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was
in the camp trembled.” Exodus 19:16.
“Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a
trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and
the house of Jacob their sins.” Isaiah 58:1

Send It to Unto the Seven Churches.—
“Why are the seven churches always named in
the same exact order? Every detail of Scripture has an
important meaning. Nothing in divine revelation is
thrown together in a careless or haphazard manner. The
churches are named in the order in which a
messenger from Patmos would deliver a message or
letter to them. The seven churches formed a circle with
Ephesus as the imperial gateway to the province. Along
the coast of the Aegean Sea was a great Roman highway
which was built between the years 133 and 130 B.C. It
passed through Ephesus, Smyrna, and Pergamos. An
imperial post road ran east from Pergamos, the capital of
the province, through Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicea, where it joined another post road direct from
Ephesus on the coast. This was a recognized circuit of

“Christ spoke with a power that swayed the
people like a mighty tempest: ‘It is written, My house
shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a
den of thieves.’ His voice sounded like a trumpet
through the temple.
The displeasure of His
countenance seemed like consuming fire. With authority
He commanded, ‘Take these things hence.’ John 2:16.”
Desire of Ages, 590.

18

REVELATION 1
imperial, provincial, and commercial postmen. This
was the order in which John had often visited these
churches from his home in Ephesus.” Bunch, SEOC,
63,64.

Christians of John’s day, for most of the events it brings
to view were so far in the future as to lie far beyond the
lifetime of the generation then living, or even the time
during which those churches would continue.
Consequently those churches could have no direct
connection with them.
“...Again, John, looking into the Christian Era, saw
only seven candlesticks, representing seven churches, in
the midst of which stood the Son of man. The position
of the Son of man among them must denote His
presence with them, His watchcare over them, and
His searching scrutiny of all their works. But does He
thus take cognizance of only seven individual churches?
May we not rather conclude that this scene represents
His position in reference to all His churches during the
gospel age? Then why were only seven mentioned?
Seven, as used in the Scriptures, is a number
denoting fullness and completeness. Therefore the
seven candlesticks denote the entire gospel church in
seven periods, and the seven churches may be applied in
the same manner.
“Why, then, were the seven particular churches
chosen that are mentioned? For the reason, doubtless,
that in the names of these churches, according to the
definitions of the words, are brought out the religious
features of those periods of the gospel age which they
respectively were to represent.
“‘The seven churches,’ therefore, are easily
understood to mean not merely the seven literal churches
of Asia which went by the names mentioned, but seven
periods of the Christian church, from the days of the
apostles to the close of probation.” Smith, DR, 342344.

Map of seven churches in Asia
Why These Particular Seven Churches?—
“There were more churches in Asia than seven.
...Even in that small part of Asia Minor where the seven
churches were located, and right in their very midst,
there were other important churches. Colosse, to the
Christians of which place Paul addressed his epistle to
the Colossians, was but a short distance from Laodicea.
Miletus was nearer than any of the seven to Patmos,
where John had his vision. ...During one of his stays
there Paul sent for the elders of the church of Ephesus to
meet him at that place. (Acts 20:17-38.) ...Troas,
where Paul spent a season with the disciples, and
whence after waiting until the Sabbath was past he
started upon his journey, was not far removed from
Pergamos, named among the seven.
“It becomes therefore an interesting question to
determine why seven of the churches of Asia Minor
were selected as the ones to which the Revelation
should be dedicated. Does the salutation to the seven
churches in Revelation 1, and the admonitions to them in
Revelation 2 and 3, have reference solely to the seven
literal churches named? Are things described only as
they then existed, and portrayed as they were to come to
them alone? We cannot so conclude, for good and
substantial reasons:
“The entire book of Revelation was dedicated to
the seven churches.
(See Revelation 1:3,11,19;
22:18,19.) The book was no more applicable to them
than to other Christians in Asia Minor—those, for
instance, who dwelt in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and
Bithynia, who were addressed in Peter’s epistle (1 Peter
1:1); or the Christians of Colosse, Troas, and Miletus, in
the very midst of the churches named.
“Only a small part of the book could have
individually concerned the seven churches, or any of the

“Without doubt the second and third chap. Rev. is
a brief history of the church in its seven states or
stages down to the second coming of Christ. Proof According to the epistles the Asiatic churches were
established by the year AD 64. About 24 years after
this, John receives this revelation respecting things
which must shortly come to pass, (not what had been 24
years before) ch. 3:1. This revelation is a prophecy of
things past, like the seven churches in Asia, which were
already revealed. If the whole book is a prophecy, how
can these two chapters be in the past; and why not
address the other nine churches which Paul speaks of.
Again, after John had seen the whole in the 22nd
chapter [vs.16], it was said to him, I, Jesus, have sent
mine angel to testify unto you these things in the
churches. The whole message was then to the churches.
Once more - it is clear that the signification of the
names of the seven churches in Asia describe the
spirit and qualities of the several periods of the
christian church. Lastly - if the above statements are
not true, how can we apply any part of Revelations to
the present state of the church?” Bates, Waymarks,
75,76.
“The messages given to the churches in Asia,
portray the state of things existing in the churches of

19

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the religious world today. The names of the churches
are symbolic of the Christian church in different
periods of the Christian era; the number of the
churches—seven—indicates completeness and is
symbolic of the fact that the messages extend to the
end of time, and are enforced today; while the figures
used are symbolic of the state of God’s professed
people—the wheat developing among the tares; truth
standing on its own eternal basis in contrast with error.
1MR, 372

shaped in the form of a shallow bowl, into which oil was
poured and a wick inserted.
Accordingly, the
‘candlesticks’ John saw were, apparently, stands
surmounted by such lamps.
...These ‘seven
...candlesticks’ are specifically said to represent
churches on earth, and are therefore not to be
thought of as the heavenly counterpart of the sevenbranched candlestick of the ancient earthly
sanctuary.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 738.
“The seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the
seven churches.” Rev. 1:20. “The seven churches
which are in Asia.” Rev. 1:11.

“Paul’s epistles, written to specific churches, have
a message for us today just as much as they did for the
Christians to whom they were originally intended. The
spiritual problems of the seven churches are typical
ones. Therefore, each time the same conditions
recur, the Lord’s exhortations, reproaches, threats,
counsels, and promises retain their full value. This
can also be seen from the conclusion to each message:
‘He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the churches....’
“These messages clearly contain a universal
application. As such, they concern us all, collectively
and individually, as disciples of Christ. Ellen G. White
does not suggest otherwise when she applies the
messages addressed to the churches of Ephesus and
Sardis to the present-day church (8 Testimonies, 98,99;
R&H, 2/25/1902).” Zurcher, COR, 26,27.

“These cannot be the antitype of the golden
candlestick of the ancient typical temple service, for
that was but one candlestick with seven branches. That
is ever spoken of in the singular number. But here are
seven, and these are more properly ‘lamp stands’
than simply candlesticks, stands upon which lamps
are set to give light in the room. They bear no
resemblance to the candlestick of the ancient tabernacle.
On the contrary the stands are so distinct, and so far
separated one from another, that the Son of man is seen
walking about in the midst of them.” Smith, DR, 358.
“What more appropriate symbol could be found of
the church which Jesus declared to be ‘the light of the
world’? Jesus spoke of the church as a lighted candle
on a candlestick so that ‘it giveth light unto all that are
in the house.’ (Matt. 5:14-16.) The church of Christ is
the light bearer to those who are in darkness. It is God’s
agency for the dissemination of the gospel light.
Christians are represented as ‘lights in the world;
holding forth the word of life.’ Phil. 2:15,16. The
wise man declared that ‘the spirit of man is the candle
of the Lord.’ Prov. 20:27. ‘Lamp’ is the marginal
reading. A lampstand such as John saw in vision was an
accepted symbol of the people of God, who, when filled
with His Spirit, give the light of divine truth to a
world in gross darkness.” Bunch, SEOC, 102,103.

(See also the notes under Rev. 1:4).

REVELATION 1:12,13
And I turned to see the voice that spake
with me. And being turned, I saw seven
golden candlesticks;
And in the midst of the seven
candlesticks one like unto the Son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the foot,
and girt about the paps with a golden girdle.

“‘Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I
am the light of the world: he that followeth Me shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.’
“When He spoke these words, Jesus was in the
court of the temple specially connected with the
services of the Feast of Tabernacles. In the center of
this court rose two lofty standards, supporting
lampstands of great size. After the evening sacrifice,
all the lamps were kindled, shedding their light over
Jerusalem. This ceremony was in commemoration of
the pillar of light that guided Israel in the desert, and was
also regarded as pointing to the coming of the Messiah.
At evening when the lamps were lighted, the court
was a scene of great rejoicing….
“In the illumination of Jerusalem, the people
expressed their hope of the Messiah’s coming to shed
His light upon Israel. But to Jesus the scene had a wider
meaning. As the radiant lamps of the temple lighted

I Turned to See the Voice.—
“The introductory scene to the seven churches
provides the theological basis for the letters to the seven
churches (Rev.2-3). Jesus comes to comfort John with
a revelation Himself (1:17-18). What He has done for
John He will do for all the churches that John represents
(1:19-20).
“Christ presents Himself to each church in
terms of the characteristics listed in the first chapter.
No church is offered all His characteristics; it receives
only those appropriate to its condition. In this manner
the introductory scene remains in the background of the
reader’s consciousness throughout the letters to the
churches.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 212.
Seven Golden Candlesticks.—
“Greek luchnia, ‘lampstands.’ Lamps were usually

20

REVELATION 1
up all about them, so Christ, the source of spiritual
light, illumines the darkness of the world.” Desire of
Ages, 463,464.
“That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons
of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the
world; Holding forth the word of life.” Phil. 2:15,16
“They are golden candlesticks, for they should be
precious and pure, comparable to fine gold; not only the
ministers, but the members of the churches ought to be
such; their light should so shine before men as to
engage others to give glory to God.” Henry, 6MHC,
1122.

Jesus walking amid the 7 churches on earth.

Lampstands on Earth Closely Connected to the Seven
Burning Lamps in Heaven.—
“While the seven golden candlesticks represent the
seven churches on earth, with Christ walking in their
midst, they [God’s people = 7 Churches] must be closely
linked by faith to the seven burning lamps in the Holy
Place of the heavenly sanctuary, representing the Holy
Spirit.” PJ

“The divine Son of God is seen walking amid the
seven golden candlesticks. Jesus Himself supplies the
oil to these burning lamps. He it is that kindles the
flame. ‘In him was life; and the life was the light of
men.’ No candlestick, no church, shines of itself.
From Christ emanates all its light. The church in
heaven today is only the complement of the church on
earth; but it is higher, grander, perfect. The same divine
illumination is to continue through eternal ages. The
Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the light thereof.
No church can have light if it fails to diffuse the glory
it receives from the throne of God.” (Manuscript 1a,
1890). 6BC 1118

In the Midst of the Seven Candlesticks on Earth One
Like Unto the Son of Man.—
“Christ is spoken of as walking in the midst of the
golden candlesticks. Thus is symbolized His relation to
the churches. He is in constant communication with
His people. He knows their true state. He observes
their order, their piety, their devotion. Although He
is high priest and mediator in the sanctuary above, yet
He is represented as walking up and down in the
midst of His churches on the earth. With untiring
wakefulness and unremitting vigilance, He watches to
see whether the light of any of His sentinels is burning
dim or going out. If the candlesticks were left to mere
human care, the flickering flame would languish and die;
but He is the true watchman in the Lord’s house, the
true warden of the temple courts. His continued care
and sustaining grace are the source of life and light.”
Acts of the Apostles, 586.

“For where two or three are gathered together
in My name, there am I in the midst of them.”
Matthew 18:20.
Same Picture of Jesus on Earth as in Chapter 10:1.—
“The description of Jesus Christ’s appearance here
in chapter one is the same as the mighty Angel, who
comes down from heaven, in chapter 10:1: ‘And I saw
another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed
with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his
face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of
fire.’ The important fact here that we want to emphasize
is that in both places Jesus has come down to earth
from heaven.” PJ

“He [Christ] walks in the midst of His churches
throughout the length and breadth of the earth. He
watches them with intense interest to see whether they
are in such a condition spiritually that they can advance
His kingdom. Christ is present in every assembly of
the church. He is acquainted with everyone connected
with His service. He knows those whose hearts He can
fill with the holy oil, that they may impart it to others.
Those who faithfully carry forward the work of Christ in
our world, representing in word and works the character
of God, fulfilling the Lord’s purpose for them, are in His
sight very precious. Christ takes pleasure in them as a
man takes pleasure in a well-kept garden and the
fragrance of the flowers he has planted.” 6 Testimonies,
418,419.

One Like Unto the Son of Man.—
“Turning, he beheld his Master, with whom he had
walked and talked in Judea, on whose breast he had
leaned. But, oh, how changed is His appearance. John
had seen Him clothed in an old purple robe and crowned
with thorns. Now He is clothed with a garment of
heavenly brightness, and girt about with a golden
girdle.” Manuscript 99, 1902.
“Jesus had prayed, ‘And now, O Father, glorify
Thou Me with Thine own self with the glory which I
had with Thee before the world was.’ John 17:5.
Before the incarnation of Christ He had the glory of the
Father, ‘being in the brightness of His glory, and the

21

GEMS FROM REVELATION
express image of His person.’ But when He came to
this earth, the Son of God veiled His divine glory in
human flesh so that sinful man could behold Him....
“In this vision we have the first view of Christ after
His ascension, and it indicates that His prayer to the
Father had been fully answered. He had been glorified
with even more glory than He had before His
incarnation. His glorification took place on the day of
Pentecost. In John 7:39 we are told that ‘the Holy
Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was not
yet glorified.’ It is also said that Jesus ‘humbled
Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly
exalted Him, and given Him a name which is above
every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and things under the earth; and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father.’ (Phil. 2:5-11.) We should study
this apocalyptic description of the glorified Saviour,
because it is a photograph of the way He will look when
He returns in glory and the redeemed ‘see the King in
His beauty,’ or ‘in all His splendour.’ (Isa. 33:17,
Moffatt.)
“...This vision of the glory of Christ is almost
identical with the one given the prophet Daniel more
than six hundred years before. (Dan. 10:5-12.) One
of these word pictures describes Him before His
humiliation, and the other after He had received back the
glory He voluntarily released in order that fallen man
might be elevated and glorified.” Bunch, SEOC, 82-85.

“Stand therefore, ...having on the breastplate of
righteousness.” Ephesians 6:14.
“But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on
the breastplate of faith and love.” 1 Thessalonians
5:8.

REVELATION 1:14
His head and his hairs were white like
wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as
a flame of fire.
His Head and His Hairs Were White.—
“In Daniel 7:9 the Father, ‘the Ancient of Days,’ is
described as clothed in a garment ‘white as snow,’ with
‘the hair of His head like the pure wool.’ Since Jesus
is ‘the express image of His person,’ He too has snowy
white hair, representing His age, beauty, glory, and
wisdom. The Scriptures declare that ‘the beauty of old
men is the grey head,’ because ‘with the ancient is
wisdom’; therefore, ‘the hoary head is a crown of
glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.’
(Proverbs 20:29; 16:31.)” Bunch, SEOC, 85.
“The purity of God Himself encircled His brow
with a halo of light, for His head and His hairs were
white like wool, as white as snow. The white hairs,
which in old age are a crown of glory, even in the
presence of sin and decay, are a token of salvation
through a Saviour’s love. The power of the life within
shone through His eyes as a flame of fire.” Haskel, SSP,
36.

Clothed With a Garment.—
“And He was clothed with a vesture dipped in
blood: and His name is called the Word of God. And
the armies which were in heaven followed him upon
white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.”
Revelation 19:13,14.

“‘Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the
remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me
from the belly, which are carried from the womb: And
even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs
will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I
will carry, and will deliver you.’ Isaiah 46:3,4.
“Jesus’ white hairs indicate that even in His
glorified humanity he is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, especially of those who are in old age, and
that He will take care of them.” PJ

“And as He prayed, the fashion of his countenance
was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering.”
Matthew 9:29.
Down to the Foot.—
“The Bible teaches modesty in dress. ‘In like
manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel.’ 1 Timothy 2:9. This forbids display in dress,
gaudy colors, profuse ornamentation. Any device
designed to attract attention to the wearer or to excite
admiration, is excluded from the modest apparel which
God’s word enjoins.” Ministry of Healing, 287.

“Come now, and let us reason together, saith the
LORD: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool.” Isaiah 1:18.
Eyes As a Flame of Fire.—
“Or like ‘lamps of fire,’ as described in Daniel’s
vision.... Later Jesus said, ‘I am He which searcheth
the reins and hearts.’ Rev. 2:23. The penetrating gaze
of Jesus discerns the thoughts and motives that give birth
to words and deeds. He knows all men and what is in
man. He is ‘a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the heart.’” Bunch, SEOC, 86,87.

Girt About the Paps (Breast) with a Golden Girdle.—
“Here we see Christ habited like Aaron the highpriest to signify, that as Aaron was of old, so Christ is
the high priest of the New Testament.” Feyerabend,
RVBV, 13.
“And faithfulness [shall be] the girdle of his
reins.” Isaiah 11:5.

“As the Holy One upon the throne slowly turned

22

REVELATION 1
the leaves of the ledger, and His eyes rested for a
moment upon individuals, His glance seemed to burn
into their very souls, and at the same moment every
word and action of their lives passed before their
minds as clearly as though traced before their vision
in letters of fire. Trembling seized them, and their
faces turned pale. Their first appearance when around
the throne was that of careless indifference. But how
changed their appearance now! The feeling of security
is gone, and in its place is a nameless terror. A dread is
upon every soul, lest he shall be found among those who
are wanting. Every eye is riveted upon the face of the
One upon the throne; and as His solemn, searching eye
sweeps over that company, there is a quaking of
heart; for they are self-condemned without one word
being uttered.” 4 Testimonies, 385.

made by the Greeks and Romans from a mixture of gold,
silver, and copper. It is spoken of in Ezra 8:27 as
‘yellow, or shining brass’ which was as ‘desirable’ or
‘precious as gold.’ (Margin.)” Bunch, SEOC, 88.
“And I saw another mighty angel come down from
heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon
his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet
as pillars of fire.” Rev. 10:1.
“Brass represents our sinful humanity. ‘And
Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a
pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten
any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he
lived.’ Numbers 21:9. As the image made in the
likeness of the destroying serpents was lifted up for
healing, so One made ‘in the likeness of sinful flesh’
was to be our Redeemer. (Romans 8:3). Christ’s feet of
‘fine brass’ represents the fact that He was ‘in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin.’ Hebrews
4:15. Christ’s feet have withstood much suffering and
walked through many fiery trials.” PJ.

“And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne
and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders,
stood a Lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns
and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God
sent forth into all the earth.” Revelation 5:6.
“For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro
throughout the whole earth, to shew Himself strong in
the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward Him.” 2
Chron. 16:9.
“Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, upon them that hope in His mercy; to deliver
their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.”
Ps. 33;18,19
“The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
and His ears are open unto their cry.” Ps. 34:15.

“This vision of Christ makes more meaningful the
description of the messengers of God in Isaiah 52:7:
‘How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of
him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth
peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that
publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God
reigneth!’ This description of the feet of those who
preach the gospel must have special application to
Christ, ‘the Messenger of the covenant’. How beautiful
are His feet as He walks about among the churches,
ministering to the spiritual needs of His people. They
are beautiful to those who love Him, but terrible and
consuming to those who are to be trampled underfoot.
The altar of burnt offering in the court of the
tabernacle was made of brass. At that altar the wrath
of God was appeased, the guilt of man expiated, and the
judgments against sin were executed.” Bunch, SEOC,
88.

“For His eyes are upon the ways of man, and He
seeth all his goings. There is no darkness, nor shadow
of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves.” Job 34:21,22.
“The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good.” Pr. 15:3.
“Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in
His sight: but all things are naked and opened unto
the eyes of Him with whom we have to do.” Heb. 4:13.

His Voice as the Sound of Many Waters.—
“And the voice of His words like the voice of a
multitude.” “And behold, the glory of the God of Israel
came from the way of the east: and his voice was like
the noise of many waters.” Eze. 1:24; 43:2.

“Search me, O God, and know my heart: try
me, and know my thoughts: And see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.”
Psalm 139: 23,24.

“As the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech,
as noise of an host.” Dan. 10:6.
“The symbol represents volume, majesty, and
musical harmony. ‘The voice of the Lord is powerful;
the voice of the Lord is full of majesty,’ declared the
psalmist, and another prophet spoke of ‘His glorious
voice.’ (Psalm 29:4; Isa. 30:30.) It is ‘voice,’ and not
‘voices.’ Jesus is the spokesman not only of the
Godhead but also of the hosts of heaven. When He
speaks it is the voice of the universe.” Bunch, SEOC,
89.

REVELATION 1:15
And his feet like unto find brass, as if
they burned in a furnace; and his voice as
the sound of many waters.
His Feet Like Unto Fine Brass.—
“The original Greek word for brass as used in our
text, according to Suidas, refers to the famous metal

23

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“His voice sounded like
instruments.” Early Writings, 289.

many

REVELATION 1:16
And he had in his right hand seven
stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp
two-edged sword: and his countenance was
as the sun shineth in his strength.

musical

The False Christ Will Look Like This.—
“As the crowning act in the great drama of
deception, Satan himself will personate Christ. The
church has long professed to look to the Saviour’s
advent as the consummation of her hopes. Now the
great deceiver will make it appear that Christ has come.
In different parts of the earth, Satan will manifest
himself among men as a majestic being of dazzling
brightness, resembling the description of the Son of
God given by John in the Revelation. Rev. 1:13-15.
The glory that surrounds him is unsurpassed by anything
that mortal eyes have yet beheld. The shout of triumph
rings out upon the air: ‘Christ has come! Christ has
come!’ The people prostrate themselves in adoration
before him, while he lifts up his hands and pronounces a
blessing upon them, as Christ blessed His disciples when
He was upon the earth. His voice is soft and subdued,
yet full of melody. In gentle, compassionate tones he
presents some of the same gracious, heavenly truths
which the Saviour uttered; he heals the diseases of the
people, and then, in his assumed character of Christ, he
claims to have changed the Sabbath to Sunday, and
commands all to hallow the day which he has blessed.
He declares that those who persist in keeping holy
the seventh day are blaspheming his name by
refusing to listen to his angels sent to them with light
and truth. This is the strong, almost overmastering
delusion.” Great Controversy, 624.

He Had in His Right Hand Seven Stars.—
“The seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches.” Rev. 1:20.
(See additional comments under Rev. 1:20.)
Out of His Mouth …a Sharp Two-Edged Sword.—
“Take ...the sword of the Spirit, which is the word
of God.” Ephesians 6:17.
“For the Word of God is quick, and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints
and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart.” Hebrews 4:12.
“Out of His mouth issues a sharp two-edged sword,
an emblem of the power of His word.” Acts of the
Apostles, 582.
“Practical truth must be brought into the life, and
the word, like a sharp two-edged sword must cut
away the surplus of self that there is in our characters.”
Special Testimonies, No.10, 9.
“The Word of God in the hands of the Spirit does a
double service.
It convicts and converts the
righteous, and it condemns and destroys the wicked.
In Revelation 19:15 is a description of Christ at His
Second Advent, when ‘out of His mouth goeth a sharp
sword, that with it He should smite the nations.’”
Bunch, SEOC, 90.

The Real Christ.—
“Soon our eyes were drawn to the east, for a small
black cloud had appeared, about half as large as a man’s
hand, which we all knew was the sign of the Son of man.
We all in solemn silence gazed on the cloud as it drew
nearer and became lighter, glorious, and still more
glorious, till it was a great white cloud. The bottom
appeared like fire; a rainbow was over the cloud, while
around it were ten thousand angels, singing a most
lovely song; and upon it sat the Son of man. His hair
was white and curly and lay on His shoulders; and
upon His head were many crowns. His feet had the
appearance of fire; in His right hand was a sharp
sickle; in His left, a silver trumpet. His eyes were as a
flame of fire, which searched His children through and
through. Then all faces gathered paleness, and those that
God had rejected gathered blackness. Then we all cried
out, ‘Who shall be able to stand? Is my robe
spotless?’ Then the angels ceased to sing, and there was
some time of awful silence, when Jesus spoke: ‘Those
who have clean hands and pure hearts shall be able
to stand; My grace is sufficient for you.’ At this our
faces lighted up, and joy filled every heart. And the
angels struck a note higher and sang again, while the
cloud drew still nearer the earth.” Early Writings, 15,16.

“And he hath made my mouth like a sharp
sword.” Isa. 49:2.
His Countenance Was as the Sun Shineth in His
Strength.—
“This signifies His holiness and divinity.
‘Dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto.’ 1 Tim. 6:16. It is reminiscent of Moses who
after forty days in God’s presence on Mt. Sinai, his
face shone so brightly that he was compelled to put a
veil over it, that the people might see his face. (Ex.
34:28-35). So Jesus, in the fullness of his divinity in his
glorified state, his countenance ‘was as the sun.’”
Cooke, #1-UR, 21.
“His face as the appearance of lightning.” Daniel
10:6.

“And his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment
was white as the light.” Matt. 17:2.
“The sun is the symbol of divine majesty. It is the

24

REVELATION 1
best illustration of glory and brightness known to man.
The churches are symbolized by lamps, the ministers
of Christ by stars, but Christ by the glory of the sun
shining in the fullness of its noonday power. Such
was the appearance of Christ at His transfiguration, and
when Paul saw him near the gate of Damascus.” Bunch,
SEOC, 91.

Bible will manifest a spirit of humility. Like Moses,
they have had a view of the awful majesty of holiness,
and they see their own unworthiness in contrast with
the purity and exalted perfection of the Infinite One.
The prophet Daniel was an example of true
sanctification. ...Instead of claiming to be pure and holy,
this honored prophet identified himself with the really
sinful of Israel as he pleaded before God in behalf of his
people: ‘We do not present our supplications before
Thee for our righteousnesses, but for Thy great
mercies.’ ‘We have sinned, we have done wickedly.’
He declares: ‘I was speaking, and praying, and
confessing my sin and the sin of my people.’ And
when at a later time the Son of God appeared, to give
him instruction, Daniel says: ‘My comeliness was
turned in me into corruption, and I retained no
strength.’ Daniel 10:7-9.)
“When Job heard the voice of the Lord out of the
whirlwind, he exclaimed: ‘I abhor myself, and repent
in dust and ashes.’ Job 42:6. It was when Isaiah saw
the glory of the Lord, and heard the cherubim crying,
‘Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts,’ that he cried
out, ‘Woe is me! For I am undone.’ Isaiah 6:3,5.
Paul, after he was caught up into the third heaven and
heard things which it was not possible for a man to utter,
speaks of himself as ‘less than the least of all saints.’ 2
Corinthians 12:2-4, margin; Eph. 3:8. It was the
beloved John, who leaned on Jesus’ breast and beheld
His glory, that fell as one dead before the feet of the
angel. Rev. 1:17.
“There can be no self-exaltation, no boastful claim
to freedom from sin, on the part of those who walk in the
shadow of Calvary’s cross. They feel that it was their
sin which caused the agony that broke the heart of the
Son of God, and this thought will lead them to selfabasement. Those who live nearest to Jesus discern
most clearly the frailty and sinfulness of humanity,
and their only hope is in the merit of a crucified and
risen Saviour.” Great Controversy, 471.

“At midday ...I saw in the way a light from
heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round
about me and them which journeyed with me.” Acts
26:13.
“But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings.” Mal.
4:2.
“Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: Save
me for thy mercies’ sake.” Ps. 31:16.
“We contemplate His character, and thus He is in
all our thoughts. His love encloses us. If we gaze even
a moment upon the sun in its meridian glory, when we
turn away our eyes, the image of the sun will appear in
everything upon which we look. Thus it is when we
behold Jesus; everything we look upon reflects His
image, the Sun of Righteousness.” Testimonies to
Ministers, 388,389.

REVELATION 1:17,18
And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as
dead. And he laid his right hand upon me,
saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and
the last: I am he that liveth, and was dead;
and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen;
and have the keys of hell and of death.
When I Saw Him.—
SIMILARITY OF DANIEL’S VISION
WITH JOHN’S VISION OF JESUS.
DANIEL 10:5-12
JOHN—REV. 1:13-17
One like the Son of man
A certain man
Garment down to the foot
Clothed in linen
Loins girded with fine A golden girdle
gold
Countenance as the sun
Face as lightning
Eyes as a flame of fire
Eyes as lamps of fire
Feet like fine brass
Feet like polished brass
Voice like of a multitude Voice as sound of many
waters
No strength, face to Fell at His feet as dead
ground
Laid His right hand on
Hand touched him
him
Fear not
Fear not

Laid His Right Hand Upon Me.—
“Jacob laid his right hand upon Ephraim and
blessed him. See Gen. 48:14-20. When Christ laid His
right hand upon John, it was to bless him.” PJ.
Fear Not.—
“Through all our trials we have a never-failing
Helper. He does not leave us alone to struggle with
temptation, to battle with evil, and be finally crushed
with burdens and sorrow. Though now He is hidden
from mortal sight, the ear of faith can hear His voice
saying, Fear not; I am with you. ‘I am He that liveth,
and was dead; and, behold, I am alive forevermore.’
Rev. 1:18. I have endured your sorrows, experienced
your struggles, encountered your temptations. I know
your tears; I also have wept. The griefs that lie too deep
to be breathed into any human ear, I know. Think not
that you are desolate and forsaken. Though your pain
touch no responsive chord in any heart on earth, look
unto Me, and live. ‘The mountains shall depart, and

I Fell at His Feet as Dead.—
“Those who experience the sanctification of the

25

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the hills be re-moved; but My kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of My
peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on
thee.’ Isa. 54:10.” Desire of Ages, 483.

“Greek zon eimi, ‘I am living,’ that is, I have
continuing life, life that does not end, life that is selfperpetuating.... In spite of the death He suffered for the
human race, Christ continues to be ‘the living [One],’ for
He is God.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 740.

The First and the Last.—
“I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end, the first and the last.” Rev. 22:13.

“Jesus declared, ‘I am the resurrection, and the
life.’ In Christ is life, original, unborrowed, underived.
‘He that hath the Son hath life.’ 1 John 5:12. The
divinity of Christ is the believer’s assurance of eternal
life.” Desire of Ages, 530.

(See also comments on Rev. 1:11.)
I Am He That Liveth.—
“Do we realize how near Jesus will come to us?
He is speaking to us individually. He will reveal
Himself to everyone who is willing to be clothed with
the robe of His righteousness. He declares: ‘I the Lord
thy God will hold thy right hand.’ Let us place
ourselves where He can hold us by the hand, where we
can hear Him saying with assurance and authority: ‘I
am He that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am
alive for evermore.’” 7 Testimonies, 71.

“Through all your trials, which have never been
fully revealed to others, you have had a never-failing
Friend, who has said: ‘I am with you alway, even unto
the end of the world.’ While upon the earth, He was
ever touched with human woe. Although He is now
ascended to His Father and is adored by angels who
quickly obey His commands, His heart, which loved,
pitied, and sympathized, knows no change. It remains a
heart of unchangeable tenderness still. That same Jesus
was acquainted with all your trials, and did not leave you
alone to struggle with temptations, battle with evil, and
be finally crushed with burdens and sorrow. Through
His angels He whispered to you: ‘Fear not, for I am
with thee.’ ‘I am He that liveth, and was dead; and,
behold, I am alive for evermore.’” 2 Testimonies, 271.

Behold, I am Alive.—
“Jesus comforts our sorrow for the dead with a
message of infinite hope: ‘I am He that liveth, and
was dead; and, behold, I am alive forevermore, ...and
have the keys of hell and of death.’ ‘Forasmuch then
as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He
also Himself likewise took part of the same; that
through death He might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them
who through fear of death were all their lifetime
subject to bondage.’ Rev. 1:18; Heb. 2:14, 15.
“Satan cannot hold the dead in his grasp when the
Son of God bids them live. He cannot hold in spiritual
death one soul who in faith receives Christ’s word of
power. God is saying to all who are dead in sin,
‘Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead.’
Eph. 5:14. That word is eternal life. As the word of
God which bade the first man live, still gives us life; as
Christ’s word, ‘Young man, I say unto thee, Arise,’
gave life to the youth of Nain, so that word, ‘Arise from
the dead,’ is life to the soul that receives it. God ‘hath
delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath
translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son.’ Col.
1:13. It is all offered us in His word. If we receive the
word, we have the deliverance.
“And ‘if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies
by His Spirit that dwelleth in you.’ ‘For the Lord
Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of
God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we
which are alive and remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in
the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.’ Rom.
8:11; 1 Thess. 4:16, 17. This is the word of comfort
wherewith He bids us comfort one another.” Desire of
Ages, 320.

Have the Keys of Hell and Death.—
“Keys represent authority and power, and this
tells us that Jesus has authority over death and the
grave. In what way? The grave in scripture is likened
to a prison—the prison house of Satan. Satan is the
author of death. ‘Him that had the power (or dominion)
of death, that is the devil.’ Heb. 2:14.
“The grave is a symbol of Satan’s arsenal or
stronghold. ‘On this rock will I build my church and
the GATES OF HELL shall not prevail against it [the
church].’ Mt. 16:18. The gates of hell represent the
arsenal of Satan. He claims the dead as his property
because they have transgressed the law. In order for
Christ to conquer death and the grave it was essential
that he enter the arsenal or stronghold of Satan and grasp
the keys. ‘When a strong man armed keepeth his
palace, his goods are in peace; but when one stronger
than he, shall come upon him, and overcome him, he
taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted,
and divides his spoils.’ Luke 11:21-22.
“Jesus by death, entered Satan’s stronghold. ‘He
took part of the same [flesh and blood], that through
death, he might destroy him that had the power [or
dominion] of death, that is the devil.’ Heb.2:14. In
this experience we have a dramatic episode in the great
controversy between Christ and Satan. Satan mustered
all his forces, ‘principalities and powers’, to keep Jesus
imprisoned in the tomb. Not only were Roman guards
keeping their watch. There were unseen watchers. The
angelic powers of darkness were undoubtedly present.
Had it been possible, the prince of darkness with his

26

REVELATION 1
hosts would have kept forever sealed, the tomb that held
the Son of God.
“It was in the tomb, the prison house of Satan, that
Jesus displayed his supremacy. On Calvary Jesus
displayed the love of God and how marvelous it was. In
the tomb, he displays the omnipotence of God. ‘Having
spoiled principalities and powers [of Satan] he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in it.’
[Margin—‘in himself’] Col. 2:15.” Cooke, #1-UR,
26,27.

Write the Things Which Thou Hast Seen.—
“In figures and symbols, subjects of vast
importance were presented to John, which he was to
record, that the people of God living in his age and in
future ages might have an intelligent understanding
of the perils and conflicts before them.
This
revelation was given for the guidance and comfort of the
church throughout the Christian dispensation.” Acts of
the Apostles, 582,583.
Seven Stars Are Angels of the Seven Churches.—
“The word ‘angel’ comes from the Greek aggelos
which means ‘messenger.’ They were not always
superhuman beings: 1. John the Baptist. (Mark 1:2). 2.
The disciples of John the Baptist. (Luke 7:24). 3. The
disciples of Jesus. (Luke 9:52). 4. The two faithful
spies. (James 2:25).” Feyerabend, RVBV, 19.
“The angel of a church must denote a
messenger, or minister, of that church. As each
church covers a period of time, the angel of each church
must denote the ministry, or all the true ministers of
Christ during the period covered by that church.” Smith,
DR, 364.

“The most cheering assurance in all these words of
consolation is the declaration of this exalted One who is
alive forevermore, that He is the arbiter of death and the
grave. I have, He says, ‘the keys of hell (hades, the
grave) and of death.’ Death is a conquered tyrant. He
may gather to the grave the precious of earth, and gloat
for a season over his apparent triumph. But he is
performing a fruitless task, for the key to his dark
prison house has been wrenched from his grasp, and
is now held in the hands of a mightier than he. He is
compelled to deposit his trophies in a region over which
another has absolute control; and this one is the
unchanging Friend and the pledged Redeemer of His
people. Then grieve not for the righteous dead; they
are in safe-keeping. An enemy takes them away for a
while, but a friend holds the key to the place of their
temporary confinement.” Smith, DR, 358,359.

“And my temptation which was in my flesh ye
despised not, nor rejected: but received me as an angel
of God, even as Christ Jesus.” Gal. 4:14.
“Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner
and fellowhelper concerning you: or our brethren be
enquired of, they are the messengers of the churches,
and the glory of Christ.” 2 Cor. 8:23.

“Christ is condemned over again in the person of
His disciple. When one is incarcerated in prison walls,
Christ ravishes the heart with His love. When one
suffers death for His sake, Christ says, ‘I am He that
liveth and was dead; and, behold, I am alive
forevermore, ...and have the keys of hell and of
death.’ The life that is sacrificed for Me is preserved
unto eternal glory.” Signs, 4/16/02.

“The seven stars which the Son of man held in His
right hand are declared to be the angels of the seven
churches. (Verse 20.) The angels of the churches,
doubtless all will agree, are the ministers of the
churches. Their being held in the right hand of the
Son of man denotes the sustaining power, guidance,
and protection vouchsafed to them. But there were
only seven of them in His right hand. Are there only
seven thus cared for by the great Master of assemblies?
May not all the true ministers of the entire gospel age
derive from this representation the consolation of
knowing that they are upheld and guided by the right
hand of the great Head of the church? Such would seem
to be the only consistent conclusion to be reached.”
Smith, DR, 344.

“ ‘He that believeth in Me,’ said Jesus, ‘though
he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth
and believeth in Me shall never die. Believest thou
this?’ Christ here looks forward to the time of His
second coming. Then the righteous dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and the living righteous shall be translated
to heaven without seeing death.” Desire of Ages, 530.

REVELATION 1:19,20
Write the things which thou hast seen,
and the things which are, and the things
which shall be hereafter;
The mystery of the seven stars which
thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven
golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the
angels of the seven churches: and the seven
candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven
churches.

“‘These things saith He that holdeth the seven
stars in His right hand.’ Revelation 2:1. These words
are spoken to the teachers in the church—those
entrusted by God with weighty responsibilities.” Acts
of the Apostles, 586.
“Seek Him that maketh the seven stars and
Orion.” Amos 5:8. [The same Hebrew word for
“seven stars” is translated in Job as “the Pleiades.”]
“Canst thou bind the sweet influences of the

27

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Job 38:31.

come, and the glory of the Lord has risen upon them.
Let them understand that Christ expects them to do the
same work as He has done. Let them leave the
churches that know the truth, and go forth to
establish new churches, to present the word of truth
to those who are in ignorance of God’s warning
message.” 6 Testimonies, 414.
“The work of the minister represented by the
seven stars is a high and sacred work. When he
entertains the idea that his work is comprehended in
sermonizing, he overlooks, and is sure to neglect, the
work devolving upon a shepherd of the flock. It is his
work to have care, to oversee the flock, to so arrange
the elements of the church that each may have
something to do.” Review & Herald, 5/31/1887.

The Pleiades, A Group of Seven Stars
Also known as The Seven Sisters
“God’s ministers are symbolized by the seven
stars, which He who is the first and the last has under
His special care and protection. The sweet influences
that are to be abundant in the church are bound up with
God’s ministers, who are to reveal the love of Christ.
The stars of heaven are under His control. He fills
them with light.
He guides and directs their
movements. If He did not do this, they would become
fallen stars. So with His ministers. They are but
instruments in His hands, and all the good they
accomplish is done through His power.
“It is to the honor of Christ that He makes His
ministers a greater blessing to the church, through the
working of the Holy Spirit, than are the stars to the
world. The Saviour is to be their efficiency. If they will
look to Him as He looked to the Father, they will do His
works. As they make God their dependence, He will
give them His brightness to reflect to the world.”
Gospel Workers, 13,14

In My Right Hand.—
“Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not
dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee;
yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness.” Isaiah 41:10.
“Here is a wonderful lesson as to the holiness of
the office and the solemnity of the responsibility of the
ministers of Christ. The figure indicates that the power
and authority to minister to the spiritual needs of
God’s people have their origin not with the church
but with Christ, the head of the church. Jesus
upholds the ministers who, as His spokesmen, preach
His Word. The right hand is the symbol of power,
authority, and honor. The stars in the right hand of
Christ indicate the high honor bestowed upon His
ambassadors as well as His absolute control over
them. It also indicates their safety amid the dangers that
surround them because of the continuous attacks of the
enemy. Christ is their possessor, upholder, and
protector. The symbolic picture demands unswerving
fidelity and unquestioned loyalty on the part of the
ministers of Christ in their service in His stead among
the churches.” Bunch, SEOC, 89,90.

“He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth
them all by their names.” Ps. 147:4.
“Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory
of the LORD is risen upon thee. For, behold, the
darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people: but the LORD shall arise upon thee, and his
glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall
come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy
rising.” Isaiah 60:1-3.
“And they that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many
to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.” Dan
12:3.

The Seven Candlesticks …Are Seven Churches.—
“As the candlestick’s sole work was to give light so
the church is to be a light bearer. This light is found
only in the Word of God. ‘Thy Word is a lamp
(candle, margin) unto my feet and a light unto my
path.’ Ps.119:105.” Burnside, RWU, 21.
“Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven.” Matthew 5:16.

“God’s servants are to preach His word to the
people. Under the Holy Spirit’s working they will come
into order as stars in the hand of Christ, to shine
forth with His brightness. Let those who claim to be
Christ’s ministers arise and shine; for their light has

(See comments under Revelation 1:13.)

28

REVELATION 2

REVELATION 2

will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.
6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the
Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
7 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches: to him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree
of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 2.—
“There are three ways to study the letters to the
churches.
1. They can be studied as letters to the local
churches as they existed in John’s day.
2. They can be studied as letters to churches whose
characteristics correspond to sequential historical time
periods of the whole Christian church.
3. They can be studied as applying to local
churches, individuals, church systems, or religious
movements as they exist in our day.” Source Unknown.

REVELATION 2:1
Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus
write; These things saith he that holdeth the
seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in
the midst of the seven golden candlesticks.

“To whom were the messages of the seven
churches addressed?
“1. To the local congregations. Those messages
were true in respect to the churches in the cities to which
the letters were addressed.
“2. To individuals. ‘He that hath an ear let him
hear what the spirit saith unto the churches.’ (Rev. 2:7.).
The lesson in all the letters apply to everyone
everywhere. So do the promises.
“3. To denominations and movements. We are
all responsible for the faults of the groups with which we
identify, and are worthy of their rewards. The letters
apply to various conditions of churches, congregation,
denominations and movements.” Feyerabend, RVBV,
20.

Unto the Angel.—
(Angel = “messenger,” the ministry of the church
of Ephesus.)
“And from Miletus he [Paul] sent to Ephesus, and
called the elders of the church. And when they were
come to him, he said unto them, ...Take heed therefore
unto yourselves, and to the flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church
of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.
For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also
of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore
watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I
ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.”
Acts 20: 17,18, 28-31.

“In each of the introductions of the seven epistles
of Christ, He identifies Himself by one of the...
descriptions given of Him in the introductory vision, the
one that is the most appropriate to the needs of that
particular church. The sum of the seven introductions
makes up the complete picture of the glorified Christ....”
Bunch, SEOC, 97,98.

“John ministered to the Ephesus, and then to the
Smyrna churches. See Desire of Ages, p.193.” PJ
Ephesus.—
“The definition of the word ‘Ephesus’ is
‘desirable,’ which may well be taken as a good
descriptive term of the character and condition of the
church in its first state.” Smith, DR, 364.

THE FIRST CHURCH: EPHESUS
REVELATION 2:1-7

“In the time of the apostles the western portion of
Asia Minor was known as the Roman province of Asia.
Ephesus, the capital, was a great commercial center.
Its harbor was crowded with shipping, and its streets
were thronged with people from every country. Like
Corinth, it presented a promising field for missionary
effort.” Acts of the Apostles, 281.

1 Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write; These things
saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh
in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks;
2 I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how
thou canst not bear them which are evil: and thou hast tried them
which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them
liars:
3 And hast borne, and hast patience, and for my name’s sake
hast laboured, and hast not fainted.
4 Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast
left thy first love.
5 Remember therefore from whence thou are fallen, and repent,
and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and

“Writing to the church at Ephesus, he [Paul] tells
how he prayed that they might be given a revelation of

29

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Christ. [‘Wherefore I …cease not to give thanks for
you, making mention of you in my prayers; That the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory,
may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him: The eyes of your
understanding being enlightened; that ye may know
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the
glory of his inheritance in the saints, And what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe,
according to the working of his mighty power....’ Eph.
1:15-19.]
Thirty years later John received this
Revelation, and the first church to which it was sent was
Ephesus.” Anderson, UR, 5.

gathered the disciples into a distinct body, continuing
his public instructions in the school of Tyrannus, a
teacher of some note.” Acts of the Apostles, 285,286.
Time Period of Ephesus.—
“The time covered by this first church may be
considered the period from the resurrection of Christ
to the close of the first century, or to the death of the
last of the apostles.” Smith, DR, 368.
“Of the church at Ephesus, which the Lord Jesus
used as a symbol of the entire Christian church in the
apostolic age, the faithful and true Witness declared:
(Rev. 2:2,3 quoted).” Acts of the Apostles, 578.

How the Ephesus Church Was Founded.—
“The groundwork for the organization of the
church at Ephesus was laid by Appollos, an eloquent
evangelist. However, the church was organized as a
result of the work of the apostle Paul about AD 52 to
AD 55. In his ministry he labored at Ephesus longer
than at any other place.” Metcalf, GPDR, 64.

The Seven Stars.—
“The seven stars are the angels of the seven
churches.” Rev. 1:20.
“Christ holds the stars in His right hand, and it is
His purpose to let His light shine forth through them to
the world. Thus He desires to prepare His people for
higher service in the church above.” 8 Testimonies, 23.

“On his arrival at Ephesus, Paul found twelve
brethren, who, like Apollos, had been disciples of John
the Baptist, and like him had gained some know-ledge of
the mission of Christ. They had not the ability of
Apollos, but with the same sincerity and faith they were
seeking to spread abroad the knowledge they had
received.
“…With deep interest and grateful, wondering joy
the brethren listened to Paul’s words. By faith they
grasped the wonderful truth of Christ’s atoning sacrifice
and received Him as their Redeemer. They were then
baptized in the name of Jesus, and as Paul ‘laid his
hands upon them,’ they received also the baptism of
the Holy Spirit, by which they were enabled to speak the
languages of other nations and to prophesy. Thus they
were qualified to labor as missionaries in Ephesus
and its vicinity and also to go forth to proclaim the
gospel in Asia Minor.” Acts of the Apostles, 282,283.

(See notes under Revelation 1:20.)
Who Walks in the Midst of 7 Golden Candlesticks—
“Although Christ is mediator in the heavenly
Sanctuary, yet he walks up and down in the midst of the
churches on earth. He goes about from church to
church, from congregation to congregation, from
soul to soul. He observes their true condition—that
which is neglected, that which is in disorder, and that
which needs to be done. He is represented as walking,
which signifies unrest, wakefulness, and unremitting
vigilance. He is observing whether the light of any of
his sentinels, or candlesticks, is burning dim or going
out. These under-shepherds may sleep, but He that
keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. If these
candlesticks were left to the charge of human powers,
the flickering flame would languish and die. But He is
the true watchman of the home, the sleep-less warden of
the temple courts. The continual watchcare and
presence and sustaining grace of Christ are the source of
all light and life.” Review & Herald, 5/31/1887.

“As was his custom, Paul had begun his work at
Ephesus by preaching in the synagogue of the Jews. He
continued to labor there for three months, ‘disputing
and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of
God.’ At first he met with a favorable reception; but as
in other fields, he was soon violently opposed. ‘Divers
were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of
that way before the multitude.’ As they persisted in
their rejection of the gospel, the apostle ceased to preach
in the synagogue.
“The Spirit of God had wrought with and through
Paul in his labors for his countrymen. Sufficient
evidence had been presented to convince all who
honestly desired to know the truth. But many per-mitted
themselves to be controlled by prejudice and unbelief,
and refused to yield to the most conclusive evidence.
Fearing that the faith of the believers would be
endangered by continued association with these
opposers of the truth, Paul separated from them and

(See also notes under Revelation 1:12,13.)

REVELATION 2:2,3
I know thy works, and thy labour, and
thy patience, and how thou canst not bear
them which are evil: and thou hast tried
them which say they are apostles, and are
not, and hast found them liars:
And hast borne, and hast patience, and
for my name’s sake hast laboured, and hast
not fainted.
30

REVELATION 2
“The eye of the Lord is upon all the work, all the
plans, all the imaginings of every mind; He sees beneath
the surface of things, discerning the thoughts and intents
of the heart. There is not a deed of darkness, not a plan,
not an imagination of the heart, not a thought of the
mind, but that He reads it as an open book. Every act,
every word, every motive, is faithfully chronicled in
the records of the great Heart-searcher, who said, ‘I
know thy works.’” Life Sketches, 322.

I Know Thy Works, Thy Labour, Thy Patience.—
“At the first the experience of the church at
Ephesus was marked with childlike simplicity and
fervor. The believers sought earnestly to obey every
word of God, and their lives revealed an earnest, sincere
love for Christ. They rejoiced to do the will of God
because the Saviour was in their hearts as an abiding
presence. Filled with love for their Redeemer, their
highest aim was to win souls to Him. They did not
think of hoarding the precious treasure of the grace of
Christ. They felt the importance of their calling; and,
weighted with the message, ‘On earth peace, good will
toward men,’ they burned with desire to carry the glad
tidings of salvation to earth’s remotest bounds. And the
world took knowledge of them that they had been with
Jesus. Sinful men, repentant, pardoned, cleansed, and
sanctified, were brought into partnership with God
through His Son.
“The members of the church were united in
sentiment and action. Love for Christ was the golden
chain that bound them together. They followed on to
know the Lord more and still more perfectly, and in their
lives were revealed the joy and peace of Christ. They
visited the fatherless and widows in their affliction,
and kept themselves unspotted from the world,
realizing that a failure to do this would be a
contradiction of their profession and a denial of their
Redeemer.
“In every city the work was carried forward. Souls
were converted, who in their turn felt that they must tell
of the inestimable treasure they had received. They
could not rest till the light which had illumined their
minds was shining upon others.
Multitudes of
unbelievers were made acquainted with the reasons of
the Christian’s hope. Warm, inspired personal appeals
were made to the erring, to the outcast, and to those
who, while professing to know the truth, were lovers
of pleasure more than lovers of God.” Acts of the
Apostles, 579,580.

“The labor of love springs from the work of faith.
Bible religion means constant work. ‘Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven.’ ‘Work
out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it
is God that worketh in you, both to will and to do of
his good pleasure.’ We are to be zealous of good
works: be careful to maintain good works. And the true
Witness says, ‘I know thy works.’
“While it is true that our busy activities will not in
themselves ensure salvation, it is also true that faith
which unites us to Christ will stir the soul to
activity.” Manuscript 16,1890.
Thou Canst Not Bear Those That are Evil.—
“Here we see a deep, heart-felt, prolonged struggle;
just such a struggle as we might have expected in these
last days of conflict. ‘Thou canst not bear them which
are evil.’ Rigid and impartial discipline was exercised
in the case of all unworthy disciples and false teachers
who were bringing in damnable heresies, which were
undermining the foundation of the faith.” Review &
Herald, 5/31/1887.
“But Peter said unto him [Simon], thy money
perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift
of God may be purchased with money…. Thy heart is
not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this
thy wickedness.” Acts 8:20-22.
Thou Hast Tried Them Which Say They are Apostles,
and are Not.—
“(Verse 2 quoted.) There will be men who claim to
have a work to do in preaching the truth to others, and it
may be found best to test them. But the most solemn
obligation is laid upon those who consent to do this, to
watch their going out and their coming in, to follow on
their track to closely investigate the manner in which
their work is done; whether they are indeed leaving a
savory influence, or an influence which belies all their
pretension to be apostles of Jesus Christ. True zeal,
Christlike zeal, is to be shown in every case, that
pretenders may not obtain a foot-hold, and through
deception insinuate themselves into the confidence of
the churches when they are not worthy of the
confidence of Christians, because their works are
evil, their hearts unsanctified, their actions defiling.”
Review & Herald, 5/31/1887.

“By the co-operation of the divine Spirit, the
apostles did a work that shook the world. To every
nation was the gospel carried in a single generation.”
Acts of the Apostles, 593.

Apostle Bartholomew, Armenia, AD 70

“This labor of purifying the church is a painful

31

GEMS FROM REVELATION
work, but one that must not be neglected, if the
church would have the commendation of God.”
Review & Herald, 6/7/1887.

youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest
after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.”
Jer. 2:2.

“For such are false apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.” 2
Cor. 11:13.

“But after a time the zeal of the believers began
to wane, and their love for God and for one another
grew less. Coldness crept into the church. Some forgot
the wonderful manner in which they had received the
truth. One by one the old standard-bearers fell at their
post. Some of the younger work-errs, who might have
shared the burdens of these pioneers, and thus have been
prepared for wise leader-ship, had become weary of oftrepeated truths. In their desire for something novel and
startling they attempted to introduce new phases of
doctrine, more pleasing to many minds, but not in
harmony with the fundamental principles of the gospel.
In their self-confidence and spiritual blindness they
failed to discern that these sophistries would cause many
to question the experiences of the past, and would thus
lead to confusion and unbelief.
“As these false doctrines were urged, differences
sprang up, and the eyes of many were turned from
beholding Jesus as the Author and Finisher of their faith.
The discussion of unimportant points of doctrine, and
the contemplation of pleasing fables of man’s invention,
occupied time that should have been spent in
proclaiming the gospel. The masses that might have
been convicted and converted by a faithful presentation
of the truth were left unwarned. Piety was rapidly
waning, and Satan seemed about to gain the ascendancy
over those who claimed to be followers of Christ.
“It was at this critical time in the history of the
church that John was sentenced to banishment.”
Acts of the Apostles, 580,581.

“But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled
thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back
part of the price of the land?” Acts 5:3.
“A mere lineal descent from Abraham was of no
value. Without a spiritual connection with him, which
would be manifested in possessing the same spirit, and
doing the same works, they were not his children.
“This principle bears with equal weight upon a
question that has long agitated the Christian world—the
question of apostolic succession.
Descent from
Abraham was proved, not by name and lineage, but by
likeness of character. So the apostolic succession rests
not upon the transmission of ecclesiastical authority, but
upon spiritual relationship. A life actuated by the
apostle’s spirit the belief and teaching of the truth
they taught, this is the true evidence of apostolic
succession. This is what constitutes men the successors
of the first teachers of the gospel.” Desire of Ages, 467.

REVELATION 2:4
Nevertheless I have somewhat against
thee, because thou hast left thy first love.
I Have Somewhat Against Thee.—
“Messages of a decided character must be borne to
the people. Men must go forth reproving, rebuking
every manner of evil. If there is given to the angel of
any church a commission like unto that given to the
angel of the church of Ephesus, let the message be
heard through human agents rebuking careless-ness,
backsliding, and sin, that the people may be brought
to repentance and confession of sin. Never seek to
cover sin; for in the message of rebuke, Christ is to be
proclaimed as the first and the last, He who is all in all
to the soul.
“His power awaits the demand of those who would
overcome. The reprover is to animate his hearers so
that they shall strive for the mastery. He is to
encourage them to struggle for deliverance from every
sinful practice, to be free from every corrupt habit, even
if his denial of self is like taking the right eye, or
separating the right arm from the body. No concession
or compromise is to be made to evil habits or sinful
practices.” (Manuscript 26a, 1892). Selected Messages,
Vol. 1, 380.

“Early in the history of the church the mystery of
iniquity foretold by the apostle Paul began its baleful
work; and as the false teachers concerning whom Peter
had warned the believers, urged their heresies, many
were ensnared by false doctrines. Some faltered under
trial and were tempted to give up the faith. At the time
when John was given this revelation, many had lost
their first love of gospel truth. But in His mercy God
did not leave the church to continue in a backslidden
state. In a message of infinite tenderness He revealed
His love for them and His desire that they should make
sure work for eternity. ‘Remember,’ He pleaded, ‘from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works.’ Verse 5.” Acts of the Apostles, 587.
“In a single generation the gospel was carried to
every nation under heaven. But little by little a change
came. The church lost her first love. She became
selfish and ease-loving. The spirit of worldliness was
cherished. The enemy cast his spell upon those to
whom God had given light for a world in darkness, light
which should have shone forth in good works. The
world was robbed of the blessings that God desired men
to receive. Is not the same thing repeated in this
generation?” 8 Testimonies, 26.

Thou Hast Left Thy First Love.—
“Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus
saith the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy

32

REVELATION 2
place in their hearts, and that they would have to repent
because of the noncontinuance of their first works. But
God in His mercy called for repentance, for a return to
their first love and to the works that are always the result
of true, Christlike love.” (Manuscript 11, 1900). 7BC,
957.

“What is the fatal deficiency?—‘Thou hast left
thy first love.’ Is not this our case? Our doc-trines may
be correct; we may hate false doctrine, and may not
receive those who are not true to principle; we may labor
with untiring energy; but even this is not sufficient.
What is our motive? Why are we called upon to
repent?—‘Thou hast left thy first love.’ Let each
member of the church study this important warn-in and
reproof. Let each one see if in contending for the truth,
if in debating on the theory, he has not lost the tender
love of Christ. Has not Christ been left out of the
sermons, and out of the heart? Is there not danger that
many are going forward with a pro-fission of the truth,
doing missionary work, while the love of Christ has not
been woven into the labor?” Review & Herald,
2/3/1891.

“This points definitely to the ‘falling away’ that is
mentioned by Paul to the elders of the church at Ephesus
(Acts 20:30), and that is dwelt upon especial-lee in 2
Thess. 2; which falling away, when continued,
developed ‘that man of sin,’ ‘the son of perdition,’
‘who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshiped; so that he as God
sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he
is God.’ 2 Thess. 2:3, 4.” Jones, GNOT, 4.
“Brethren, your own lamps will surely flicker and
grow dim until they go out in darkness unless you make
decided efforts to reform. ‘Remember there-fore from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works.’ The opportunity now presented may be short.
If this season of grace and repentance passes
unimproved, the warning is given: ‘I will come unto
thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of
his place.’ These words are uttered by the lips of the
long-suffering, forbearing One. They are a solemn
warning to churches and individuals that the Watcher
who never slumbers is measuring their course of action.
It is only by reason of His marvelous patience that they
are not cut down as cumberers of the ground. But His
Spirit will not always strive.” 5 Testimonies, 611.

“Love is the supreme grace of the Christian
religion, and the cooling of that love is the first sign of
decay and the first step toward a general apostasy.
From the decline of love the early church marched
steadily onward away from God, till apostasy
climaxed in the scarlet woman, Babylon the Great.”
Bunch, SEOC, 126.

REVELATION 2:5
Remember therefore from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works; or else I will come unto thee quickly,
and will remove thy candlestick out of his
place, except thou repent.

“(Rev. 2:5 quoted). Why is there so dim a
perception of the true spiritual condition of the
church? Has not blindness fallen upon the watchmen
standing on the walls of Zion? Are not many of God’s
servants unconcerned and well satisfied, as if the pillar
of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night rested
upon the sanctuary? Are there not those in positions of
responsibility, professing to know God, who in life and
character deny Him?” 8 Testimonies, 248.
Repent.—
“Repentance is turning from self to Christ; and
when we receive Christ so that through faith He can live
His life in us, good works will be manifest.” Mount of
Blessing, 87.

Remember From Whence Thou Art Fallen.—
“There is only one remedy for spiritual decline,
one alone, that proposed by Jesus. It involves three
successive steps and is a brief summary of the three
phases of all true conversion: awakening of conscience,
repentance, and the practice of good works inspired by
love. ‘Remember therefore from whence thou are
fallen’ (2:5) is the first part of Jesus’ practical counsel.
...Repent’ is the second part of the Master’s advice. ...If
repentance is sincere, it will be evidenced subsequently
by the actions. And this is the third part to Jesus’
counsel: ‘Do the first works.’ Jesus calls for the
church to carry out its first works, that is, works of
love.” Zurcher, COR, 34.

“Real sorrow for sin is the result of the working of
the Holy Spirit. The Spirit reveals the ingratitude of the
heart that has slighted and grieved the Saviour, and
brings us in contrition to the foot of the cross. By every
sin Jesus is wounded afresh; and as we look upon
Him whom we have pierced, we mourn for the sins
that have brought anguish upon Him.
Such
mourning will lead to the renunciation of sin.” Desire
of Ages, 300.

“The Ephesian church met with great opposition,
and some of the early Christians suffered persecution;
and yet some of these very ones turned from the truths
that had united them with Christ’s followers, and
adopted, in their stead, the specious errors devised by
Satan.
“This change is represented as a spiritual fall.
(Rev. 2: 5 quoted.) The believers did not sense their
spiritual fall. They knew not that a change had taken

Do The First Works.—
“The first works of the church were seen when the

33

GEMS FROM REVELATION
believers sought out friends, relatives, and
acquaintances, and with hearts overflowing with love,
told the story of what Jesus was to them and what
they were to Jesus.” Testimonies to Ministers, 168.

sin, and by active, earnest piety show stability and
submission to the precepts of God’s word, and are
faithful in the discharge of religious duty, they will help
to establish the candlestick in its place, and will have the
evidence that the Lord of hosts is with them and the God
of Jacob is their refuge.” 4 Testimonies, 286.

“(Rev. 2:5 quoted). Have not many in this
ministerial school seen their mistake of not abiding in
Christ? Cannot they have the privilege of repenting, and
of doing their first works? Who shall condemn this
work of repentance, of confession, of baptism? If
some conscientiously feel that their first duty is to repent
of their sins, confess them, and be baptized, is not this
the first works that they must do? Manuscript Releases,
Vol.7, 261.

“I was shown the churches in different states that
profess to be keeping the commandments of God and
looking for the second coming of Christ. There is an
alarming amount of indifference, pride, love of the
world, and cold formality existing among them. And
these are the people who are fast coming to resemble
ancient Israel, so far as the want of piety is concerned.
Many make high claims to godliness and yet are
destitute of self-control. Appetite and passion bear
sway; self is made prominent. Many are arbitrary,
dictatorial, overbearing, boastful, proud, and
unconsecrated.
Yet some of these persons are
ministers, handling sacred truths. Unless they repent,
their candlestick will be removed out of its place.” 4
Testimonies, 403.

“He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of
Jonas, lovest thou Me? Peter was grieved because He
said unto him the third time, Lovest thou Me? And he
said unto Him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou
knowest that I love Thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed
My sheep.” John 20:17.
Will Remove Thy Candlestick Out of His Place, Except
Thou Repent.—
“Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and
the spark of his fire shall not shine. The light shall be
dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out
with him.” Job 18:5,6.

“Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have
lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted? It is
thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to
be trodden under foot of men.” Matthew 5:13
“[Rev. 2:4,5 quoted]. …The love of God has
been lost, and this means the absence of love for one
another. Self, self, self, is cherished, and is striving for
the supremacy. How long is this to continue? Unless
there is a reconversion, there will soon be such a lack
of godliness that the Church will be represented by the
barren fig tree. Great light has been given to her. She
has had abundant opportunity for bearing much fruit.
But selfishness has come in, and God says, ‘I will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou
repent.’” Review & Herald, 2/25/1902.

“Those who do not submit to the influence of the
Holy Spirit soon lose the blessings received when they
acknowledged the truth as from Heaven. They fall into a
cold, spiritless formality; they lose their interest in
perishing souls: they have ‘left their first love.’ And
Christ says unto them, ‘[verse 5 quoted].’ He will take
his Holy Spirit from the church, and give it to others
who will appreciate it.
“There is no greater evidence that those who have
received great light do not appreciate that light, than is
given by their refusal to let their light shine upon those
who are in darkness, and devoting their time and
energies in celebrating forms and ceremonies. Thoughts
of the inner work, the necessary purity of heart, are not
entertained. The absence of harmony with God becomes
apparent.
The light grows dim, goes out; the
candlestick has been removed.
There is much
exercising of man-made authority by those to whom
God has not given his wisdom because they did not feel
the need of the wisdom from above.” R&H, 7/16/1895.

REVELATION 2:6
But this thou hast, that thou hatest the
deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
Thou Hatest the Deeds of the Nicolaitans.—
“He does not say that they hated the presence of
the Nicolaitans, and could not endure them; but that they
hated their deeds, ‘which I also hate.’ This church
was in a position where they could hate the sin, and
not the sinner, where they could have patience, and
labor long for the erring, and love them; while they
hated the deeds that separated them from the Lord.”
Haskel, SSP, 47.

“Some in these churches are in constant danger
because the cares of this life and worldly thoughts so
occupy the mind that they do not think upon God or
heaven and the needs of their own souls. They rouse
from their stupor now and then, but fall back again in
deeper slumber. Unless they shall fully rouse from
their slumbers, God will remove the light and
blessings He has given them. He will in His anger
remove the candlestick out of its place. He has made
these churches the depositary of His law. If they reject

The Nicolaitans.—
“The doctrine is now largely taught that the gospel
of Christ has made the law of God of no effect; that by
‘believing,’ we are released from the necessity of

34

REVELATION 2
being doers of the Word. But this is the doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, which Christ so unsparingly
condemned….
“Those who are teaching this doctrine today
...declare that we have only to believe on Jesus Christ,
and that faith is all-sufficient; that the righteousness of
Christ is to be the sinner’s credentials; that this
imputed righteousness fulfills the law for us, and that
we are under no obligation to obey the law of God.
This class claim that Christ came to save sinners, and
that He has saved them. ‘I am saved,’ they will repeat
over and over again. But are they saved while transgrassing the law of Jehovah? —No; for the garments
of Christ’s righteousness are not a cloak for iniquity.”
Signs, 1/2/1912.

the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him
that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree
of life, which is in the midst of the paradise
of God.
He That Hath an Ear, Let Him Hear!—
“ ‘He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches.’ This is a solemn
manner of calling universal attention to that which is
of general and most momentous importance. The
same language is used to each of the seven churches.
Christ, when upon earth, made use of the same form of
speech in calling the attention of the people to the most
important of His teachings. He used it in reference to
the mission of John (Matthew 11:15), the parable of the
sower (Matthew 13:9), and the parable of the tares,
setting forth the end of the world (Matthew 13:43). It is
also used in relation to an important prophetic
fulfillment in Revelation 13:9.” Smith, DR, 366.

“Who were the Nicolaitans? Irenaeus, a secondcentury minister who grew up near Ephesus, referred to
them in one of his writings. The Nicolaitans claimed to
be Christians, he said, but they considered it ‘a matter of
indifference to practice adultery, and to eat things
sacrificed to idols.’ It appears then that the Nicolaitans
were Christians who felt that faith in Jesus released them
from obedience to some of the Ten Commandments. In
1 John 2:4, John wrote against similar people who
were saying, ‘I know him [Jesus],’ but those same
people were breaking the commandments. Anyone
who talks this way, John said, is a ‘liar.’
(“For there are certain men crept in unawares, who
were before of old ordained to this condemnation,
ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ.” Jude 4. “He that saith, I know
him, and keepeth not his command-mints, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him.” 1 Jn. 2:4.)
“Calling a commandment-flouting Christian a ‘liar’
is strong language. Jesus used strong language when He
said He ‘hated’ the teachings of the Nicolai-tans. We
remember that in the Sermon on the Mount Jesus said,
‘Not every one who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ shall
enter the kingdom of heaven, but he who does the
will of my Father who is in heaven.’ Matthew 7:21.
Such language sobers us, especially when we consider
that many people today say that faith releases Christians
from keeping one or more of the Ten Commandments.
Usually these Christians treat lightly the seventh
commandment, about adultery, or the fourth, about
keeping the seventh-day Sabbath holy.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 99,100.

“Seven times in chapters two and three we read:
‘He that hath an ear, let him hear.’ It should be
carefully observed that we do not read this expression
anywhere else in the Apocalypse except in Rev. 13:9.
That the messages to the seven churches are of the
utmost importance none will dispute, a fact which we
point to in order to confirm our belief that Rev. 13:9 also
contains an important message for the individual
believer at the time to which we are directed in that
prophecy.” Were, WATB, 39.
“Take heed therefore how ye hear:
for
whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever
hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he
seemeth to have.” Luke 8:18.
“To day if ye will hear His voice, harden not your
heart.” Ps. 95:7,8.
“We can never employ our faculty of hearing
better than in hearkening to the word of God: and
we deserve to lose it if we do not employ it to this
purpose. Those who will not hear the call of God now
will wish at length they had never had a capacity of
hearing anything at all.” Henry, 6MHC, 1125.
Hear What the Spirit Saith Unto the Churches.—
“The appeal to hear the voice of the Spirit is seven
times repeated in the epistles of Christ. While Christ
revealed Himself to John as the author of the
Apocalypse, it was the Holy Spirit who inspired the
prophet to write it. The voice of Christ is also the
voice of the Holy Spirit. They two are chief of the
witnesses through whom God speaks to man. The
term churches indicates that all seven churches were to
profit by each of the seven epistles. It is a dangerous
thing to refuse to listen when the Holy Spirit speaks.”
Bunch, SEOC, 128.

“Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?
God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein?” Romans 6:1.
(See also comments under Revelation 2:15.)

REVELATION 2:7
He that hath an ear, let him hear what
35

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“In verse 1, it is Christ who speaks to the church.
But here it is the Spirit. What is the significance? The
Holy Spirit is Christ’s representative on earth. He is
the one and only Vicar of Christ.” Cooke, #2-UR, 9.

if we could listen to His voice. It is in these promises
that Christ communicates to us His grace and power.
They are leaves from that tree which is ‘for the
healing of the nations.’ Rev. 22:2.
Received,
assimilated, they are to be the strength of the character,
the inspiration and sustenance of the life. Nothing else
can have such healing power. Nothing besides can
impart the courage and faith which give vital energy
to the whole being.” Ministry of Healing, 122.

“The message reads, ‘John to the seven
churches;’ yet the message closes with the words, ‘He
that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith to
the churches.’
This shows that the message is
universal, to every one who will hear.” Straw, SR, 6.

(See additional comments under Rev. 22:2.)
To Him That Overcometh.—
“The glorious promise of victory given in each of
the messages to the seven churches, is addressed to the
individual: ‘To him that overcometh’ (Rev. 2: 7, 11,
17, 26; 3:5, 12, 21).” Were, WATB, 39.

Paradise.—
“Paradise is a Persian word adopted in both Greek
and Hebrew. It means a park, or pleasure ground. It is
called ‘the garden of God,’ and ‘the garden of the
Lord.’ Paradise is ‘the garden of all delights.’ ...Thus
the first promise of the first epistle of Christ is of the
restoration of the first thing lost through sin—access to
the tree of life and its life-giving fruit.” Bunch, SEOC,
129.

Eat of the Tree of Life.—
“The first Eden remained on earth one-fourth of the
period of earth’s history. With its closed gate, and an
angel guard at the tree of life, it was a wonderful lesson
to the inhabitants of the world before the flood.
Before the destruction of the earth by water, the garden
was transported to heaven, and the promise since has
been, (Rev. 2:7 quoted.)” Haskel, SSP, 351.

“As we receive the instruction and grace of God,
we should impart to others a knowledge of how to care
for the precious plants. Thus we may extend the
vineyard of the Lord. God is watching for evidence of
our faith, love, and patience. He looks to see if we are
using every spiritual advantage to become skillful
workers in His vineyard on earth, that we may enter the
Paradise of God, that Eden home from which Adam
and Eve were excluded by transgression.” Christ’s
Object Lessons, 282.

“The fruit of the tree of life in the Garden of Eden
possessed supernatural virtue. To eat of it was to live
forever. Its fruit was the antidote of death. Its leaves
were for the sustaining of life and immortality. But
through man’s disobedience death entered the world....
After the entrance of sin the heavenly Husbandman
transplanted the tree of life to the Paradise above;
but its branches hang over the wall to the lower
world. Through the redemption purchased by the blood
of Christ, we may still eat of its life-giving fruit.
“Of Christ it is written, ‘In Him was life; and the
life was the light of men.’ John 1:4. He is the fountain
of life. Obedience to Him is the life-giving power that
gladdens the soul. Christ declares: ‘I am the bread of
life; he that cometh to Me shall never hunger; and he
that believeth on Me shall never thirst.’ John 6:35.
‘As the living Father hath sent Me, and I live by the
Father: so he that eateth Me, even he shall live by
Me.... It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh
profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you,
they are spirit, and they are life.’ John 6:35, 57-63;
(Rev. 2:7 quoted.)” 8 Testimonies, 288.

In the Midst of the Paradise of God.—
“Where is this Paradise? It is in the third heaven.
Paul writes, in 2 Corinthians 12:2, that he knew a man
(referring to himself) caught up to the third heaven. In
verse 4 he says that he was caught up into ‘Paradise,’
leaving only one conclusion to be drawn, which is that
Paradise is in the third heaven. In this Paradise, it
seems, is the tree of life. There is but one tree of life
brought to view in the Bible. It is mentioned six
times, three times in Genesis, and three times in the
Revelation; but it is used every time with the definite
article ‘the.’ It is the tree of life in the first book of the
Bible, the tree of life in the last; the tree of life in the
‘Paradise’ (the term used for ‘garden’ in the Greek
translation of Genesis) in Eden at the beginning, and
the tree of life in the Paradise of which John now
speaks, in heaven above. If there is but one tree, and
that was at first upon earth, it may be asked how it has
now come to be in heaven. The answer would be that it
must have been taken up to the Paradise above. There is
no possible way that the identical body which is situated
in one place can be located in another, but by being
transported there bodily. That the tree of life and
Paradise have been removed from earth to heaven there
is a very good reason to believe.” Smith, DR, 366,367.

“From childhood,... the Scriptures of the Old
Testament were His constant study, and the words,
‘Thus saith the Lord,’ were ever upon His lips.
“They (Christ’s brothers and the rabbis) recognized
that His education was of a higher type than their own.
But they did not discern that He had access to the
tree of life, a source of knowledge of which they were
ignorant.” Desire of Ages, 84,86.
“So with all the promises of God’s word. In them
He is speaking to us individually, speaking as directly as

“The Garden of Eden remained upon the earth

36

REVELATION 2
long after man had become an outcast from its pleasant
paths. The fallen race were long permitted to gaze upon
the home of innocence, their entrance barred only by the
watching angels. At the cherubim-guarded gate of
paradise the divine glory was re-veiled. Hither came
Adam and his sons to worship God. Here they renewed
their vows of obedience to the law the transgression of
which had banished them from Eden. When the tide of
iniquity overspread the world, and the wickedness of
men determined their destruction by a flood of
waters, the hand that had planted Eden withdrew it
from the earth. But in the final restitution, when there
shall be ‘a new heaven and a new earth’ (Rev. 21:1), it
is to be restored more gloriously adorned than at the
beginning.
“Then they that have kept God’s commandments
shall breathe in immortal vigor beneath the tree of life;
and through unending ages the inhabitants of sinless
worlds shall behold, in that garden of delight, a
sample of the perfect work of God’s creation,
untouched by the curse of sin—a sample of what the
whole earth would have become, had man but
fulfilled the Creator’s glorious plan.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 62.

and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee a crown of life.
11 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches: He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second
death.

REVELATION 2:8
And unto the angel of the church in
Smyrna write: These things saith the First
and the Last, which was dead, and is alive:
The Meaning and the Time of the Church.—
“Smyrna is synonymous with myrrh, which was an
aromatic substance used sometimes as a healing
ointment but more especially for embalming the dead.
According to Psalms 45:8 and Song of Solomon 3:6,
myrrh seems to have been the special perfume of Christ
as King and Bridegroom. One of the chief ingredients of
myrrh was made by crushing and bleeding a plant of the
same name. This thorny plant, or tree, grows about eight
or nine feet high, and is found in Arabia and to some
extent in Palestine. It is very bitter to the taste but has a
fragrant odor, and the more the plant is crushed and
bruised the greater the fragrance.
The name
Smyrna, therefore, indicates suffering and
persecution which prove a blessing. Smyrna would be
crushed by cruel persecutions, but as a result of her
sufferings would be anointed for a death and burial that
would end in a resurrection and renewal of life.
Although the afflictions would be bitter to the victim,
they would result in releasing to the world the perfume
of heaven.” Bunch, SEOC, 130,131.

“To the overcomer then, is promised a restoration
that will include more than Adam lost. Not to the
overcomers of that state of the church merely, but to all
overcomers of every age is the promise made, for in
the great rewards of heaven there are no restriction.”
Smith, DR, 368.
“Blessed are they that do His commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter
in through the gates into the city.” Rev. 22:14

“This was a period when the church was having
trouble within and without. It was a time when the
church was afflicted by persecution from the pagan
world. It continued through the special and last effort
on the part of the pagans to overthrow the church. This
period ended in 313 AD by the Edict of Milan.
Although there was intermittent persecution constantly
until the church became subservient to the state after
313, yet there were two special efforts; that of Decius
about 250 AD, and Diocletian, 303-313—when
paganism endeavored to overthrow the church.” Straw,
SR, 15.

Jesus, the Tree of Life in the Midst of His Garden.—
“ ‘In the midst of the garden’ of Eden, God
placed the Tree of Life. Jesus is the Tree of Life in the
midst of the Paradise of God—the trees of
righteousness [His people]. Jesus delights to be in the
midst of His people. ‘Let them make Me a sanctuary;
that I may dwell among them.’ Ex. 25:8. He says,
‘Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them.’ Mt. 18:20. He
is the one ‘who walketh in the midst of the seven
golden candlesticks.’ Rev. 2:1. ‘Christ in you, the
hope of glory.’ Col. 1:27. ‘Immanuel = ‘God with
us.’” PJ

“The letter to the Church in her second phase is
wholly commendatory.
This shows that, while
individuals had continued in the apostasy mentioned
in the first letter, the Church herself had heeded the
counsel given by the Head of the Church, and had
repented, and returned to ‘the first works.’ The time
of this phase of the Church’s experience is definitely
suggested in the word that she should ‘have tribulation
ten days.’ Rev. 2:10. This refers to the ten years of
persecution in the reign of Diocletian, from AD 303313; which was ended by the Edict of Milan, issued by
the two emperors Constantine and Licinius, March, AD
313.” Jones, GNOT, 4.

THE SECOND CHURCH: SMYRNA
REVELATION 2:8-11
8 And unto the angel of the church of Smyrna write: These
things saith the First and the Last, which was dead, and is alive:
9 I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art
rich) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews,
and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan.
10 Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold,
the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried;

37

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a
wealthy place.” Psalm 66:10-12.

The Angel of the Church of Smyrna.—
“Smyrna was the home of Polycarp and the scene
of his martyrdom in A.D. 168. ...Many believe that
Polycarp was the ‘angel,’ or ‘minister,’ of the church
of Smyrna at the time the message of Christ was
delivered. This is based chiefly on the statement he
made just before his death. When asked by the judge to
renounce Christianity with its Christ, he replied:
‘Eighty and six years have I served Him, and He never
did me wrong, how then can I blaspheme my king, who
hath saved me?’ Tertullian tells us the Polycarp was
consecrated bishop of Smyrna by the apostle John, and
with this conclusion agree also the testimonies of
Irenaeus, Eusebius, and Jerome.” Bunch, SEOC, 134.

But Thou Art Rich.—
“Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God
chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs
of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that
love him?” James 2:5.
“Receive my instruction, and not silver, and
knowledge rather than choice gold. For wisdom is
better than rubies; and all the things that may be
desired are not to be compared to it.” Pr. 8:10,11.
“The humblest and poorest of the true disciples of
Christ, who are rich in good works, are more blessed
and more precious in the sight of God than the men
who boast of their great riches. They are more
honorable in the courts of heaven than the most exalted
kings and nobles who are not rich toward God.” 2
Testimonies, 682.

The First & the Last, Which Was Dead & Is Alive.—
“It will be noticed that the Lord introduces Himself
to each church by mentioning some of His
characteristics which show Him to be peculiarly fitted to
bear to them the testimony which He utters. To the
Smyrna church, about to pass through the fiery
ordeal of persecution, He reveals Himself as one who
was dead, but is now alive. If they should be called to
seal their testimony with their blood, they were to
remember that the eyes of One were upon them who had
shared the same fate, but had triumphed over death, and
was able to bring them up from a martyr’s grave.”
Smith, DR, 368.

“Those who are poor in this world’s goods, yet
who trust in God and are patient in suffering, will one
day be exalted above those who now hold the highest
positions the world can give, but who have not
surrendered their life to God.” Christ’s Object Lessons,
260.
“During the first three centuries the church was
characterized by material poverty and spiritual power,
whereas the modern church is noted for its material
wealth and spiritual weakness. She claims to be ‘rich,
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing,’
but in God’s sight she is spiritually ‘wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked....
“Smyrna was a rich poor church and Laodicea a
poor rich church. It is far better to be poor in the
estimation of the world and rich in spiritual things than
to be rich in one’s own esteem and the world’s but
poverty stricken in the sight of Christ. Persecution and
physical suffering usually bring material poverty, but
they also have a tendency to increase spiritual riches.
Persecution for the sake of righteousness has always
been a blessing in disguise. The crucible and the
burning fiery furnace are the purifying instruments of
love and grace rather than the obnoxious weapons of
torture.” Bunch, SEOC, 137.

REVELATION 2:9
I know thy works, and tribulation, and
poverty, (but thou art rich) and I know the
blasphemy of them which say they are Jews,
and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan.
I Know Thy Works, and Tribulation, and Poverty.—
“They saw that truth and souls of men were more
valuable than earthly riches.” PJ
“Temptation, poverty, adversity, is the very
discipline needed to develop purity and firmness.”
Desire of Ages, 71.
“But call to remembrance the former days, in
which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great
fight of afflictions; Partly, whilst ye were made a
gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions; and
partly, whilst ye became companions of them that were
so used. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and
took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in
yourselves that ye have in heaven a better and an
enduring substance.” Hebrews 10: 32-34.

Them Which Say They Are Jews, and Are Not.—
“That the term Jew is not here used in a literal
sense, is very evident. It denotes some character which
was approved by the gospel standard. Paul’s language
will make this point plain. He says: ‘He is not a Jew,
which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision,
which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew (in the
true Christian sense), which is one inwardly; and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not
in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.’
Romans 2:28,29. Again he says: ‘For they are not all

“For Thou, O God, hast proved us: Thou hast
tried us, as silver is tried. Thou broughtest us into the
net; thou laidst affliction upon our loins. Thou hast
caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire

38

REVELATION 2
persist in it.” Henry, 6MHC, 1126.

Israel, which are of Israel; neither, because they are
the seed of Abraham, are they all children.’ Romans
9:6,7.
“In Galatians 3:28,29, Paul further tells us that in
Christ there are no such outward distinctions as Jew or
Greek; but if we are Christ’s, then are we ‘Abraham’s
seed’ (in the true sense), and heirs according to the
promise. To say, as some do, that the term Jew is never
applied to Christians, is to contradict all these inspired
declarations of Paul, and the testimony of the faithful
and true Witness to the Smyrna church. Some were
hypocritically pretending to be Jews in this Christian
sense, when they possessed none of the necessary
characteristics. Such were of the synagogue of Satan.”
Smith, DR, 369.

“The two places where the apostasy seemed
most pronounced were at Rome and Alexandria.
…Antioch and the churches of Asia Minor opposed the
tendency manifest at these two great cities. Polycarp, a
disciple of the Apostle John, went from Asia to Rome
and won many from their apostasy back to the teaching
of the apostles.” Straw, SR, 18.
“Christ speaks of the church over which Satan
presides as the synagogue of Satan. Its members are
the children of disobedience. They are those who
choose to sin, who labor to make void the holy law of
God. It is Satan’s work to mingle evil with good, and to
remove the distinction between good and evil. Christ
would have a church that labors to separate the evil
from the good, whose members will not willingly
tolerate wrong-doing, but will expel it from the heart and
life.” (Review & Herald, 12/4/1900). 7BC, 958.

“Christ recognized no virtue in lineage. He taught
that spiritual connection supersedes all natural
connection. The Jews claimed to have descended from
Abraham; but by failing to do the works of Abraham,
they proved that they were not his true children.
Only those who prove themselves to be spiritually in
harmony with Abraham by obeying the voice of God,
are reckoned as of true descent.”
Christ’s Object
Lessons, 268.

“Satan has a large confederacy, his church. Christ
calls them the synagogue of Satan because the members
are the children of sin. The members of Satan’s church
have been constantly working to cast off the divine law,
and confuse the distinction between good and evil.
Satan is working with great power in and through the
children of disobedience to exalt treason and apostasy
as truth and loyalty. And at this time the power of his
satanic inspiration is moving the living agencies to carry
out the great rebellion against God that commenced in
heaven.” Testimonies to Ministers, 16.

“I saw a very large company professing the
name of Christ, but God did not recognize them as
His. He had no pleasure in them. Satan seemed to
assume a religious character and was very willing that
the people should think they were Christians. He was
even anxious that they should believe in Jesus, His
crucifixion, and His resurrection. Satan and his angels
fully believe all this themselves, and tremble. But if this
faith does not provoke to good works, and lead those
who profess it to imitate the self-denying life of Christ,
Satan is not disturbed; for they merely assume the
Christian name, while their hearts are still carnal,
and he can use them in his service even better than if
they made no profession.” Early Writings, 227.

REVELATION 2:10
Fear none of those things which thou
shalt suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some
of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and
ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.

The Synagogue of Satan.—
“1. …Those assemblies which are set up in
opposition to the truths of the gospel, and which
promote and propagate damnable errors—those which
are set up in opposition to the purity and spirituality of
gospel worship, and which promote and propagate the
vain inventions of men and rites and ceremonies which
never entered into the thoughts of God—and those
which are set up to revile and persecute the true worship
and worshippers of God—these are all synagogues of
Satan: he presides over them, he works in them, his
interests are served by them, and he receives a horrid
homage and honour from them.
“2. For the synagogues of Satan to give
themselves out to be the church or Israel of God is no
less than blasphemy. God is greatly dishonoured when
his name is made use of to promote and patronize the
interests of Satan; and he has a high resentment of this
blasphemy, and will take a just revenge on those who

Fear None of Those Things Which Thou Shalt
Suffer.—
“This is not only a word of command, but of
efficacy, not only forbidding slavish fear, but subduing it
and furnishing the soul with strength and courage.”
Henry, 6MHC, 1126.
“Is not the language Christ here uses a good
comment upon what He taught His disciples when He
said, ‘Fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul: but rather fear Him which is
able to destroy both soul and body in hell’? Matt.
10:28. The Smyrna church members might be put to
death here, but the future life which was to be given
them, man could not take away, and God would not.
Hence they were to fear not those who could kill the

39

GEMS FROM REVELATION
body, fear none of the things which they should suffer,
for their eternal existence was assured.” Smith, DR,
371,372.

that their faith, and patience, and courage, might be
proved and improved, and be found to honour and
glory.” Henry, 6MHC, 1126.

“I was carried forward to the time when the
heathen idolaters cruelly persecuted the Christians, and
killed them. Blood flowed in torrents. The noble, the
learned, and the common people, were alike slain
without mercy. Wealthy families were reduced to
poverty because they would not yield their religion.
Notwithstanding the persecution and sufferings those
Christians endured, they would not lower the standard.
They kept their religion pure. I saw that Satan exulted
and triumphed over the sufferings of God’s people. But
God looked with great approbation upon his faithful
martyrs, and the Christians who lived in that fearful
time were greatly beloved of him; for they were
willing to suffer for his sake. Every suffering
endured by them increased their reward in heaven.
But although Satan rejoiced because the saints suffered,
yet he was not satisfied. He wanted control of the mind
as well as the body. The sufferings those Christians
endured drove them closer to the Lord, and led them to
love one another, and caused them to fear more than
ever to offend him. Satan wished to lead them to
displease God; then they would lose their strength,
fortitude and firmness. Although thousands were slain,
yet others were springing up to supply their place. Satan
saw that he was losing his subjects, and although they
suffered persecution and death, yet they were secured to
Jesus Christ, to be the subjects of his kingdom.”
Spiritual Gifts, Vol.1, 103-105.

Ye Shall Have Tribulation.—
Roman Emperors Who Persecuted Christians
Thirteen Roman emperors initiated or supported
the persecution of the Christians, but ten of them were
more pronounced.
1. Trajan, 98-117 AD-[reigning period].
2. Hadrian, 117-138 AD.
3. Antoninus Pius, 138-161 AD.
4. Marcus Aurelius, 161-180 AD.
5. Commodus, 180-192 AD.
6. Septimus Severus, 193-211 AD.
7. Alexander Severus, 222-235 AD.
8. Maximus, 235-238 AD.
9. Decius Trajan, 249-251 AD.
10. Gallus, 251-253 AD.
11. Valerian, 253-260 AD.
12. Aurelian, 270-275 AD.
13. Diocletian, 284-305 AD [303-313 persecution].
“ ‘[Diocletian] became so puffed up with pride,
because of his success as ruler, that he commanded that
he should be worshipped as God. He claimed that he
was brother to the sun and moon and adorning his shoes
with gold and precious stones, he commanded the people
to kiss his feet.’ Foxe’s Book of Martyrs, 34. This
demand led to the fiercest period of persecution under
the Caesars. It continued for exactly ten years, 303313 AD, and we suggest that this was the fulfillment of
the prediction that the Smyrnian church would have
tribulation ten days.”
From: Cooke, #2-UR, 16-18.

The Devil Shall Cast.—
“Observe, it is the devil that stirs up his
instruments, wicked men, to persecute the people of
God; tyrants and persecutors are the devil’s tools, though
they gratify their own sinful malignity, and know not
that they are actuated by a diabolical malice.” Henry,
6MHC, 1126.

“These persecutions, beginning under Nero about
the time of the martyrdom of Paul, continued with
greater or less fury for centuries. Christians were falsely
accused of the most dreadful crimes and declared to be
the cause of great calamities—famine, pestilence, and
earthquake. As they became the objects of popular
hatred and suspicion, informers stood ready, for the sake
of gain, to betray the innocent. They were condemned
as rebels against the empire, as foes of religion, and
pests to society. Great numbers were thrown to wild
beasts or burned alive in the amphitheaters. Some
were crucified; others were covered with the skins of
wild animals and thrust into the arena to be torn by
dogs. Their punishment was often made the chief
entertainment at public fetes. Vast multitudes assembled
to enjoy the sight and greeted their dying agonies with
laughter, and applause.
“Wherever they sought refuge, the followers of
Christ were hunted like beasts of prey. They were
forced to seek concealment in desolate and solitary
places. ‘Destitute, afflicted, tormented; (of whom the
world was not worthy;) they wandered in deserts,
and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the
earth.’ Heb. 11:37,38. The catacombs afforded shelter

Some of You.—
“Christ forearms them against these approaching
troubles,... by showing them how their sufferings
would be alleviated and limited. First, They should
not be universal. It would be some of them, not all,
who should be cast into prison, those who were best able
to bear it and might expect to be visited and comforted
by the rest. Secondly, They were not to be perpetual, but
for a set time, and a short time: Ten days. It should not
be everlasting tribulation, the time should be shortened
for the elect’s sake.” Henry, 6MHC, 1126.
Into Prison.—
“Thousands were imprisoned and slain, but
others sprang up to fill their places.” Great Controversy,
42.
That Ye May Be Tried.—
“It should be to try them, not to destroy them,

40

REVELATION 2
for thousands. Beneath the hills outside the city of
Rome, long galleries had been tunneled through earth
and rock; the dark and intricate network of passages
extended for miles beyond the city walls. In these
underground retreats the followers of Christ buried their
dead; and here also, when suspected and proscribed,
they found a home. When the Life-giver shall awaken
those who have fought the good fight, many a martyr
for Christ’s sake will come forth from those gloomy
caverns.
“Under the fiercest persecution these witnesses for
Jesus kept their faith unsullied. Though deprived of
every comfort, shut away from the light of the sun,
making their home in the dark but friendly bosom of
the earth, they uttered no complaint. With words of
faith, patience, and hope they encouraged one another to
endure privation and distress. The loss of every earthly
blessing could not force them to renounce their belief in
Christ. Trials and persecution were but steps bringing
them nearer their rest and their reward.
“Like God’s servants of old, many were ‘tortured,
not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a
better resurrection.’ (verse 35). These called to mind
the words of their Master, that when persecuted for
Christ’s sake, they were to be exceeding glad, for great
would be their reward in heaven; for so the prophets had
been persecuted before them. They rejoiced that they
were accounted worthy to suffer for the truth, and
songs of triumph ascended from the midst of
crackling flames. Looking upward by faith, they saw
Christ and angels leaning over the battlements of
heaven, gazing upon them with the deepest interest and
regarding their steadfastness with approval. A voice
came down to them from the throne of God: ‘Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life.’ Rev. 2:10.” Great Controversy, 40-42.

“‘The tenth began in the nineteenth year of
Diocletian, 303. In this dreadful persecution, which
lasted ten years, houses filled with Christians were set
on fire, and whole droves were tied together with ropes
and thrown into the sea. It is related that 17,000 were
slain in one month’s time; and that during the
continuance of this persecution, in the province of Egypt
alone, no less than 144,000 Christians died by the
violence of their persecutors; besides 700,000 that died
through the fatigues of banishment, or the public works
to which they were condemned.” White, James, The
Seven Churches, R&H, 10/16/1856.

“The Smyrna period is known as the era of
martyrdom. Justin Martyr, with six other Christians,
was scourged and beheaded in A.D. 165. Irenaeus is
believed to have been put to death in 202 during the
persecutions of Severus. Cyprian died under the
persecutions of Trajan in 258, and Victorinus in 304
during the martyrdoms under Diocletian.” Bunch,
SEOC, 136.

Why Persecution.—
“Paganism foresaw that should the gospel
triumph, her temples and altars would be swept
away; therefore she summoned her forces to destroy
Christianity.” Great Controversy, 39.

Christians in Roman Colosseum
“The horrors of this persecution are vividly
described by the church historian Theodoret
(Ecclesiastical History i. 6), who describes the gathering
of the bishops of the church to the Council of Nicaea
some years after the end of the persecution (AD 325).
Some came without eyes, some without arms, which
had been pulled from their sockets, others with their
bodies horribly maimed in different ways. Many, of
course, did not survive this time of trouble.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 748.

Polycarp.—
“Polycarp was martyred here in 156 AD. Even
though it was the Sabbath day, the Jews were so anxious
for his death that they came in large numbers to the
stadium, bringing faggots for the fire in which Polycarp
died.” Thiele, OSIR, 38.

Tribulation Ten Days.—
“As this message is prophetic, the time mentioned
in it must also be regarded as prophetic. Since a
prophetic day stands for a literal year, the ten days
would denote ten years. It is a noticeable fact that the
last and most bloody of the ten great persecutions of the
Christian church continued just ten years from AD 303
to 313, beginning under Diocletian.” Smith, DR, 369.

Persecution Under Maximus.—
“Pontian became the Bishop of Rome in the year
230 AD.
He was made bishop suddenly and
unexpectedly when his predecessor was arrested and
killed by Roman authorities.
“On September 27, 235 AD, Emperor Maximinus
decreed that all Christian leaders were to be arrested.
Christian buildings were burned, Christian cemeteries
were closed, and the personal wealth of Christians was
confiscated.

“(The Smyrna church period) reached down to
Constantine, covering the period of what is called the ten
persecutions. See Buck’s Theological Dictionary, pp.
332,333. For want of room we can give here only his
statement of the last.

41

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Bishop Pontian was arrested the same day. He
was put in the Mamertine Prison, where he was tortured
for ten days. Then he was sent to work in the lead mines
of Sardinia.
“When prisoners arrived at Sardinia, their left eye
was gouged out and a number was branded on their
forehead. Iron rings were soldered around their ankles,
linked together with a six-inch chain which hobbled
them. A tight chain around their waist was fastened to
their ankle-chain in such a way that they were
permanently bent over.
“The prisoners worked for 20 hours a day, with
four one-hour breaks for sleep. They had one meal of
bread and water per day. Most prisoners died within six
to fourteen months from exhaustion, malnutrition,
disease, beatings, infection, or violence. Some went
insane or committed suicide.
“Pontian only lasted four months. In January, 236
AD, Pontian was killed and his body was thrown into the
cesspool.” Heiks, AD538, 232,233.

Christ has tasted death for every man in its bitterest
form. He knows how to pity, how to sympathize.
Only rest in His arms; He loves you, and He has
redeemed you with His everlasting love. Be thou
faithful unto death, and thou shalt receive a crown of
life.” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 256.
“The Lord supported His faithful ones to the end.
This should be an encouragement. It should give
confidence to the righteous in all ages that the Lord is
unchangeable. He will manifest for His people in this
age His grace and His power as He has done in past
ages. The declarations of God's Word and the accuracy
with which He has made them good in history combine
to give us assurance and instruction of greatest value.
Nothing can shake the pledge we have from God
Himself that with the Bible for our guide and present
help, we shall have peace under all circumstances,
and an eternal weight of glory for our future reward.
“Here in the experience of Huss was a witness, a
monument erected, calling the attention of the world to
the promise: ‘Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a crown of life’ (Rev. 2:10). Registered in the
history of nations, John Huss lives. His godly works and
steadfast faith, his pure life, and conscientious following
of the truth that was unfolded to him, these he would not
yield even to be saved a cruel death. That triumphant
death was witnessed by all heaven, by the whole
universe. Satan bruised the heel of the seed of the
woman, but in the act of Huss his head was bruised.
In contrast to deeds of that council, uprooting truth and
righteousness, in contrast to their cruelty to Huss, the
martyr’s constancy, his faith, his example, has been
reflecting its light down along the times for centuries.
His example has been encouraging others to submit their
souls and bodies to God alone, to exalt God alone and
take the Scriptures as their guide. This will make them
the light of the world. This will make them examples of
faith and courage and steadfastness in truth. This will
nerve them to suffer and to endure, gaining victories
even in sorrow and in death. Those who follow John
Huss’ example may expect the same mercies from the
same God who braced and fortified him. Huss’
Christlike bearing under trials of suffering, contempt,
abuse, and perjury caused joy among the angels and the
friends of truth and righteousness.
“For the student of such history, the experience of
others can become his experience through faith. The
same wonders are wrought through prayer, the same
mercies are obtained, the same promises realized, the
same assistance from heaven communicated, the same
victories achieved.” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 9, 275277.

Be Thou Faithful Unto Death.—
“Those who would rather die than perform a wrong
act are the only ones who will be found faithful.” 5
Testimonies, 53.
“Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and
said to the king,… Our God whom we serve is able to
deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will
deliver us out of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it
known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy
gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set
up.” Daniel 3: 17,18.
“By a word or a nod the martyrs might have denied
the truth and saved their lives. By consenting to cast a
single grain of incense upon the idol altar they might
have been saved from the rack, the scaffold, or the cross.
But they refused to be false in word or deed, though life
was the boon they would receive by so doing.
Imprisonment, torture, and death, with a clear
conscience, were welcomed by them, rather than
deliverance on condition of deception, falsehood, and
apostasy. By fidelity and faith in Christ, they earned
spotless robes and jeweled crowns.” 4 Testimonies, 336.
“In the kingdom of God, position is not gained
through favoritism. It is not earned, nor is it received
through an arbitrary bestowal. It is the result of
character. The crown and the throne are the tokens of a
condition attained—tokens of self-conquest through the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.... The one who stands
nearest to Christ will be he who has drunk most
deeply of His Spirit of self-sacrificing love,...—love
that moves the disciple, as it moved our Lord, to give all,
to live and labor and sacrifice even unto death, for the
saving of humanity.” Acts of the Apostles, 543.

“And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they love
not their lives unto the death.” Rev. 12:11.

“All humanity must be tested and tried. All of us
must drink the cup and be baptized with affliction. But

I Will Give Thee a Crown of Life.—
“Those who were martyred for their faith were

42

REVELATION 2
secured to Christ and accounted of Him as conquerors.
They had fought the good fight, and they were to
receive the crown of glory when Christ should come.”
Great Controversy, 42.

shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn
them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch. …And ye shall tread down the
wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your
feet in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord of
hosts.” Malachi 4:1,3.

“Paul declares that this crown is to be given at the
day of Christ’s appearing (2 Tim. 4:8); at the last
trump (1 Cor. 15:51-54); when the Lord shall Himself
descend from heaven (1 Thess. 4:16,17); when the
Chief Shepherd shall appear, says Peter (1 Peter 5:4);
at the resurrection of the just, says Christ (Luke
14:14); and when He shall return to take His people to
the mansions prepared for them, that they may ever be
with Him (John 14:3). ‘Be thou faithful unto death,’
and having been thus faithful, when the time comes that
the saints of God are rewarded, you shall receive a
crown of life.” Smith, DR, 371.

“All men die the first death. That death is the
result of Adam’s sin. The second death is the result
of one’s own sins. Every person who rejects the death
of Christ on his behalf—as his substitute—must pay the
penalty for his own sins. …The gospel of Christ is the
power of God unto salvation. Not only does Christ save
the sinner from the guilt of his sin, but also from the
power of sin. ‘He shall save his people from their
sins.’ [Mt. 1:21]. In the gospel there is overcoming
power. But if the professed believer does not
overcome, his end will be with all other sinners in the
lake of fire.” Cooke,#33-UR, 16.

“The crown of righteousness is for the overcomer.
Every one of you, think of this. In the morning think of
it, now today I must look at that crown. I must run for it.
I must run the race for it. And that crown is mine if I
overcome. But if I do not overcome, and am
overcome of Satan, I lose that crown; another gets it.
Shall we not try to win the crown of everlasting life? If
we lose heaven, we lose everything. If we gain heaven,
we gain everything.” Sermons & Talks, Vol. 1, 190.

“The penalty threatened is not merely temporal
death, for all must suffer this. It is the second death,
the opposite of everlasting life. God cannot save the
sinner in his sins; but he declares that the wicked, having
suffered the punishment of their guilt, shall be as though
they had not been. Says an inspired writer, ‘Thou shalt
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.’ [Ps.
37:10.] In consequence of Adam’s sin, death passed
upon all mankind. All alike go down into the grave.
But through the provisions of the plan of salvation, all
are to be brought forth from their graves. Then those
who have not secured the pardon of their sins must
receive the penalty of transgression. They suffer
punishment varying in duration and intensity
according to their works, but finally ending in the
second death. Covered with infamy, they sink into
hopeless, eternal oblivion.” Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 4,
364.

(See also Thy Crown.— in Rev. 3:11.)

REVELATION 2:11
He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the churches: He that
overcometh shall not be hurt of the second
death.
Not Be Hurt of the Second Death.—
“Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection: on such the second death hath no
power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand years.” Rev. 20:6.

THE THIRD CHURCH: PERGAMOS
REVELATION 2: 12-17
12 And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write; These
things saith He which hath the sharp sword with two edges;
13 I know thy works and where thou dwellest, even where
Satan’s seat is: and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied
My faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful
martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.
14 But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there
them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a
stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication.
15 So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.
16 Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight
against them with the sword of My mouth.
17 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the
hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a
new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth
it.

“While the earth was wrapped in the fire of
destruction, the righteous abode safely in the Holy City.
Upon those that had part in the first resurrection, the
second death has no power. While God is to the
wicked a consuming fire, He is to His people both a
sun and a shield. Rev. 20:6; Psalm 84:11.” Great
Controversy, 673.
Second Death.—
“The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable,
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the
second death.” Rev. 21:8.
“For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an
oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly,

43

GEMS FROM REVELATION
a union, or marriage, with the state. Satan had failed
to crush the church and destroy Christianity through
persecution, and he therefore changed his policy.
Christianity had won in its great struggle with paganism,
and Satan, as it were, joined the church in order to
ruin it from within through amalgamation with the
world and union with the state. When Satan failed to
accomplish his purpose through violence, he corrupted
the church through worldly alliance. Rome boasted
of her ability to assimilate anything that contributed to
her strength. In the per-son of Constantine, the church
mounted the throne of the Caesars and reigned as queen.
The church that was ‘espoused as a chaste virgin to
Christ’ was united in marriage to pagan Rome. The
Pergamos period covered about 250 years, from the
so-called conversion of Constantine to Justinian the
Great, whose decrees made the popes the successors of
the Caesars.” Bunch, SEOC, 150,151.

REVELATION 2:12
And to the angel of the church in
Pergamos write; These things saith he which
hath the sharp sword with two edges.
Pergamos, Its Meaning and Time-Period.—
“The condition of Christianity for two or more
centuries following the accession of Constantine the
Great to the Roman throne may be learned from the
message delivered to the church of Pergamos. The ten
years’ persecution, which took place during the reign of
Diocletian, failed to accomplish the design of its
instigator, and a wonderful reaction followed.
Constantine, wishing to gain favor above the very men
who were foremost in the opposition to Christianity,
espoused the cause of that despised sect, and through
him, Christianity was raised to the throne of Rome.
Pergamos means ‘exaltation,’ or ‘elevation,’ and it
was when nominal Christianity became popular, and
swayed the civil government, that the two-edged sword
of the Word was necessary to separate between the true
and the false. Naturally the number of converts
increased rapidly, and church buildings multi-plied.
Officers in the church, under favor of the government,
spread themselves like the green bay tree. The doctrine
of Him who said, ‘He that is greatest among you shall
be your servant,’ was reversed, and the papal hierarchy
grew apace. This was peculiarly true of the Roman See.
Other dioceses attempted the same exaltation.
Constantinople, Jerusalem, Ephesus, and Alexandria—
all contended for supremacy, but Rome, the seat of the
dragon was finally the acknowledged head of the
Christian church.” Haskel, SSP, 53,54.

“For that day shall not come, except there come
a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed,
the son of perdition.” 2 Thess. 2:3. “During this
period Paul’s warnings applied and his prophecies were
fulfilled. (Acts 20:29,30; 2 Thess. 2:2-7.) Pagan beliefs
and practices were brought into the church, and
Christianity was so changed by heathen influences that it
virtually became ‘baptized paganism.’”
Bunch,
SEOC, 151,152.
“During this time Isaiah 2:2,3 was fulfilled, and the
church was established in ‘the top of the mountains’ or
government of Rome, and ‘above the hills,’ or smaller
states, where she dictated the laws of the land and
became so popular that ‘all nations’ flowed into it.
...Isaiah’s prophecy will again be fulfilled just before
the end, when the message to the church of Pergamos
will again be applicable and meaningful.” Bunch,
SEOC, 152.

“By a decree issued at Milan, 313 AD, the year
after the battle at Milvian Bridge, Constantine placed
Christianity on an equal footing with the other religions
of the empire. The language of this famous edict of
toleration, the Magna Carta, as it has been called, of the
Church, was in import as follows: ‘We grant to
Christians and to all others full liberty of following
that religion which each may choose.’ For the first
time in history, the principle of universal toleration was
(thus) officially laid down.
“But by subsequent edicts Constantine made
Christianity in effect the state religion and extended to
it a patronage which he withheld from the old pagan
worship. He granted the Christian societies the right to
receive gifts and legacies, and he himself enriched the
Church with donations of money and grants of land.
This marks the beginning of the great possessions of
the Church, and with these the entrance into it of a
worldly spirit.” Burnside, RWU, 42.

“The message to Pergamos applies in the fourth
and fifth centuries; it has also been the experience of
each separate Protestant denomination, and it is a
warning to all churches to the end of time.” Haskel,
SSP, 57.
The Sharp Sword With Two Edges.—
“The truth is the truth. It is not to be wrapped up
in beautiful adornings, that the outside appearance
may be admired. The teacher is to make the truth clear
and forcible to the understanding and to the conscience.
The word is a two-edged sword, that cuts both ways. It
does not tread as with soft, slippered feet.” Review &
Herald, 4/20/1897.
“Most swords have one edge. This sword has two
edges. It is the Old and the New Testaments. Heb.
4:12.” Burnside, RWU, 45.

“Not only does Pergamos carry the meaning of
power and exaltation, but it also indicates union
through marriage. The Greek word gamos means
marriage. During the Pergamos period the church was
exalted to royal power and kingly authority through

44

REVELATION 2
kingdom, the great red dragon, imperial Rome, whereon
the great mystical whore of Babylon sitteth. The
church, in this age, became immediately connected
with this power called Satan, which is the devil,
Pagan Rome.” Miller, Evidence, 138.

REVELATION 2:13
I know thy works, and where thou
dwellest, even where Satan’s seat is: and
thou holdest fast My name, and hast not
denied My faith, even in those days wherein
Antipas was My faithful martyr, who was
slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.

“When Cyrus captured the city of Babylon, the
ancient seat of Satan’s counterfeit system of religion, the
supreme pontiff of the Chaldean mysteries and his
retinue of priests fled from the city and ultimately
made their residence in Pergamos. Here they reestablished their Babylonian worship and made the kings
of Pergamum the chief pontiffs of their religion. When
Attalus III, the last of their priest-kings, died in 133 BC,
he bequeathed both his royal and priestly offices to
the Romans. A century later Caesar became both
emperor of Rome and Pontifex Maximus of the religion
of the empire. He was given divine honors, which he
handed down to his successors. These were later
assumed by the popes, the supreme pontiffs of
ecclesiastical Rome. Thus Pergamos became the
connecting link between the two Babylons, the ancient
and the modern. The papal system is patterned after that
of Babylon and Rome. This is another reason for the
statement of Jesus that Pergamos was the place ‘where
Satan dwelleth.’” Bunch, SEOC, 149,150.

I Know Thy Works.—
“The great adversary now endeavored to gain by
artifice what he had failed to secure by force.
Persecution ceased, and in its stead were substituted the
dangerous allurements of temporal prosperity and
worldly honor. Idolaters were led to receive a part of
the Christian faith, while they rejected other essential
truths. They professed to accept Jesus as the Son of
God and to believe in His death and resurrection, but
they had no conviction of sin and felt no need of
repentance or of a change of heart. With some
concessions on their part they proposed that Christians
should make concessions, that all might unite on the
platform of belief in Christ.
“Now the church was in fearful peril. Prison,
torture, fire, and sword were blessings in comparison
with this. Some of the Christians stood firm, declaring
that they could make no compromise. Others were in
favor of yielding or modifying some features of their
faith and uniting with those who had accepted a part of
Christianity, urging that this might be the means of their
full conversion. That was a time of deep anguish to the
faithful followers of Christ. Under a cloak of pretended
Christianity, Satan was insinuating himself into the
church, to corrupt their faith and turn their minds from
the word of truth.
“Most of the Christians at last consented to
lower their standard, and a union was formed
between Christianity and paganism. Although the
worshipers of idols professed to be converted, and united
with the church, they still clung to their idolatry, only
changing the objects of their worship to images of Jesus,
and even of Mary and the saints. The foul leaven of
idolatry, thus brought into the church, continued its
baleful work. Unsound doctrines, superstitious rites, and
idolatrous ceremonies were incorporated into her faith
and worship.
“As the followers of Christ united with idolaters,
the Christian religion became corrupted, and the church
lost her purity and power. There were some, however,
who were not misled by these delusions. They still
maintained their fidelity to the Author of Truth, and
worshipped God alone.” Great Controversy, 42,43.

“Let no man deceive you by any means: for that
day shall not come, except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition; Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as
God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that
he is God.” 2 Thess. 2:3,4.
“Christ declared, where stands Satan’s throne,
there shall stand My cross, the instrument of
humiliation and suffering. No single principle of human
nature will I violate. Clothing My divinity with
humility, I will endure every temptation wherewith man
is beset. I will call to My aid the powers of heaven, that
men and women, imbued with My Spirit, may overcome
as I overcame.... The working out of My purposes in
behalf of degraded humanity require that divine and
human forces be combined....” Manuscript Releases,
Vol. 5, 114.
“To secure worldly gain and honor, the church was
led to seek the favor and support of the great men of the
earth; and having thus rejected Christ, she was
induced to yield allegiance to the representative of
Satan—the Bishop of Rome.” Great Controversy, 50.
Holdest Fast My Name, and Not Denied Faith.—
“There is no union between the Prince of light
and the prince of darkness, and there can be no
union between their followers. When Christians
consented to unite with those who were but half
converted from paganism, they entered upon a path
which led further and further from the truth. Satan

Where Satan’s Seat Is.—
“The dragon [Pagan Rome] gave him his power,
and his seat, and great authority.” Rev. 13:2.
“Here, again, we have an evidence that this church
is mystical, ‘dwelling in Satan’s seat,’ the fourth

45

GEMS FROM REVELATION
exulted that he had succeeded in deceiving so large a
number of the followers of Christ. He then brought his
power to bear more fully upon these, and inspired
them to persecute those who remained true to God.
None understood so well how to oppose the true
Christian faith as did those who had once been its
defenders; and these apostate Christians, uniting with
their half-pagan companions, directed their warfare
against the most essential features of the doctrines of
Christ.
“It required a desperate struggle for those who
would be faithful to stand firm against the deceptions
and abominations which were disguised in sacerdotal
garments and introduced into the church. The Bible
was not accepted as the standard of faith. The doctrine
of religious freedom was termed heresy, and its
upholders were hated and proscribed.
“After a long and severe conflict, the faithful
few decided to dissolve all union with the apostate
church if she still refused to free herself from
falsehood and idolatry. They saw that separation
was an absolute necessity if they would obey the
word of God. They dared not tolerate errors fatal to
their own souls, and set an example which would
imperil the faith of their children and children’s
children. To secure peace and unity they were ready to
make any concession consistent with fidelity to God; but
they felt that even peace would be too dearly purchased
at the sacrifice of principle. If unity could be secured
only by the compromise of truth and righteousness,
then let there be difference, and even war.
“Well would it be for the church and the world
if the principles that actuated those steadfast souls
were revived in the hearts of God’s professed people.
There is an alarming indifference in regard to the
doctrines which are the pillars of the Christian faith.
The opinion is gaining ground, that, after all, these are
not of vital importance.
This degeneracy is
strengthening the hands of the agents of Satan, so that
false theories and fatal delusions which the faithful in
ages past imperiled their lives to resist and expose, are
now regarded with favor by thousands who claim to be
followers of Christ.” Great Controversy, 45,46.

universal, word for ‘papa.’ The word ‘papa’ is simply
the repetition of the original root word, ‘pa.’ And this
word ‘papa’ is the original of the word ‘pope.’
Therefore this word ‘Antipas’—‘against “pas” or
“papas”’—shows the growth of the ‘papa’-cy in the
period immediately following A. D. 313. This was the
period of Constantine, and onward, in which the ‘papa’cy itself was distinctly made, and began openly to assert
its authority. And in that time the history records that
while the other principal bishops of the Church bore the
title of ‘patriarch,’ the bishop of Rome studiously
avoided the title of ‘patriarch,’ ‘as placing him on a
level with other “patriarchs.”’ He always preferred
the title of ‘papa,’ or ‘pope;’ and this, because
‘patriarch’ bespeaks an oligarchical church government,
that is, government by a few: whereas ‘pope’ bespeaks
a monarchical church government, that is,
government by one. (Schaff, ‘History of the Christian
Church, Vol. III, sec. 55, par 1, note.) Thus the history
and the word of the counsel of Christ unite in marking,
as the characteristic of that phase of the Church, the
formation of the ‘papa’-cy, and the assertion of the
authority of the pope. This definitely brings us to the
time of the making of the Papacy; and corresponds
exactly, in point of time, to the facts of history following
the Edict of Milan, which put an end of the ‘tribulation’
mentioned in the previous letter to the Church. Thus the
‘falling away,’ the leaving of the ‘first love,’ mentioned
in the first letter, had, in this time of the third letter,
culminated in the papacy.” Jones, GNOT, 5.
“As the apostasy was now established in the
church, the true people of God, who opposed this
tendency, were called Anti-Pas, or anti-Popes—people
who opposed this movement. Now there is a more
distinct separation from apostasy than during the
Smyrna period.” Straw, SR, 21.
“One of the men who led out in opposition to
Rome during this time was Aerius of Asia Minor about
360 AD. He opposed prayers for the dead, stated fasts,
celebration of Easter, and other errors creeping in. In
Italy there was Jovinianus (390 AD) called the
‘Protestant of his time’, who opposed the same evils as
that of Aerius and taught that salvation is by grace and
not by merit. He taught that Jesus saved man completely
and absolutely, and thus it was not necessary for man to
work out part of his salvation by his own efforts.
Vigilantius lived in Gaul (France) about the time
Jovinianus did in Italy. He took a similar stand in that
section as these others did in Italy and Asia Minor.
There may be some reason for this. Irenaeus lived his
early days in Asia Minor and was a follower of the
successors of the apostles. His disciple, Hippolytus,
went to Italy about 250 AD and opposed the lax
elements coming into the church of Rome.” Straw, SR,
23.

Antipas.—
“It is supposed that Antipas was not an individual,
but a class of men who opposed the power of the
bishops, or popes, in that day, being a combination of
two words, Anti, opposed, and Papas, father or Pope;
and many of them suffered martyrdom at that time in
Constantinople and Rome, where the bishops and popes
began to exercise the power which soon after brought
into subjection the kings of the earth, and trampled on
the rights of the church of Christ.” Miller, Evidence,
138,139.
“This word ‘Antipas’ is not a person’s name, but is
a term characteristic of the times. It is composed of two
Greek words, (anti) and (pappas). Anti signifies
against, and pappas is our English, and also the

“ ‘Although the word Pope was already in general
use as a respectful term, Syricius (398) was the first

46

REVELATION 2
Roman bishop to adopt it formally as his title.’ The
Rise of the Papacy, W. Ernest Beet, p. 2, publ. Chas. &
Kelly, London.” Straw, SR, 19.

curse could not harm Israel.… The bribe of costly gifts
and prospective exaltation excited his covetousness. He
greedily accepted the offered treasures, and did not
change his course when met by the angel. While
professing strict obedience to the will of God, he tried
to comply with the desire of Balac.’
“If in reading this paragraph the word ‘Balaam’
is replaced by the ‘Church,’ in the fourth and fifth
centuries, and for ‘Balac’ is read ‘Constantine,’ or
‘the Roman Emperor,’ the exact history of the
church is portrayed. The church had known God, but
it became covetous; while it still professed allegiance to
the Most High. The church, tempted by the rich offers
of the government, parlied with its ambassadors and
refused to declare the statutes of Jehovah, and remain a
separate and peculiar people. The union of Church
and State was formed in order to obtain the
privileges and protection of the civil power.
“The following paragraph, read in the same way,
gives the second step in the transaction, when Church
and State joined hands:
“‘Disappointed in his hopes of wealth and
promotion, in disfavor with the king, and conscious that
he had incurred the displeasure of God, Balaam returned
to his self-chosen mission. After he had reached home,
the controlling power of the Spirit of God left him, and
his covetousness, which had been merely held in check,
prevailed. He was willing to resort to any means to gain
the reward promised by Balac. ...He immediately
returned to the land of Moab, and laid his plans before
the king.... The plan pro-posed by Balaam was to
separate them (Israel, the church) from God by
enticing them into idolatry.... This plan was readily
accepted by the king, and Balaam himself remained to
assist in carrying it into effect. Balaam witnessed the
success of his diabolical scheme.’
“The scheme was that Israel should be invited to a
feast of the Moabites, where meats sacrificed to the
heathen gods, were eaten, and that Israel should be
caused to commit adultery with the inhabitants of Moab.
“The church between 312 and 538 AD joined
hands with the civil power. It took of the wealth of
the State, and asked for civil protection. Then it was
that the spiritual sins of idolatry and fornication
were introduced. Idolatry was the love of money, the
world, and all false worship which took the place of
the worship of Jehovah. It is fornication in the eyes
of God when His people are wedded to any power
save the arm of Omnipotence.
“Any interpretation of this period that does not
correspond with the history of Balaam is not according
to the mind of the Lord, for God has given Balaam’s
history as a test by which we may know the true
interpretation.” Haskel, SSP, 57,58.

Martyr.—
“[The]
Greek
[word
for
martyr
is]
martus,[meaning] ‘witness.’ A ‘martyr’ is one whose
death testifies to his faith. The Greek here rendered
‘faithful martyr’ is identical with that used of Christ in
ch. 1:5 and translated ‘faithful witness.’” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 749.

REVELATION 2:14
But I have a few things against thee,
because thou hast there them that hold the
doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to
cast a stumblingblock before the children of
Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols,
and to commit fornication.
I Have A Few Things Against Thee, Because Thou
Hast There Them.—
“To continue in communion with persons of
corrupt principles and practices is displeasing to
God, draws a guilt and blemish upon the whole society:
they become partakers of other men’s sins. Though the
church, as such, has no power to punish the persons of
men, either for heresy or immorality, with corporal
penalties, yet it has power to exclude them from its
communion; and, if it do not so, Christ, the head and
lawgiver of the church, will be displeased with it.”
Henry, 6MHC, 1128.
Balaam and Balak.—
“God watched the church as it trod this dangerous
path to worldly exaltation, and to Pergamos He sent this
message: (Rev. 2:14 quoted.) During the period of
ecclesiastical history, when the message to Pergamos
is applicable, the church was guilty of idolatry and
fornication. Lest Christians should misunderstand the
application, and be led to deny the charge, the Spirit of
God cites them to the experience of Balaam with Balac,
the king of the Moabites, at a time when Israel was
about to enter the promised land. The following quoted
paragraphs throw light on the work of Balaam in
teaching Balac to cast a stumbling-block before Israel:
“‘Balaam was once a good man and a prophet of
God; but he had apostatized, and had given himself
up to covetousness; yet he still professed to be a servant
of the Most High. He was not ignorant of God’s work in
behalf of Israel; and when the messengers (from Balac)
announced their errand, he well knew that it was his duty
to refuse the reward of Balac, and to dismiss the
ambassadors. But he ventured to dally with temptation,
and urged the messengers to tarry with him that night,
declaring that he could give no decided answer till he
had asked counsel of the Lord. Balaam knew that his

“The spirit of compromise and conformity was
restrained for a time by fierce persecutions which the
church endured under paganism. But as persecution
ceased, and Christianity entered the courts and
palaces of kings, she laid aside the humble simplicity

47

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Sylvester lived in luxury, with servants waiting on
him. Constantine confessed his sins to Sylvester and
asked for his advice. Sylvester presided over worldwide
Church councils. He had a splendid palace and a
sumptuous cathedral. He had power, prestige, wealth,
pomp, and the favor of the Emperor.
“Churchmen wore purple robes, reflecting the
purple of Constantine’s court. That was an external
change. The most important change was an internal one.
The Church took on the mentality of Rome. Under
Sylvester, the internal structure of the Church took
on the form and practice and pomp of Rome.
“Sylvester died in December, 335 AD. He died
peacefully, in a clean, comfortable bed, in the Roman
Lateran Palace. He died surrounded by well-dressed
bishops and priests, and attended by Roman guards. His
body was dressed in ceremonial robes, put in an elegant
casket, and carried through the streets of Rome in a
solemn procession. He was buried with honor and
ceremony, attended by the cream of Roman society and
by the Roman people.
“It is understandable that many Christians would
have preferred an officially approved status for the
Church. But what was the result?
“Before Constantine, the church was a band of
heroic men and women who were so committed to serve
the Lord Jesus Christ that they would endure any
hardship.
After 314 AD, the Church became
infiltrated by opportunists who were seeking power
and political advancement. Church leaders were no
longer in danger of persecution. Rather, they enjoyed all
the trappings of power and luxury. [Paul Johnson, A
History of Christianity, (Athenum-New York, 1979),
69.]
“…Sylvester takes the first step toward a genuinely
universal church. He accepts an alliance between church
and empire, so that the church can spread everywhere.
“The 232 successors to Sylvester will never modify
or deviate from that fateful step. From that day to this
their spiritual power will be entangled in temporal
alliances. Essentially, obstinately, blindly, they will
stand in Sylvester’s shoes down to the late twentieth
century.” [Malachi Martin, The Decline and Fall of the
Roman Church (New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1981),
33-35.]
“…But he [Sylvester] commanded to call the
Sabbath by the ancient term of the law, and [to call] the
first feria ‘Lord’s day,’ because that on it the Lord rose
[from the dead]. Moreover the same pope [Sylvester]
decreed that the Sabbath rest should be transferred
to the Lord’s Day, in order that on that day we should
rest from earthly works to the praising of God. [Rabanus
Maurus, De Clericorum Inslitutione, book 2, chap. 46, in
J. P. Migne, Patrologia Latina, Vol. 107, col. 361,
author’s translation….]” Heiks, AD538, 230 ,231, 237.

of Christ and his apostles for the pomp and pride of
pagan priests and rulers; and in place of the
requirements of God, she substituted human theories and
traditions. The nominal conversion of Constantine, in
the early part of the fourth century caused great
rejoicing; and the world, cloaked with a form of
righteousness, walked into the church.”
Great
Controversy, 49.
Balaam and Balak Illustrated in History.—
“Constantine wanted to have a state Church, with
Christian clergy acting as civil servants. He called
himself a Bishop. He said that he was the interpreter of
the Word of God, and the voice which declares what is
true and godly. According to historian Paul Johnson,
Constantine saw himself as being an important agent of
salvation, on a par with the apostles. Bishop Eusebius
(Constantine’s eulogist) relates that Constantine built the
Church of the Apostles with the intention of having his
body be kept there along with the bodies of the apostles.
Constantine’s coffin was to be in the center (the place
of honor), with six apostles on each side of him. He
expected that devotions honoring the apostles would be
performed in the church, and he expected to share the
title and honor of the apostles. [Paul Johnson, A History
of Christianity, (Athenum-New York, 1979), 68.]
“ ‘Constantine told Bishop Miltiades that he
wanted to build two Christian basilicas, one dedicated to
the Apostle Peter and one dedicated to the Apostle Paul.
He offered a large, magnificent palace for the use of
Miltiades and his successors. Miltiades refused. He
could not accept the idea of having Christianity be
promoted by [the civil and military power of] the
Roman Empire. [Malachi Martin, The Decline and Fall
of the Roman Church, 33-34.]
“ ‘Constantine rode off to war. By the time that he
returned in 314 AD, Miltiades had died. Bishop
Sylvester was Miltiades’ successor. Sylvester was eager
to have the Church be spread using Roman roads,
Roman wealth, Roman law, Roman power, and
Roman military might. Constantine officially approved
of Sylvester as the successor of Miltiades. Then he had a
coronation ceremony for Sylvester and crowned him like
a worldly prince. No bishop had ever been crowned
before. [Ibid., 34-35]. Constantine’s actions give the
impression that he believed that he had authority over
the Church.
“ ‘Before Constantine’s “conversion,” Christians
were persecuted. Now, instead of facing persecution,
Bishop Sylvester lived in the lap of luxury. He had a
beautiful palace, with the finest furniture and art. He
wore silk brocade robes. He had servants to wait on him.
Near his palace was a basilica which served as his
cathedral. This luxurious building had seven altars made
of gold, a canopy of solid silver above the main altar,
and 50 chandeliers. The imperial mail system and
transportation system were placed at Sylvester’s
disposal. It was now possible to have worldwide church
councils. [James G. McCarthy, The Gospel According
to Rome, 231-232.]

48

REVELATION 2
the Lord God; Every man of the house of Israel that
setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the
stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and
cometh to the prophet; I the Lord will answer him that
cometh according to the multitude of his idols. That I
may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because
they are all estranged from me through their idols.
Ezekiel 14:3-5.
“In Ezekiel 14, the ‘stumblingblock’ is associated
with ‘idols.’ In the Pergamos period Balaam is a symbol
of the worldly church. Balak is a symbol of Constantine
and civil rulers. In AD 325 at the Council of Nicea the
world-loving church taught Constantine to cast a
stumblingblock before the children of Israel. The
Godhead is composed of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit—three distinct eternal Beings.
The
‘stumblingblock’ was an idol—a false concept of god,
the Trinity—that was forced upon the world.” PJ

Parallels Between Balaam & Apostate Church.—
APOSTATE CHURCH
BALAAM
Balaam was once true to Church was once true to
God.
God.
Church was overcome by
Balaam was overcome
the spirit of covetousness,
by the spirit of
popularity, and power.
covetousness—wealth.
Church leaders offered
Balaam was offered a
rich rewards by
rich reward by Balak,
Constantine if they
king of Moab, to ruin
compromised, thus
Israel.
ruining the church.
Church compromised and
Balaam finally fell for
accepted the support of
the reward and united
the civil power, thus
with Balak.
uniting church & state.
Church leaders were
Balaam was warned by
a special messenger, but warned and opposed by a
loyal minority (Antipas),
to no avail.
but to no avail.
Church leaders lured
Balaam counseled:
members from Christ by
‘Lure Israel by an
compromise with
idolatrous feast and
paganism, which is
immoral pleasure.’
spiritual adultery.
Those that lead spiritual
Those who led Israel
Israel astray, Christ will
astray were slain with
the sword. Num. 25, 31. fight against them ‘with
the sword of his mouth.’
Those who refused to eat Those who rejected the
things sacrificed to idols, spiritual food of the
Balaamites were saved
etc., were saved and
from spiritual death and
continue to eat of the
continued to eat of the
manna from Heaven.
Hidden manna—the pure
Word of God.
From: Cooke, #2-UR, 37,38.

Constantine Presides at Council of Nicea, 325AD
Eat Things Sacrificed unto Idols and to Commit
Fornication.—
“The two practices here mentioned had been
expressly prohibited by the council at Jerusalem.
...These two sins led to a mixture of paganism with
true religion (see on Acts 15:29...).” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 749.

“Woe unto them! For they ...ran greedily after the
error of Balaam for reward.” Jude 11.
“A heart they have exercised with covetous
practices; cursed children: Which have forsaken the
right way, and are gone astray, following the way of
Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness.” 2 Pet. 2:14,15.

“For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us,
to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things; That ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and
from blood, and from things strangled, and from
fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall
do well.” Acts 15 :28,29.

“This compromise between paganism and
Christianity resulted in the development of "the man of
sin" foretold in prophecy as opposing and exalting
himself above God. That gigantic system of false
religion is a masterpiece of Satan's power--a monument
of his efforts to seat himself upon the throne to rule the
earth according to his will.” Great Controversy, 50.

“What attitude should be taken toward the use of
meats offered to idols? Many of the Gentile converts
were living among ignorant and superstitious people
who made frequent sacrifices and offerings to idols. The
priests of this heathen worship carried on an extensive
merchandise with the offerings brought to them, and the
Jews feared that the Gentile converts would bring
Christianity into disrepute by purchasing that which
had been offered to idols, thereby sanctioning, in
some measure, idolatrous customs.
“Again, the Gentiles were accustomed to eat the
flesh of animals that had been strangled, while the Jews
had been divinely instructed that when beasts were

To Cast a Stumblingblock Before Israel.—
“Son of man, these men have set up their idols in
their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity
before their face: should I be enquired of at all by them?
Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, thus saith

49

GEMS FROM REVELATION
killed for food, particular care was to be taken that the
blood should flow from the body; otherwise the meat
would not be regarded as wholesome. God had given
these injunctions to the Jews for the purpose of
preserving their health. The Jews regarded it as sinful
to use blood as an article of diet. They held that the
blood was the life, and that the shedding of blood was
in consequence of sin.
“The Gentiles, on the contrary, practiced catching
the blood that flowed from the sacrificial victim and
using it in the preparation of food. The Jews could not
believe that they ought to change the customs they had
adopted under the special direction of God. Therefore,
as things then stood, if Jew and Gentile should attempt
to eat at the same table, the former would be shocked
and outraged by the latter.
“The Gentiles, and especially the Greeks, were
extremely licentious, and there was danger that some,
unconverted in heart, would make a profession of faith
without renouncing their evil practices. The Jewish
Christians could not tolerate the immorality that was
not even regarded as criminal by the heathen.” Acts
of the Apostles, 191,192.

and immoral? Whatever it is that has been petted and
cultivated until it has become strong and over-mastering,
make determined efforts to overcome, else you will be
lost. It is these cherished sins, abhor-rent to God,
that make enfeebled moral courage, and leave you to
choose to walk apart from God, while you retain a
miserable, heartless, outward form.” Review &
Herald, 6/7/1887.
“The doctrine of the Nicolaitans, as described
under the church of Ephesus, was a mingling of the
pure teachings of Christ with the philosophy of the
Greeks. If this doctrine had not been accepted in the
church which claimed to be following the Saviour; if the
children and the young people had been fed on truth
instead of the mixture of good and evil, as represented
by the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, the church would
never have fallen.” Haskel, SSP, 57.
(See also the notes on Revelation 2:6).

REVELATION 2:16
Repent; or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will fight against them with the
sword of my mouth.

Commit Fornication.—
“The Lord has bestowed great blessings upon His
church. …But instead of improving upon these gifts and
going forward unto perfection, she has fallen away from
that which she had attained in her earlier experience.
The change in her spiritual state has come gradually and
almost imperceptibly. As she began to seek the praise
and friendship of the world, her faith diminished, her
zeal grew languid, her fervent devotion gave place to
dead formality. Every advance step toward the world
was a step away from God. As pride and worldly
ambition have been cherished, the spirit of Christ has
departed…” 5 Testimonies, 240.

Repent.—
“Either repent by separating from the apostasy, or
fight against Christ and His church who wield the sword
of the Spirit, the Word of God.” PJ
I Will Fight Against Them With the Sword of My
Mouth.—
“After a long and severe conflict, the faithful
few decided to dissolve all union with the apostate
church if she still refused to free herself from falsehood
and idolatry. They saw that separation was an
absolute necessity if they would obey the word of
God. They dared not tolerate errors fatal to their own
souls, and set an example which would imperil the faith
of their children and children’s children. To secure
peace and unity they were ready to make any concession
consistent with fidelity to God; but they felt that even
peace would be too dearly purchased at the sacrifice of
principle. If unity could be secured only by the
compromise of truth and righteousness, then let there
be difference, and even war.
“Well would it be for the church and the world
if the principles that actuated those steadfast souls
were revived in the hearts of God's professed
people.” Great Controversy, 45,46.

“The unfaithfulness of the church to Christ in
permitting her confidence and affection to be turned
from him, and allowing the love of worldly things to
occupy the soul, is likened to the violation of the
marriage vow.” Great Controversy, 381.

REVELATION 2:15
So hast thou also them that hold the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I
hate.

“It is our work to know our special failing and sins,
which cause darkness and spiritual feebleness, and
quenched our first love. Is it worldliness? Is it
selfishness? Is it the love of self-esteem? Is it striving
to be first? Is it the sin of sensuality that is intensely
active? Is it the sin of the Nicolaitans, turning the
grace of God into lasciviousness. Is it the misuse and
abuse of great light and opportunities and privileges,
making boasted claims to wisdom and religious
knowledge, while the life and character are inconsistent

“ ‘These things saith He which hath the sharp
sword with two edges.’ Rev. 2:12.) The ‘sword of My
mouth’ is the two-edged sword. From the midst of the
church, which fell because of its union with the State,
God separated, by his Spirit, a little company whose
history may be read in a part of the message sent to the

50

REVELATION 2
church of Thyatira.” Haskel, SSP, 58.
He that Hath an Ear, Let Him Hear.—
“God calls to each church, no matter how low
the ebb of spirituality, and those who have an ear
turned heavenward, hear.” Haskel, SSP, 58.

“This refers to the Nicolaitans or Balaamites. The
expression appears to be borrowed from Moses’
account of the experience of Israel in Numbers 25,
where those who led Israel astray were literally slain
with the sword.
“ ‘And Moses said to the judges of Israel, Slay ye
everyone his men that were joined to Baal-peor. And
behold one… brought to his brethren a Midianitish
woman in the sight of Moses and… all the
congregation… who were weeping before the door of
the tabernacle… And when Phinehas the son of
Eleazar… saw it, he rose up… and took a javelin…
and thrust both of them through… so the plague was
stayed… and those that died in the plague were twenty
and four thousand.’ Numbers 25:1-9.
“This is a graphic warning to spiritual Israel. All
who persist in compromising with the world, which is
spiritual adultery (James 4:4) are to be dealt with by the
spiritual sword of the Spirit—the word of God—and
severed from among God’s people. This is what will
stay the plague of judgments of God upon spiritual
Israel.
“Phinehas, the grandson of Aaron, was rewarded
for his zeal by being granted the covenant of an
everlasting priesthood.
“ ‘Phinehas…hath turned away my wrath from…
Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them,
that I consumed not the children of Israel in my
jealousy… Behold I give to Him my covenant of
peace… even the covenant of an everlasting
priesthood; because he was zealous for his God and
made an atonement for the children of Israel.’ Numbers
25:10-14.
“In spiritual Israel, those who zealously resist the
spiritual Balaamites, or Nicolaitans, likewise will be
rewarded, by being granted a spiritual priesthood for
eternity. They will be made ‘kings and priests of
God.’ Rev. 1:16.” Cooke, #2-UR, 33,34.

“‘He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches.’ It is of consequence
that you hear attentively and obey. Come into close
relationship with Christ. Keep your souls in constant
contact with the world, and its customs will become
your customs, its practices will become your practices, if
you place yourselves where you will see and hear and
feel and act as they do. ‘Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the
unclean.’ Turn quickly to Jesus.” Review & Herald,
6/7/1887.
“If you ‘hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches,’ and meditate upon the instruction given to
them, your ears will be closed to the folly and nonsense
which surround you. You will neither hear and repeat
these things, nor will you ever hanker after them. When
Christ satisfies the soul hunger, these trivialities are to
you distasteful and disgusting. You have no desire to
feast upon them, but choose instead the bread of
heaven.” Manuscript 92, 1901.
“Behold the days come, saith the Lord God, that I
will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor
a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the
Lord.” Amos 8:11.
The Hidden Manna—
“The ‘hidden manna’ is an allusion to the pot of
manna preserved inside the ark of the covenant in the
Holy of Holies of the sanctuary. Ex. 16:31-35. It was
‘hidden manna’ because no one could see it in the ark
except the High Priest maybe, and then only once a year.
“It was incorruptible. It was preserved in the
ark for 40 years in the wilderness and for over eight
hundred years in the Promised Land until 586 BC
approximately, when the ark and its contents were
hidden by the prophet Jeremiah in a secret cave east of
Jordan. 2 Maccabees 2:4-8. Prophet & Kings, 453.
“It was food from heaven. It was all-sufficient. It
gave life and it kept one free from disease. It
represents the spiritual food of the believer (John
6:48-63) the Word of God. This word is described in
scripture as hidden…
“ ‘Thy word have I hid in my heart that I might
not sin against thee.’ Ps. 119:11.
“ ‘I have meat [food] to eat that ye know not of.’
John 4:32.
“ ‘I have esteemed [margin ‘hid, laid up’ Hebrew]
the words of his mouth more than my necessary
food.’ Job. 23:12.
“ ‘Your life [spiritually] is hid with Christ in
God.’ Col. 3:3.
“This promise to the overcomer represents the fact

“The effect of this apostasy, which developed the
Papacy in the Roman Empire, was the complete ruin
of the Roman Empire. And this con-sequence of the
apostasy traced in these first three steps in the two lines
of prophecy of the Seven Churches and the Seven Seals,
is portrayed in the line of prophecy of the Seven
Trumpets.” Jones, GNOT, 6.

REVELATION 2:17
He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the churches: to him
that overcometh will I give to eat of the
hidden manna, and will give him a white
stone, and in the stone a new name written,
which no man knoweth saving he that
receiveth it.
51

GEMS FROM REVELATION
that in the kingdom he will have provision to
maintain life and health throughout eternity.” Cooke
#2-UR, 34,35.

teachings—and a spiritual lesson of marriage with the
Lamb, instead of with the dragon.” Haskel, SSP, 58-60.
“The manna, falling from heaven for the
sustenance of Israel, was a type of Him who came
from God to give life to the world. Said Jesus, ‘I am
that bread of life. Your fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which
cometh down from heaven.... If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will
give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.’ John 6:48-51. And among the promises of
blessing to God’s people in the future life it is written,
‘To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the
hidden manna.’” Patriarchs & Prophets, 297.

“But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery,
even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before
the world unto our glory: 8 Which none of the princes
of this world knew: for had they known it, they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory.
9 But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God hath prepared for them that love
him. 10 But God hath revealed them unto us by his
Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep
things of God.” 1Co 2:7-10.
“The life-giving Spirit, flowing from the infinite
fullness of God, is the true manna. Jesus said, ‘The
bread of God is that which cometh down out of
heaven, and giveth life unto the world.’ John 6:33,
R.V.” Desire of Ages, 386.

A White Stone, And In It a New Name Written.—
“This white stone is absolution from the guilt of
sin, alluding to the ancient custom of giving a white
stone to those acquitted on trial and a black stone to
those condemned.” Henry, 6MHC, 1128. [See Acts
26:10 where the same word for ‘stone’ is translated as
‘voice.’ Saul gave a black stone.]

“His Words are the manna from heaven for the
soul to feed upon and receive spiritual strength.”
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students, 422.

“It is a stone free from all signs of impurity, and on
it is impressed, by the power of God, the name which is
known only to the individual and his Redeemer. Others
may pronounce that name, it is true, but its significance
is a secret between Christ and the individual. The one
who receives it has been guilty of idolatry and
fornication, and none other save his Lord can know
the soul experience which brought the new name.
Once it was Jacob, supplanter. None but the bearer
knew how applicable was the name. Every time it was
pronounced by friend or foe, it was an open rebuke from
God. And when at the close of the night of wrestling,
the angel said, ‘Thy name shall be called no more
Jacob, but Israel’—a prince of God—none but Israel
knew the depth of meaning in that new name.
“When the Jewish nation lived near to God, and the
voice of Jehovah could be heard, every child was named
under the direction of the Spirit. Today heaven has a
new name carved on a pure white stone for each sinner
who repents, and the deeper the crimson dye of sin, the
purer the stone will appear by contrast. ‘Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in
whose spirit there is no guile.’” Haskel, SSP, 60,61.

“Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth and
abideth forever. …But the Word of the Lord
endureth for ever.” 1 Peter 1:23,25.
“As the sins of the Church of Pergamos are given
in the form of a parable, so the blessings to the repentant
ones of this period are offered in figure. Those who had
in sin partaken of food offered to idols, are offered in
exchange the ‘hidden manna.’ Manna is the bread of
heaven, and as it was the only food necessary to nourish
the multitudes of Israel during the forty years journey, it
became a fit emblem of Christ, the bread sent down to
the world. Eating flesh sacrificed to idols brings death,
but hidden manna brings life. ‘Jesus said unto them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not
that bread from heaven; but My Father giveth you
the true bread from heaven. For the bread of God is
He which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life
unto the world.’ A union of Church and State
crushes the spiritual life of any church. Why will
men eat the food of idolatry when the bread of heaven is
free to all? Why do Christians in the education of their
children, cultivate in them an appetite for ‘food
sacrificed to idols,’ instead of spreading the table with
manna which will give life to the soul?
“The lesson for the church as a whole is total
separation from the civil power. The lesson to the
home and to the individual is complete separation from
the world. Cling to God; for He has the hidden manna.
Feed the children on hidden manna; for it is well adapted
to supply every need. God is teaching in these words a
wonderful lesson on the laws of physical growth by
simplicity of food—food unadulterated with heathen

“A great name among men is as letters traced in
sand, but a spotless character will endure to all
eternity.” 5 Testimonies, 579.

THE FOURTH CHURCH: THYATIRA
REVELATION 2:18-29
18 And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write: These
things saith the Son of God, who hath His eyes like unto a flame of
fire, and His feet are like fine brass:
19 I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy

52

REVELATION 2
“If an exact date were chosen for the beginning of
the Thyatira period it would be A.D. 538, when the
decree of Emperor Justinian and the arms of Belisarius
elevated the Bishop of Rome to sovereign power.”
Bunch, SEOC, 162.

patience and thy works; and the last to be more than the first.
20 Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because
thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a
prophetess, to teach and to seduce My servants to commit
fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.
21 And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she
repented not.
22 Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit
adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their
deeds.
23 And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches
shall know that I am He which searcheth the reins and hearts: and
I will give unto every one of you according to your works.
24 But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as
have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of
Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden.
25 But that which ye have already hold fast till I come.
26 And he that overcometh, and keepeth My works unto the end,
to him will I give power over the nations:
27 And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a
potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of My
Father.
28 And I will give him the morning star.
29 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches.

“The most natural division to be assigned to the
church of Thyatira would be the time of the continuance
of this power [Papal Rome] through the 1260 years of its
supremacy, or from AD 538 to AD 1798.” [See Rev.
13:5.] Smith, DR, 377.
The Son of God.—
“This is the only time the title ‘the Son of God’ is
used in the seven epistles or in the entire book. During
this period the place and authority of the Son of God
were usurped by symbolic Jezebel, representing an
apostate religious system.
The backslidden and
apostatized church failed to recognize His priestly
service and sovereign authority, and assumed
prerogatives that belonged alone to the ‘Son of God.’”
Bunch, SEOC, 161.
His Eyes Like a Flame of Fire—
“He whose eyes are ‘as a flame of fire’ is
searching every church in the world. His gaze is
piercing every heart. He is measuring the temple and
the worshipers thereof, weighing all their actions in the
golden scales of heaven, and registering the result in the
books of record. All things are open to the eye of Him
with whom we have to do. He is a ‘discerner of the
thoughts and intents and purposes of the heart.’ No
deed of darkness can be screened from his view. Sin,
undetected by man, unsuspected by human minds, is
noted and registered by the great Heart searcher.”
Pamphlet PH028, 2.

REVELATION 2:18,19
And unto the angel of the church in
Thyatira write: These things saith the Son of
God, who hath His eyes like unto a flame of
fire, and His feet are like fine brass:
I know thy works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy
works; and the last to be more than the first.
The Church of Thyatira.—
“Thyatira signifies ‘sweet savor of labor,’ or
‘sacrifice of contrition.’ This well describes the state
of the church of Jesus Christ during the long period of
papal triumph and persecution. This age of dreadful
tribulation for the church such as never was (Matt.
24:21), improved the religious condition of believers.
Hence for their works—charity, service, faith, and
patience—they receive the commendation of Him whose
eyes are as a flame of fire. Works are again mentioned,
as if worthy of double commendation, and the last were
more than the first. There had been an improvement in
their condition, a growth of grace, an increase in all
these elements of Christianity. This progress, under
such conditions, was commended by the Lord.” Smith,
DR, 377.

“Yet a little while, and He that is to come will
come and will not tarry. His eyes as a flame of fire
penetrate into the fast-closed dungeons and hunt out
the hidden ones, for their names are written in the
Lamb’s book of life. The eyes of the Saviour are above
us, around us, noting every difficulty, discerning every
danger; and there is no place where His eyes cannot
penetrate, no sorrows and sufferings of His people
where the sympathy of Christ does not reach.” Last Day
Events, 277.
(See comments under Rev. 1:14,15.)
Thy Works, ...the Last to be More Than the First.—
“The re-establishment of the Christian faith in
Europe after the settlement of the Gothic tribes and the
destructive influence of Clovis, king of the Franks,
commenced with the advent of Columbanus and thirteen
companions.
“543-615 AD: Columbanus or Columban, was
of the Irish church which had been established and
nurtured by St. Patrick and which became a great
missionary movement of the day. Columbanus was

“Over in Philippi of Macedonia the apostle Paul
brought the gospel to ‘a certain woman named Lydia,
a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira.’ Acts
16:12-14. It is believed that the local church of Thyatira
owed its origin to the labors of Lydia after she returned
home.” Bunch, SEOC, 160.
The Time of the Church.—

53

GEMS FROM REVELATION
educated and trained for his work at the Celtic college at
Bangor. [The Celtic church kept alive the truth and
flourished in Ireland, Scotland, and Wales for centuries.]
In 573 AD with thirteen companions he was inspired to
commence missionary work in Gaul. He set up schools,
first in Gaul, then in Belgium, Germany, Austria,
Switzerland and Northern Italy. Not only did he implant
the true faith amid the people, but he also brought
education to benighted Europe.
“…This mission [gospel work] continued for
almost 200 years when persecution commenced (733
AD). This divided the Celtic church in Europe into
separate units, but they retained their faith and witness.
…The subjection of the Celtic church in Europe was
completed by Charlemagne (800 AD). However
remnants of believers continued in various areas of the
continent.
“864 AD: The Bulgarians were won to Christ
by Greek and Paulician believers who were opposed
to Rome. The Paulicians were a large group of true
believers who in this period began to migrate from
Armenia and Asia Minor into various areas of Europe.
The Paulicians have been grossly misrepresented by
historians, but now they have been recognized as true
Christians who withstood the apostasy of the day. They
brought revival to the scattered remnants throughout
Europe.
Various incidents in Europe reveal the
existence and witness of true believers.
“…1050 AD: Berengarius of Tours, an exRoman Catholic prelate who united with the Waldenses,
made a powerful impact upon France, England and Italy.
He had thousands of followers. He called the Church of
Rome ‘The Congregation of the Wicked and the Seat of
Satan’ as did also the Waldenses. He publicly opposed
the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation, i.e. that the
priest turns the bread and wine into the flesh and blood
of Jesus Christ.
“…1100 AD: The famous Waldensian ‘Nobla
Lecon’ (Noble Lesson) was written. It is a sublime
presentation of the origin and the story of the plan of
redemption. It is a contribution to world literature in the
Romaunt language, from a persecuted and martyred
people.
“1104 AD: Peter de Bruys from the French
Waldensian Valleys stirred Southern France by his
biblical, apostolic preaching. Misrepresented as usual
by Rome, finally he was martyred at the stake in 1124
AD.
“1128 AD: Henry of Lausanne, a gifted disciple
of Peter de Bruys, powerfully proclaimed the gospel to
the masses of people, especially in southern France. His
influence was so great that he was assailed by the
leading Roman figure, Bernard of Clairvaux, who
relentlessly attacked him. He was finally imprisoned
and disappeared.
“1150 AD: Arnold of Brescia, a powerful and
eloquent preacher exposed the errors of the Papacy. He
was far ahead of his age. He denounced the union of
church and state. He preached in Switzerland, France,
Germany and Italy. Even a church synod met to answer

Arnold. He was finally burned to death, but he left
behind numerous followers.
“1175: Peter Waldo of Lyons, France. A wealthy
merchant who forsook his riches and proclaimed the
gospel and the doctrines of the New Testament. He
exposed the Church of Rome as ‘the man of sin’ of 2
Thessalonians ch. 2 and the beast of Revelation. He
greatly revived and increased the number of
Waldensians throughout Europe. Upon persecution he
withdrew to Bohemia and his followers to the
Waldensian Valleys. He stimulated the circulation of
the scriptures. Rome has fraudulently branded Waldo as
the founder of the Waldenses in order to hide the truth
that there were numerous Christian dissenters against
Rome centuries before Waldo’s time.
“…The Waldenses first separated from the
established church in the time of Sylvester, Bishop of
Rome, and Constantine and the Council of Nicaea,
314-326 AD. They rapidly spread their faith throughout
all Europe, but they were particularly numerous in the
provinces of South France. Here they influenced the
population to such a degree that this region of
Narbonne—Gaul became a flourishing, enlightened and
independent civilization.
To their skilful land
cultivation was added that of commerce, art, poetry and
music, especially the troubadour or minstrel, many of
who were colporteurs and missionaries. They possessed
the New Testament in their own Provencal language,
from the Latin ‘Itala’ Bible which had been translated
from the uncorrupted Greek manuscripts of Lucian.
This led to the development of a pure form of
Christianity.
The Albigensian civilization was in
striking contrast to that of the rest of the benighted
peoples of Europe. Six Roman Catholic councils were
conducted to counter the Albigenses, from 1119 to 1229
AD, finally ending in the appalling crusade of
extermination under Pope Innocent III. Altogether over
one million were put to death.
“1215 AD: …At the very time Innocent III was
destroying the Albigenses of South France, England was
beginning to revolt against the Papal yoke. In 1215, the
Magna Carta had been signed in reaction to the Papal
dominance of England. The Pope had annulled and
declared void the Magna Carta. This was the beginning
of England’s emancipation. As she cast off the Papal
shackles she began to grow in power and wealth.
“1324-1384: John Wycliffe. …This outstanding
Englishman rose like a brilliant star amid the darkness of
the Papal night. A scholar of Oxford University, he
began lectures on the Bible in 1360 AD. …He exploded
with scripture the corrupt practice of indulgences and
concluded that the Popes were the Antichrist of
prophecy. He strongly attacked the Catholic eucharist,
or transubstantiation, and brought to light many
fundamentals of the gospel. …Probably his greatest
work was the translation of the Bible into English.
“1373-1415 AD:
John Huss of Bohemia.
Preached the Scriptures. Attacked the errors of Rome.
As Huss’s biblical knowledge increased, he soon learned
of further falsehoods of Rome and finally concluded that

54

REVELATION 2
‘the Pope and his court were members of Antichrist.’
…At the Council of Constance (1414), Huss and Jerome
were tried and dammed to the stake.
“…1452-1498: Savonarola of Florence. Aroused
by the corruptions of the church, he preached with great
power and conviction. He taught justification by faith
and passionately uplifted the crucified Christ before the
people. …He concluded that the Papacy was Babylon
and urged the people to ‘fly far from Babylon.’ Rome in
her usual manner, arrested, tortured and publicly burnt
this superbly gifted, scholarly and saintly man of fortysix years, casting his ashes into the river Arno.
“…1482: John of Wesalia, Doctor of Divinity of
Erfurt, attacked Rome’s errors and proclaimed the Bible
as the sole source of faith. ‘It is by the grace of God
alone that the elect are saved,’ he boldly preached, ‘I
despise the Pope, the church and the councils and I give
Christ the glory.’ He communicated with the Hussites
with whom he found himself in agreement. In his old
age he was condemned by the Inquisition and perished
in their dungeons in 1482.” Cooke, #3-UR, 7-27.

God because he had appropriating faith. He needed
help, and he prayed for it, grasped it by faith, and wove
into his experience the belief that God cared for him.
He believed that God ruled his life in particular. He
saw and acknowledged God in every detail of his life
and felt that he was under the eye of the All-seeing One,
who weighs motives, who tries the heart. He looked to
God and trusted in Him for strength to carry him
uncorrupted through every form of temptation.... The
presence of God was sufficient to carry him through
the most trying situations in which a man could be
placed.” 5 Testimonies, 651,652.

REVELATION 2:20
Notwithstanding I have a few things
against thee, because thou sufferest that
woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a
prophetess, to teach and to seduce My
servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed unto idols.

“The believers... are commended for their works,
especially the last works. ...A change came at the end
of the Thyatiran period when the great Reformation
arose. Such men as Luther, Knox, Calvin, Zwingli, and
scores of others came to lead the people back to God.”
Anderson, UR, 30,31.

Thou Sufferest.—
“Now why should the wickedness of this Jezebel
be charged upon the church of Thyatira? Because that
church suffered her to seduce the people of that city.
But how could the church help it? ...They had
ministerial power to censure and to excommunicate
her: and it is probable that neglecting to use the power
they had made them sharers in her sin.” Henry, 6MHC,
1129.

“The good works of the children of God are the
most effectual preaching the unbeliever has.” Spiritual
Gifts, Vol. 2, 235.
Works, Charity, Service, and Faith.—
“Faith and love [charity] are the ‘gold tried in the
fire.’” (See Rev. 3:18). Desire of Ages, 280.

Jezebel.—
“Now what is this figurative Jezebel? We have
learned that a woman in symbol represents a church.
A true and pure woman represents the bride of Christ,
the true church; while a corrupt woman represents a
false church. Jer. 6:2. As Jezebel, the apostate woman,
married the king of Israel and proceeded to direct the
affairs of the kingdom and establish her false worship,
so the apostate church took possession of the rulers of
the earth and proceeded to direct in the affairs of the
nations and establish her false worship. Any who
opposed her work were either destroyed or driven out of
the country.” Straw, SR, 25.

And Faith.—
“Faith is trusting God—believing that He loves
us, and knows best what is for our good. Thus,
instead of our own, it leads us to choose His way. In
place of our ignorance, it accepts His wisdom; in place
of our weakness, His strength; in place of our sinfulness,
His righteousness.” Education, 253.
“The just shall live by his faith.” Hab. 2:4.
“Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead,
being alone. ...I will shew thee my faith by my works.
…Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when
he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? See thou
how faith wrought with his works, and by works was
faith made perfect?” James 2:17,18, 21,22.

“In Rev. 2:20-24, the Lord employs the symbol of
‘Jezebel’ to portray the apostasy of the Papal power.
As indicated in this prophecy, the success which came to
the apostate church, was due to the fact that she
professed to be ‘a prophetess’—assuming the garments
of the servant of the Lord caused many in the past, in the
present, and particularly in the near future, to be
deceived by her false teachings.” Were, WATB, 50.

“Much of the faith which we see is merely
nominal; the real, trusting, persevering faith is
rare…. God will reward the man of faith and
obedience. If this faith is brought into the life
experience, it will enable everyone who fears and loves
God to endure trials. Moses was full of confidence in

“Jezebel was a Zidonian princess, a prophetess of
the god Baal. ...Jezebel never made any pretensions
of worshiping the Lord. Ahab, the king of Israel,

55

GEMS FROM REVELATION
married her for the sake of her influence, but found
himself completely under the control of a headstrong,
wicked woman. At her table, in the kingdom of Israel,
sat the prophets of Baal. In the capital were erected
temples, groves, and altars, to the heathen god; sunworship took the place of the worship of Jehovah. The
prophets of God were put to death by order of the queen;
even Elijah fled before her face. She was a propagator
of whoredom and witchcraft, and in the name of the
king, she wrote a letter causing innocent men to be put
to death. Israel had war, bloodshed, and finally
captivity, as the result of the evil of this woman. It was
during her lifetime that the heavens were stayed so
that it rained not for three years and a half (1260
days). The history of Jezebel is an unerring guide to the
interpretation of the prophetic history of the church
during the Dark Ages.
“In every detail, even to this last period of years,
the history of Jezebel is a parable of the church history
during the time, times, and half a time—the three and
one half years of the papal supremacy, the period
covered by the message to Thyatira. As a result of the
doctrine of justification by works, which was the
stronghold of the church during this period, Europe had
over a thousand years of darkness, known in all history
as the Dark Ages. It was a tyranny of the most absolute
kind—a tyranny of theology over thought.
Whosoever raised a hand against the church, fell as
did Naboth whom Jezebel slew. Sorcery, witchcraft,
idolatry, and fornication took the place of the religion of
Jesus Christ. Anti-christ, or the ‘mystery of iniquity,’
had full control of the world. As Jezebel wrote in the
king’s name, and in his name slew an innocent man, so
the apostate church opposed and exalted itself above the
King of heaven, and while speaking in His name, it
changed the law of Jehovah, and put to death
thousands who were, indeed, followers of Christ.”
Haskel, SSP, 63,64.

Newman, A Manual of Church History, p. 515. He
called the Fourth Lateran Council in which the
Inquisition was established as a means of ferreting out
heretics, and sent a band against the Waldenses to try
to blot them out. How completely the figure parallels
the original.” Straw, SR, 25,26.
Parallels Between Jezebel and Church of Rome.—

QUEEN
JEZEBEL

ROMAN
CATHOLIC
CHURCH SYSTEM

A religious organization.
Calls itself the sole
teacher of truth, but is
spiritual Babylon.
A spiritual whore and
A whore and a witch
riddled with sorcery.
Spiritual Babylon’s god is
Baal—the sun-god of
same as Old Babylon’s.
Babylon
Spiritual Babylon united
Jezebel married Ahab
with the State.
the king
Spiritual Babylon
Jezebel dominated the
dominated political rulers.
king.
Through the state spiritual
Through Ahab Jezebel
Babylon led the Church
led Israel in apostasy.
into apostasy.
Spiritual Babylon,
Jezebel, haughty and
haughty and intolerant.
intolerant.
Spiritual Babylon killed
Jezebel killed the true
the true teachers of the
prophets of the Lord.
faith.
Spiritual Babylon
Jezebel installed the
replaced true teachers
prophets of Baal.
with false.
Roman Catholic Church
Jezebel, mother of
system, Mother of harlots.
usurper Athaliah.
Jezebel influenced Israel Spiritual Babylon
influenced the true church
to idolatrous feasts that
led to immoral rites, etc. to accept her cup of false
doctrines making them
guilty of spiritual
drunkenness and adultery.
Special messengers
Elijah appeared and
appeared, warning of
called for repentance
apostasy, calling for
and reform.
repentance & reform.
Three and half prophetic
Three and half years of
years of spiritual drought.
literal drought.
A faithful remnant
A remnant (7000)
remained true.
remained true.
True teachers & believers
True teachers, etc.
hidden in wilderness.
hidden in caves.
Punishment of false
Punishment of Jezebel
church and supporters.
and Ahab…
Tribulation of death
Tribulation and death
Deadly Wound—National
Extinction of Ahab’s
Ruin—Eternal Oblivion.
family
From: Cooke, #3-UR, 30,31.
That woman Jezebel.
Calls herself a
prophetess of Baal.

“Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel
slew the prophets of the Lord, ….” 1 Kings 18:13.
“It came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he
said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace,
so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and
her witchcrafts are so many?” 2 Kings 9:22.
Jezebel in History.—
“We will take one example of the efforts of the
Papacy in directing the affairs of Europe. Innocent
III was Pope at the beginning of the thirteenth century.
He forced King John of England to give his kingdom to
the Pope and receive it back as a fief. ‘Innocent
compelled Alphonso of Spain to break off a matrimonial
engagement with his niece. ...He summoned Peter of
Aragon to Rome, took away his crown and restored it
only on condition that he should recognize the Pope’s
sovereignty by the payment of an annual tribute. His
influential interference in political matter extended to
Hungary, Poland, Norway, and even to the East.’

56

REVELATION 2
all the world. In nearly every council the Sabbath
which God had instituted was pressed down a little
lower, while the Sunday was correspondingly exalted.
Thus the pagan festival came finally to be honored as a
divine institution, while the Bible Sabbath was
pronounced a relic of Judaism, and its observers were
declared to be accursed.” Great Controversy, 53.

To Teach and to Seduce My Servants.—
“ ‘To teach and to seduce My servants’ implies
the teaching of error as though it were the truth. It is in
this way that the beast has ‘opened his mouth in
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name, and
His tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven’ (Rev.
13:6). To claim to be representing Christ whilst
working contrary to the Bible is to commit blasphemy—
especially when making the claim of being the Vicar of
the Son of God, and at the same time persecuting the
people of God!” Were, WATB, 50.

“The Scriptural ordinance of the Lord’s Supper
had been supplanted by the idolatrous sacrifice of the
mass. Papal priests pretended, by their senseless
mummery, to convert the simple bread and wine into the
actual ‘body and blood of Christ.’ …With blasphemous
presumption, they openly claimed the power of
creating God, the Creator of all things. Christians were
required, on pain of death, to avow their faith in this
horrible, Heaven-insulting heresy. Multitudes who
refused were given to the flames.” Great Controversy,
59.

To Commit Fornication.—
“Unfaithfulness to God is called fornication
because throughout the Scriptures the covenant relation
between God and His people is represented by marriage.
Christ represented Himself as the Bride-groom and His
church as the Bride. Any transgression would therefore
be a form of spiritual adultery, harlotry, or fornication.
This would especially be true of any union between
the church and the state or the world.” Bunch, SEOC,
167.

REVELATION 2:21,22
And I gave her space to repent of her
fornication; and she repented not.
Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and
them that commit adultery with her into
great tribulation, except they repent of their
deeds.

“The unfaithfulness of the church to Christ in
permitting her confidence and affection to be turned
from Him, and allowing the love of worldly things to
occupy the soul, is likened to the violation of the
marriage vow. See Eze. 16:8, 13-15, 32; Jer. 3:20.
“In the New Testament, language very similar is
addressed to professed Christians who seek the
friendship of the world above the favor of God. Says the
apostle James: (James 4:4 quoted).” Great Controversy,
381,382.

Space.—
“Gr. chronos = time.”
I Gave Her Space to Repent; She Repented Not.—
“Observe, First, Repentance is necessary to
prevent the sinner’s ruin.
Secondly, Repentance
requires time, a course of time, and time convenient; it
is a great work, and a work of time. Thirdly, Where God
gives space for repentance, he expects fruits meet for
repentance. Fourthly, Where the space for repentance is
lost, the sinner perishes with a double destruction.”
Henry, 6MHC, 1129.

“When the early church became corrupted by
departing from the simplicity of the gospel and
accepting heathen rites and customs, she lost the Spirit
and power of God; and in order to control the consciences of the people, she sought the support of the
secular power.” Great Controversy, 443.
And to Eat Things Sacrificed Unto Idols.—
“To afford converts from heathenism a substitute
for the worship of idols, and thus to promote their
nominal acceptance of Christianity, the adoration of
images and relics was gradually introduced into the
Christian worship. The decree of a general council
finally established this system of idolatry. To complete
the sacrilegious work, Rome presumed to expunge from
the law of God the second commandment, forbidding
image worship, and to divide the tenth commandment, in
order to preserve the number.” Great Controversy, 52.

“God gave Jezebel space to repent at the beginning
of her rise to power during the Pergamos church
period when ‘Antipas’, the faithful followers of Christ,
protested the rise of the papal power.” PJ
“For more than a hundred years before the
Reformation of the sixteenth century began, God
called the Church of Rome, and especially the leaders in
it, to repentance. For one hundred years and better he
gave her space to repent.
“This calling of the church of Rome to better ways
began under Wycliffe, and continued under Matthias
of Janow, Conrad of Waldhausen, Militz of Prague,
Huss, Jerome, and a host of others. The work of these
men, in many ways, was primarily for the church. It was
an effort to have the church adopt different and better

“The darkness seemed to grow more dense. Image
worship became more general. Candles were burned
before images, and prayers were offered to them.”
Great Controversy, 57.
“Vast councils were held from time to time, in
which the dignitaries of the church were convened from

57

GEMS FROM REVELATION
principles and policies. It was an attempt to have her
abandon devious and tortuous paths, to let affairs of state
alone and trust them with the secular rulers.” Magan,
Vatican & the War, 66,67.

“This would be a warning to all church systems in
the future that would commit adultery with the papacy
by joining themselves to the state.” PJ
Judgment Executed.—
“The punishment of this seducer, this Jezebel, v.
22,23, in which is couched a prediction of the fall of
Babylon. (1.) I will cast her into a bed, into a bed of
pain, not of pleasure, into a bed of flames; and those
who have sinned with her shall suffer with her; but this
may yet be prevented by their repentance. (2.) I will kill
her children with death; that is, the second death,
which does the work effectually, and leaves no hope of
future life, no resurrection for those that are killed by the
second death, but only to shame and everlasting
contempt.” Henry, 6MHC, 1130.

“God gave her opportunity to repent.
The
Reformation of the sixteenth century was God’s appeal
to His people, but ‘she repented not’ (chapter 2:21);
that is, those symbolized by Jezebel refused to heed.
The Counter Reformation was launched in
opposition to the Protestant Reformation; thus the
minds of many were blinded to God’s real message for
that time.” Anderson, UR, 31,32.
“There are none so hardened as those who have
slighted the invitation of mercy, and done despite to the
Spirit of Grace. The most common manifestation of
the sin against the Holy Spirit is in persistently
slighting heaven’s invitation to repent. Every step in
the rejection of Christ is a step toward the rejection of
salvation, and toward the sin against the Holy Spirit.”
Desire of Ages, 324.

“But as there was a day or recompense with
Jezebel, so there will be with the oppressive power of
the papacy. Jezebel was thrown from a window and
dashed to pieces, and dogs ate her body. Ahab was
slain, and dogs licked up his blood, and his sons were
also killed. Of the ‘mystery of iniquity’ it is recorded,
(verses 22,23 quoted). Herein is given the final
destruction of the apostate church. The civil power of
the papacy was broken in 1798, when Pope Pius VI
was taken prisoner by the French; but the influence
continues. Thyatira is Babylon itself, and the churches
spoken of elsewhere as ‘daughters of Babylon,’ will
meet with the fate of the mother, Thyatira; for when the
history of all churches is over, Babylon and her
daughters will be destroyed in the lake of fire. The
time of trouble spoken of by Daniel, the prophet (Daniel
12:1), will be the time of tribulation for Thyatira. Of
this the dreadful death of Jezebel is a symbol; as her life
and deeds are taken to typify the church itself.” Haskel,
SSP, 65,66.

“We would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his
own country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven,
and is lifted up even to the skies.” Jer. 51:9.
Cast into a Bed.—
“What is the significance of being cast into a bed?
This expression appears to denote affliction or
tribulation.
“ ‘He is chastened also with pain upon his bed.’
Job 33:19. ‘For the bed is shorter than a man can
stretch himself on it; and the covering narrower than
that he can wrap himself in it.’ Isa. 28:20.
“The imagery is borrowed from the Old Testament
account of the family of Ahab and Jezebel. In response
to the message of doom pronounced by Elijah, Ahab
displayed a form of repentance and humility, and God
delayed the visitation of justice.
“ ‘I will not bring the evil in his [Ahab’s] days:
but in his son’s days will I bring the evil upon his
house.’ 1 Kings 21:27-29.
“This was fulfilled upon Ahaziah the son of Ahab
who took the throne upon Ahab’s death. (II Kings
22:51-53.)
The manner of fulfillment of the
prediction was in Ahaziah being injured by a fall and
being confined to his bed—his deathbed. In his
affliction Ahaziah planned to consult the pagan god
Baalzebub, but Elijah declared in response, ‘Thou shalt
not come down from that bed… but shalt surely die.’
This was repeated three times. (II Kings 1:4,6,16).”
Cooke, #3-UR, 34,35.

“And the beast was taken, and with him the false
prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which
he deceived them that had received the mark of the
beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both
were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone.” Rev. 19:20.
Great Tribulation.—
“And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
prince which standeth for the children of thy people:
and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation even to that same time: and at
that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that
shall be found written in the book.” Dan. 12:1.
“If any man worship the beast and his image, and
receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation.” Rev. 14:9,10.

“Western Europe was ‘cast into a bed’ of
sickness, experiencing recurrent dreadful epidemics of
the Plague, or Black Death.” Maxwell, God Cares, 301.
Them That Commit Adultery With Her.—

58

REVELATION 2
“God is known by the judgments that he executes;
and, by this revenge taken upon seducers, He would
make known: (1.) His infallible knowledge of the
hearts of men, of their principles, designs, frame, and
temper, their formality, their indifference, their secret
inclinations to symbolize with idolaters. (2.) His
impartial justice, in giving every one according to his
work, that the name of Christian should be no protection,
their churches should be no sanctuaries for sin and
sinners.” Henry, 6MHC, 1130.

REVELATION 2:23
And I will kill her children with death;
and all the churches shall know that I am
He which searcheth the reins and hearts:
and I will give unto every one of you
according to your works.
I Will Kill Her Children With Death.—
“…In the light of the Old Testament type where
God decreed the extermination of the family of Ahab,
we suggest that the thought indicated is
extermination. If this application is correct, what a
warning this is as to where we place our religious
allegiance. The man who clings to a false system of
religion is warned in the above scripture that for him
there is no future—no eternal life, but ultimate
extermination.
“It is informative to notice that the church period
of Thyatira corresponds with the fourth or pale
horseman of Revelation 6:8. Upon the pale horse
death rode and hell (grave) followed and power was
given to kill with sword, hunger, death and beasts. This
was abundantly fulfilled in the same period—Thyatira—
of Papal supremacy when millions of believers were
martyred. It was literal death to the saints, but it was
spiritual death for the followers of the false church.”
Cooke, #3-UR, 36,37.

Searcheth the Reins and Hearts.—
“These things saith the Son of God, who hath his
eyes like unto a flame of fire….” Rev. 2:18.
“I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even
to give every man according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his doings.” Jeremiah 17:10.
“God is a searcher of hearts and a trier of the reins,
and will accept nothing less than entire devotion to the
work and consecration to Himself.” 3 Testimonies,
191.
I Will Give Every One According to Your Works.—
“And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before
God; and the books were opened: and another book was
opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the
books, according to their works.” Rev. 20:12.
“For we must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in
his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be
good or bad.” 2 Corinthians 5:10.

The Black Death 1348-1351, Killed 1/3 of Europe.—
“Although this doubtless has reference to the seven
last plagues in which is ‘filled up the wrath of God’
against Babylon and her family, it may also have an
application to the plagues and pestilences which
swept Europe between the fourteenth and eighteenth
centuries.
Besides the pneumonic plague which
destroyed millions of lives, there was the terrible plague
known as The Black Death. It was reported to Pope
Clement at Avignon that throughout the East, with the
exception of China, 23,840,000 people had died of the
plague. ...Hecker estimates a total of 25,000,000 deaths
in Europe, and this is considered conservative. These
terrible visitations were at the time considered
judgments from God because of the corruptions that
existed in the church and among the nations.” Bunch,
SEOC, 170.

“Then I saw thrones, and Jesus and the redeemed
saints sat upon them; and the saints reigned as kings and
priests unto God. Christ, in union with His people,
judges the wicked dead, comparing their acts with the
Statute Book, the Word of God, and deciding every
case according to the deeds done in the body. Then
they meted out to the wicked the portion which they
must suffer, according to their works; and it was
written against their names in the Book of Death.” Early
Writings, 290,291.

REVELATION 2:24,25
But unto you I say, and unto the rest in
Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine,
and which have not known the depths of
Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you
none other burden.
But that which ye have already hold fast
till I come.

All the Churches Shall Know.—
“The thought appears to be that all the churches
have witnessed, or know of the visitation of ‘death’
upon the followers of Jezebel, and realize it is a
display of God’s justice. He reads the motives of men
and metes out justice according to their works. This
suggests that an experience has befallen the followers of
Jezebel in which ‘death’ in some drastic form has
overtaken them. Some believe that this may refer to the
terrible visitation of the ‘Black Death’ during 134851 AD.” Cooke, #3-UR, 37.

The Rest.—
“In the NT it is primarily the word loipos and its
derivatives that are used to express the remnant idea.

59

GEMS FROM REVELATION
The OT remnant concept is found only in Ro-mans 9-11
and in the book of Revelation. In the book of Revelation
John uses loipos eight times. The ‘rest’ in Thyatira
are the faithful ones who have not accepted the
teachings of Jezebel (2:24).” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 297.

calleth herself a prophetess’ and who teaches and
seduces ‘my servants to commit fornication, and to
eat things sacrificed unto idols’ (2:20). Here she
personifies the supposedly infallible and all-powerful
Papacy....
The expressions ‘fornication’ and
‘adultery,’ here repeated three times, perfectly describe
the false teaching, idolatry, and immorality that the
symbolic Jezebel endeavored to bring into the church,
seducing the very servants of Christ.
“Third, there are ‘the rest in Thyatira, as many as
have not this doctrine, and which have not known the
depths of Satan.’ (2:24). ...The history of the church
teaches us that there have always been devoted men
and women who through the centuries have called
for a reform in the church and a return to the
teaching of the gospel. We can think of the Waldenses,
the Albigenses, the Hussites, the Huguenots, the
Moravian brethren, Peter Waldo, Savonarola, Wycliffe
[and his followers], John Huss and Jerome of Prague,
and others as well.” Zurcher, COR, 44,45.

You and the Rest in Thyatira.—
“Mention has already been made of a separation
from the church as a church in the days of Pergamos
and the early days of Thyatira. Individuals, who
recognized the leadings of the Spirit, gathered in little
companies, hidden away in the caves, mountain
fortresses, and dens, like the prophets of God in the days
of Jezebel. In these secluded spots were thousands
who did not bow the knee to Baal. Among these were
the Waldenses of Italy, and others scattered all through
Europe, who retained the Word of God, and trusted in
His promises. Of these scattered, yet faithful ones, the
message speaks in the following words: ‘But unto you I
say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have
not this doctrine (of Jezebel), and which have not
known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put
upon you none other burden.’
“The name Thyatira means ‘sacrifice of
contrition,’ and appears to have direct application to
those, who, in the eyes of their persecutors and the
world, were looked upon as heretics and outlaws—fit
subjects for the stake. Their sacrifice was in truth a
‘sacrifice of contrition.’ The contrite heart is the heart
which God honors. As the ages passed, much of the
light and truth which shone upon the Apostolic Church
had been lost, but the Saviour does not rebuke the ones
who were sacrificing for the truth which they knew and
lived out, because they did not have the light of the first
centuries.
“Justification by faith was the doctrine which
broke the power of the papacy. Christ and Him
crucified, a truth so long forgotten, or replaced by faith
in the head of the church, was given to the people of the
world in the sixteenth century. Many other truths, long
hidden by the darkness, or buried under the traditions of
the church, were brought forward in the early days of the
Reformation. The Sabbath of the Decalogue was
acknowledged; some preached upon the true meaning of
baptism, and others made known the proper relation of
the church to the state; but these subjects were too strong
for minds so long held in subjection. The age was not
ripe for the fullness of truth. But as watchmen of the
night hail the dawn when the morning star arises, so
the early Reformers, from Wycliffe to Luther and his
contemporaries, opened the Scriptures, and the first
rays of light brought joy and gladness to those who
sat in darkness.” Haskel, SSP, 66,67.

Martin Luther posts 95 theses
against the sale of indulgences—1517.
The Depths of Satan.—
“In the thirteenth century was established that most
terrible of all the engines of the papacy—the Inquisition.
The prince of darkness wrought with the leaders of the
papal hierarchy. In their secret councils Satan and his
angels controlled the minds of evil men, while unseen
in the midst stood an angel of God, taking the fearful
record of their iniquitous decrees and writing the history
of deeds too horrible to appear to human eyes.
‘Babylon the great’ was ‘drunken with the blood of
the saints.’ The mangled forms of millions of
martyrs cried to God for vengeance upon that apostate
power.” Great Controversy, 59,60.
“When Rome at one time determined to
exterminate the hated sect [the Waldenses], a bull was
issued by the pope, condemning them as heretics, and
delivering them to slaughter. They were not accused as
idlers, or dishonest, or disorderly; but it was declared
that they had an appearance of piety and sanctity that
seduced ‘the sheep of the true fold.’ Therefore the
pope ordered ‘that malicious and abominable sect of
malignant,’ if they ‘refuse to abjure, to be crushed like

The Three Groups in Thyatira.—
“First there are the faithful ones who are
distinguished by all the Christian virtues mentioned
but who tolerate Jezebel.
“Second, there is ‘that woman Jezebel, which

60

REVELATION 2
venomous snakes.’ Wylie, b. 16, ch. 1. Did this
haughty potentate expect to meet those words again?
Did he know that they were registered in the books of
heaven, to confront him at the judgment? ‘Inasmuch as
ye have done it unto one of the least of these My
brethren,’ said Jesus, ‘ye have done it unto Me.’
Matthew 25:40.” Great Controversy, 77.

come.’” Smith, DR, 380.

“His [Satan’s] agents, disguised in the robes of
priests and rulers, joined hands with the lowest and most
degraded, in an effort to take the life of the Son of God.
How could the beings He had created, the beings He
loved so well that He left His heavenly home to come to
this earth in their behalf, sink to such depths of
wickedness that they would personate Satan in fighting
against Him.” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 18, 94,95.

REVELATION 2:26,27
And he that overcometh, and keepeth
My works unto the end, to him will I give
power over the nations: And he shall rule
them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a
potter shall they be broken to shivers: even
as I received of My Father.

“But Christ [was faithful] as a son over his own
house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the
confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
end.” Heb. 3:5,6.

“The forces of the powers of darkness will unite
with human agents who have given them-selves unto
the control of Satan, and the same scenes that were
exhibited at the trial, rejection and crucifixion of
Christ will be revived. Through yielding to satanic
influences men will be merged into fiends, and those
who were created in the image of God, who were formed
to honor and glorify their Creator, will become the
habitation of dragons, and Satan will see in an apostate
race his masterpiece of evil—men who reflect his own
image.” (Manuscript 39, 1894). 5BC, 1136.

Keepeth My Works.—
“Let no one say that your works have nothing to do
with your rank and position before God. In the
judgment the sentence pronounced is according to
what has been done or to what has been left un-done
(Matt. 25:34-40).
“Effort and labor are required on the part of the
receiver of God’s grace; for it is the fruit that makes
manifest what is the character of the tree. Although the
good works of man are of no more value without
faith in Jesus than was the offering of Cain, yet
covered with the merit of Christ, they testify [to] the
worthiness of the doer to inherit eternal life. That
which is considered morality in the world does not reach
the divine standard and has no more merit before
Heaven than had the offering of Cain.” Manuscript 26a,
1892.

I Will Put Upon You None Other Burden.—
“I saw that the present test on the Sabbath could
not come, until the mediation of Jesus in the Holy
Place was finished; and he had passed within the
second veil; therefore, Christians, who fell asleep before
the door was opened in the Most Holy, when the
midnight cry was finished, at the seventh month 1844,
and had not kept the true Sabbath, now rest in hope; for
they had not the light, and the test on the Sabbath,
which we now have since the door was opened. I saw
that Satan was tempting some of God’s people on this
point. Because so many good Christians have fallen
asleep in the triumphs of faith, and have not kept the true
Sabbath, they were doubting about its being a test for us
now.” Early Writings, 42,43.

Unto the End.—
“This must denote the end of the Christian age.
‘He that shall endure unto the end,’ …‘the same shall
be saved.’ Matthew 24:13. Is there not here a like
promise to those who keep the works of Christ, do the
things He has enjoined, and keep the faith of Jesus?
(Revelation 14:12.)” Smith, DR, 380.
Power Over the Nations.—
“Our Lord being thus inducted into his kingly
office, [Psalm 110:1] and proceeding to the exercise of
his power against his enemies, the next verse [Psalm
110:2.] states the sympathy of his people with this
work: ‘Thy people shall be willing in the days of thy
power; in the beauties of holiness from the womb of
the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth.’ Instead
of ‘the day of thy power,’ Martin’s French Bible reads,
‘The day that thou shalt assemble thy army in holy
pomp.’ This is the time when the Son of man descends
in power and great glory, and the armies of Heaven, i.e.,
all the holy angels, attend and surround him.
Matt.24:30,31; 1Thess.4:16-18; Rev.19:11-21.
The
people of God are to unite with Christ in his rule
over the nations of wicked men. Rev.2:26,27; Ps.2:6-

“Christ says, ‘I will put upon you none other
burden. But that which ye have already hold fast till
I come.’ How merciful is our God. He measures out to
humanity its burdens of life, and no burden is made
heavier than can be borne. ‘Only hold fast till I come,’
are his words of encouragement. To others, more
accustomed to the light greater truths would be made
known.” Haskel, SSP, 66-68.
Hold Fast Till I Come.—
“In the history of this church we reach a point
when the end is drawing so near that the attention of the
people could properly be called more particularly to that
event. Christ has ever said to His followers, ‘Occupy
till I come.’ Luke 19:13. Now He says, ‘Hold fast till I

61

GEMS FROM REVELATION
9. The morning of this verse must be the morning of the
day which it mentions. One of the earliest events of that
day is the resurrection of the just, when, like their Lord,
they are born from the dead to life immortal. Rev.20:4-6;
Luke 20:35,36; Col.1:18; Hosea 13:13,14; 1Cor.15:4244,51-54.” Andrews, JEO, 41.

Christ: ‘I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said
unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of
iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s
vessel.” Psalm 2:7-9.
“These identical promises reveal that Christ
shares his ultimate victory with His faithful people,
especially those of Thyatira.” Cooke, #3-UR, 41.

“In the Thyatiran period the nations dominated by
spiritual Jezebel had power over the saints. One day the
tables will be turned and the saints will have power
or authority over those who have so cruelly misused
them. Here is revealed the justice of God. …The saints
will have power over the unsaved during the millennium
when they engage in a work of judgment upon the lost.”
Cooke, #3-UR, 40.

Even as I Received of My Father.-“For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he
given to the Son to have life in himself; And hath given
him authority to execute judgment also, because he is
the Son of man.” John 5:26, 27.

“In this world the wicked bear rule, and the
servants of Christ are of no esteem. But the time is
coming when righteousness will be in the ascendency;
when all ungodliness will be seen in its true light, and
be at a heavy discount; and when the scepter of
power will be in the hands of the people of God. This
promise will be explained by the following facts and
scriptures: The nations are to be given by the Father
into the hands of Christ, to be ruled with a rod of
iron, and dashed in pieces like a potter’s vessel.
(Psalm 2:8,9.) Associated with Christ when He thus
enters upon His own work of power and judgment, are to
be His saints. (Rev. 3:21.) They are to reign with Him
in this capacity for one thousand years. (Rev. 20:4.)
During this period, the degree of judgment upon the
wicked men and evil angels is determined.
(1
Corinthians 6:2,3.) At the end of the one thousand
years, they have the honor of sharing with Christ in
the execution of the sentence written. (Psalm 149:9.)”
Smith, DR, 380.

REVELATION 2:28
And I will give him the morning star.
The Morning Star.—
“Christ says in Rev. 22:16 that He is Himself the
morning star, the immediate forerunner of the day.
What is here called the ‘morning star,’ is called the ‘daystar’ in 2 Peter 1:19, where it is associated with the dawn
of the day: ‘Until the day dawn, and the daystar
arise.’ During the saints’ weary night of watching, they
have the Word of God to shed its needful light upon
their path. But when the daystar shall arise in their
hearts, or the morning star be given to the
overcomers, they will be taken into so close a
relationship to Christ that their hearts will be fully
illuminated with His Spirit, and they will walk in His
light. Then they will no longer need the sure word of
prophecy, which now shines as a light in a dark place.
Hasten on, O glorious hour, when the light of heaven’s
bright day shall rise upon the pathway of the faithful!”
Smith, DR, 380,381.

“Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing
aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God be in
their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; To
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and
punishments upon the people; To bind their kings
with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; To
execute upon them the judgment written: This
honour have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord.” Psalm
149:5-9.

“Christ is the ‘bright and morning star.’ He is
the Christian’s light. ‘They that follow me, he says,
‘shall not walk in darkness.’ They are to receive
their light from the morning star; and as they catch his
bright beams, they are actively, interestedly, to transmit
to others the light received.” Review & Herald,
10/6/1896.

He Shall Rule Them With a Rod of Iron; As the
Vessels of a Potter Shall They be Broken to Shivers.—
“This is a reference to the shepherd’s crook. On its
other end was a length of iron which was used as a
weapon of defence or attack against any preying upon
the flock. It was an instrument of destruction. It denotes
that the overcomers will share in the final administration
of justice against those who so cruelly oppressed them,
because of their loyalty to Christ. This is confirmed by
the remainder of the verse: ‘as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken to shivers: Even as I received of
my Father.’
“The promise to the overcomer was also given to

“The promise of the morning star indicates that
a night, or period of darkness, was coming to a close.
The morning star is the sign and promise of greater light.
It does not disperse the darkness but is a sign that the
soon-rising sun will scatter the darkness of night and
usher in the dawn of day, that will be followed by the
‘perfect day’ of noontide glory.” Bunch, SEOC, 176.
“In the fourteenth century arose in England ‘the
morning star of the Reformation.’ John Wycliffe was
the herald of reform, not for England alone, but for

62

REVELATION 2
all Christendom. ...He lived to place in the hands of his
countrymen the most powerful of all weapons against
Rome—to give them the Bible, the heaven-appointed
agent to liberate, enlighten, and evangelize the people.
...In giving the Bible to his countrymen, he had done
more to break the fetters of ignorance and vice, more
to liberate and elevate his country, than was ever
achieved by the most brilliant victories on fields of
battle.
...The great movement that Wycliffe
inaugurated, which was to liberate the conscience and
the intellect, and set free the nations so long bound to the
triumphal car of Rome, had its spring in the Bible. Here
was the source of that stream of blessing, which, like
the water of life, has flowed down the ages since the
fourteenth century.” Great Controversy, 80,88,93.

felt. What was once done by a church in days of
intellectual darkness will be repeated in days of great
light. The union of the church and state will be followed
by laws compelling obedience to man-made laws,
instead of the laws of God. The law of God will be
trampled underfoot; for a church with civil power
always works the works of Jezebel. …This message is
impressed upon the minds of those living in the latter
days by the oft-repeated words, ‘He that hath an ear,
let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
churches.’” Haskel, SSP, 69.
“Again and again the true Witness says, ‘He that
hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches.’ But it is evident that some who have
ears will not hear, will not receive, and will not become
wise in regard to sacred truth. The Lord Jesus, the
Alpha and Omega, gave the message to John in regard to
the church. He understood the danger of their neglecting
their God-given work. ‘The Spirit and the bride say,
Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let
him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely.’ When God’s people hear
to a purpose the things that are revealed to the churches,
when they get the burden of the message, and say to
others, ‘Come,’ they are laborers together with God.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 21, 452.
“To whom shall I speak, and give warning, that
they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised,
and they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the LORD
is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in it.”
Jeremiah 6:10.

An Original Wycliffe Bible
Wycliffe, the Morning Star of the Reformation,
gave the Word of God to the English people.

REVELATION 2:29:
He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the churches.

“It should be noticed that the call to hear for the
church of Thyatira is the last item to come to this
church, following the promise. For the first three
churches the call to hear had preceded the promise.
For the last four churches the call to hear follows the
promise.” Thiele, OSIR, 52.

“It should be remembered that, as the experiences
of Ephesus, Smyrna, and Pergamos, will be repeated
in the last church before the second coming of Christ,
so the history of Thyatira will have its counterpart in
the last generation. The power of Jezebel will again be

63

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 3
America that the new church found congenial
environments for growth: and while all nations
receive the Sardis message, it is particularly applicable
in the United States, or at least, the United States
becomes the center for the movement therein mentioned.
“Sardis means ‘prince of joy’; and the name is
most appropriate for those who received the light of the
eighteenth century, and the first half of the nineteenth
century. Protestantism is an active, living principle,
based upon eternal truths. It came as the result of the
opening of the Scriptures to the common people. The
doctrine of justification by faith makes every man
responsible to God alone, and necessitates freedom of
conscience. When it is once made known that every
man is equal in the sight of God, a deathblow is struck to
all tyranny in government; and with freedom of
conscience, comes also a government by the people and
for the people. In the days of Luther, Germany and the
other countries of Europe, had an opportunity to develop
this twofold nature of Protestantism. For a time it
seemed that all Europe would be transformed; but
gradually, there was a return to papal principles in
Germany, and nearly all of the other countries,
which had espoused the cause of Protestantism,
followed her example. The return was largely due to
the educational work of the Jesuits, who arose to
counteract the teachings of the Reformers.
“Since the days of Wycliffe, there had been in
England followers of God, walking in all the light which
they had received. …So strong were the principles of
Protestantism that her government has been, since the
days of the Commonwealth, a government by the
people. It was in England that the first Anglo-Saxon
branches of Protestantism had birth, and it was because
of lack of freedom in the mother country, that
separatists from the English church sought homes in
America.
“…The very ones who crossed the ocean because
of oppression at home, oppressed, in America, those
who did not worship God in the prescribed way.
Nevertheless, America was destined to be the home of
Protestantism; and gradually, the shackles of the Dark
Ages were dropped off, and the equal rights of mankind
were acknowledged. The Constitution of the United
States was the first document ever granting complete
freedom of worship, and placing in the hands of the
people the sole power of the government.” Haskel,
SSP, 70-73.

THE FIFTH CHURCH: SARDIS
REVELATION 3:1-6
1 And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write: These things
saith He that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars: I
know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art
dead.
2 Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are
ready to die; for I have not found thy works perfect before God.
3 Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and
hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come
on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come
upon thee.
4 Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled
their garments; and they shall walk with Me in white: for they are
worthy.
5 He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white
raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but
I will confess his name before My Father, and before His angels.
6 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches.

REVELATION 3:1
And unto the angel of the church in
Sardis write: These things saith He that
hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven
stars: I know thy works, that thou hast a
name that thou livest, and art dead.
Sardis, Its Time Period and Meaning.—
“The period covered by the church of Sardis
must begin about 1798. ‘Sardis’ signifies ‘prince of
joy,’ or ‘that which remains.’ We then have the
reformed churches before us as constituting this church,
from the date above named to the great movement which
marked another era in the history of the people of God.”
Smith, DR, 383.
“The message to Sardis is addressed to
Protestantism. The period covered by Thyatira was the
era of papal persecution. …The darkness was first
broken when Wycliffe, ‘the morning star of the
Reformation,’ translated the Bible into the English
language. The first streaks of dawn lighted up the sky,
and in the course of two hundred years, the sun had
arisen in its splendor. The church came out of the
wilderness, leaning on the arm of her Beloved. The
twelve hundred and sixty years of darkness ended. It
was like the return of spring after a severe winter. Life
of every kind sprang into existence. …God was
preparing a cradle for the newborn cause of
Protestantism. Germany might have nourished it;
England had an opportunity to cherish it; but it was in

“As the spirit of humility and devotion in the
church had given place to pride and formalism, love for
Christ and faith in His coming had grown cold.
Absorbed in worldliness and pleasure seeking, the

64

REVELATION 3
professed people of God were blinded to the
Saviour’s instructions concerning the signs of His
appearing. The doctrine of the second advent had been
neglected; the scriptures relating to it were obscured by
misinterpretation, until it was, to a great extent, ignored
and forgotten. Especially was this the case in the
churches of America. The freedom and comfort enjoyed
by all classes of society, the ambitious desire for wealth
and luxury, begetting an absorbing devotion to moneymaking, the eager rush for popularity and power, which
seemed to be within the reach of all, led men to center
their interests and hopes on the things of this life, and
to put far in the future that solemn day when the
present order of things should pass away....
“The condition of the church at this time is
pointed out in the Saviour’s words in the Revelation:
‘Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.’
And to those who refuse to arouse from their careless
security, the solemn warning is addressed: ‘If therefore
thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief,
and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon
thee.’ Rev. 3:1, 3.
“It was needful that men should be awakened to
their danger; that they should be roused to prepare for
the solemn events connected with the close of probation.
...To prepare a people to stand in the day of God, a great
work of reform was to be accomplished. God saw that
many of His professed people were not building for
eternity, and in His mercy He was about to send a
message of warning to arouse them from their stupor
and lead them to make ready for the coming of the
Lord. This warning is brought to view in Revelation
14....” Great Controversy, 308-311.

has the seven spirits, the Spirit without measure and
in perfection, to whom they may apply themselves for
the reviving of his work among them.” Henry, 6MHC,
1131.
“‘These things saith He that hath the seven Spirits
of God….’ Rev. 3:1. ‘Let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the churches.’ Repeated seven times.”
Burnside, RWU, 62.
And the Seven Stars.—
“‘The seven stars’ represent the human guides and
teachers of the church, including ‘the angel of the
church in Sardis.’ Here is shown the relation between
Christ as the giver of the Holy Spirit and as the head of a
ministry of human agents. The success of Christ’s
ministers depends upon the gift of the Holy Spirit.
Here is positive proof that the seven Spirits and the
seven angels are not the same, as some contend. It is
the seven Spirits who make the seven stars shine.”
Bunch, SEOC, 182.
I Know Thy Works.—
“During the fifty years following the adoption of
the principles of Protestantism in America, the various
branches of the Protestant church had their period of
probation. One by one the denominations arose,
separating farther and farther from the physical,
intellectual, and spiritual tyranny of the papacy. To
each denomination was offered the law of God and
the faith of Jesus. The time came when each had an
opportunity to accept or reject, as seemed good to them;
but the decision then made, decided their eternal destiny.
“In the early days of the nineteenth century God
took a man, hitherto unacquainted with the Bible, and
opened to him the beauties of the prophecies. As Luther
found in Christ a Saviour, and with the light that entered
his mind, attacked the papacy, so William Miller, in
1818, saw light in the books of Daniel and Revelation.
He studied with care the twenty-three hundred days,
spoken of by Daniel, and became convinced that the
second coming of Christ was near at hand. He applied
every test, but all pointed forward to the year 1843 as the
time when the world must welcome its Saviour. The
condition of the people at the first advent of Christ,
was now repeated; when the time approached for the
message of His second coming, the world lay in
ignorance: and not the world only, but the church which
bore the name of Christian. Nay, more! The very
churches which in their zeal for truth had faced hardship
and persecution, in protesting against the errors of the
papacy—these churches were quiet when great
changes were right upon them. But unto the church of
Sardis, John was bidden write: ‘These things saith He
that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven
stars; I know thy works, that thou hast a name that
thou livest, and art dead.’
“He, who walked among His churches, and who
sought diligently for signs of life, searching among the
seven stars—the leaders of the churches—found that,

He That Hath the Seven Spirits of God.—
“Why does Christ in addressing Sardis remind His
people that he HATH the Holy Spirit?
“1. To declare His Godhead. As God the Son, He
is equal with the Father in His person, but in office or
position, He is the second Person of the Godhead. The
Holy Spirit, likewise, as the third Person of the
Godhead, is equal with the Father and the Son, but in
office or authority, He is third; He is subject to the
Father and the Son. Thus, Christ having the Holy Spirit,
He may send Him wheresoever He and the Father
determine.
“ ‘I will pray the Father and he shall give you
another Comforter that he may abide with you
forever.’ John 14:16. ‘But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father,
…he shall testify of me.’ John 15:26.
“2. The seven Spirits represent the Holy Spirit in
His fullness and only through the power of the Spirit
would it be possible to bring spiritual life to Sardis.
However, because Christ has the Spirit in his fullness—
He is able to bring hope and comfort to the
Sardians.” Cooke, #4-UR, 1,2.
“This epistle being sent to a languishing ministry
and church, they are very fitly put in mind that Christ

65

GEMS FROM REVELATION
although Sardis claimed to have life, it was dead.
Strange condition! So quietly had this life been lost,
that, looking back upon the activity of the past, and
priding itself upon what great things had been done by
Protestantism, this church had allowed the very
principles of the papacy to twine about it until its life
was choked.” Haskel, SSP, 73-75.

“If you fail to shine as lights in the world, some
will rise in judgment, and charge upon you the blood of
their souls. It will be seen that you were an agent in the
hands of the enemy of God and man to mislead and
deceive by your profession of Christianity. You did not
lead souls to piety and devotion. You had a name to
live, but were spiritually dead. You had not the
vitalizing influence of the Spirit of God, which is
abundantly provided for all who, in faith, make
demands upon it.” Review & Herald, 8/16/1898.

“The reformers were men of God, but their
followers, thinking that all was won, settled down to
organized religion. Many became state religions
supported by government funds.” Burnside, RWU,
53.

“Like Samson of old the modern church is
spiritually dead and ‘wist not that the Lord was
departed from him.’ (Jg. 16:19.)” Bunch, SEOC, 183.

A Name that Thou Livest, and Art Dead.—
“The Reformation churches had discovered what it
means to live by faith in Jesus Christ, but for the most
part they eventually lapsed into a state resembling, in
certain ways, that of the organization from which they
had withdrawn.... Their name—Protestant—implied
opposition to the abuses, errors, and formalism of the
Roman Catholic Church, and the name Reformation
implied that none of these faults were to be found
within the Protestant fold.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
756.

Cause of Corporate Spiritual Death.—
“How, then, did the churches of the Reformation
begin to lose their spiritual life and decline? It is
considered that there were five causes of decline of the
church of that period. These were:
1. The union of the main church bodies with the
state.
2. The formation of rigid creeds.
3.
Their adherence to certain unscriptural
doctrines.
a. Sacramentalism.
b. Predestination
c. Original Sin
d. False Justification
e. Antinomianism. [Law abolished.]
4. The influence of the Counter-Reformation.
5. The rise of Deism or the Age of Reason.”
From: Cooke, #4-UR, 4,6.

“Many have a name to live while they have
become spiritually dead. These will one day say:
‘Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy name?
And in Thy name have cast out devils? And in Thy
name done many wonderful works? And then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from
Me, ye that work iniquity.’ (Mt. 7:22,23).” 5
Testimonies, 73.
“Having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof.” 2 Tim. 3:5.

REVELATION 3:2
Be watchful, and strengthen the things
which remain, that are ready to die: for I
have not found thy works perfect before
God.

“Many who are without spiritual life have their
names on the church records, but they are not written in
the Lamb’s book of life. They may be joined to the
church, but they are not united to the Lord. They
may be diligent in the performance of a certain set of
duties, and may be regarded as living men; but many are
among those who have ‘a name that thou livest, and
art dead.’” 4BC, 1166.

Be Watchful.—
“There are three watchwords in the Christian life
which must be heeded if we would not have Satan steal a
march upon us. Watch, pray, work.” 2 Testimonies,
283.

“A hundred years later [late 1700’s], in a day of
great spiritual darkness, Whitefield and the Wesleys
appeared as light bearers for God. Under the rule of the
established church the people of England had lapsed
into a state of religious declension hardly to be
distinguished from heathenism. Natural religion was
the favorite study of the clergy, and included most of
their theology. The higher classes sneered at piety, and
prided themselves on being above what they called its
fanaticism. The lower classes were grossly ignorant and
abandoned to vice, while the church had no courage or
faith any longer to support the downfallen cause of
truth.” Great Controversy, 253.

“He advises them to be upon their watch. The
cause of their sinful deadness and declension was that
they had let down their watch. Whenever we are off
our watch, we lose ground, and therefore must return to
our watchfulness against sin, and Satan, and whatever is
destructive to the life and power of godliness.” Henry,
6MHC, 1131.
Strengthen Things Which Remain, Ready to Die.—
“There was a time in the history of Pergamos,

66

REVELATION 3
“Perfect as used here means ‘fulfilled,’ or ‘up to
the mark or standard.’ ‘I have found no works of thine
perfected before my God’ is the American Revised
Version, and ‘fully performed’ is the rendering in the
Emphatic Diaglott.
This indicates that the
Reformation was started but not completed. It came
to a standstill, and was not carried to its
consummation.
...Sir Robert Peel, while Prime
Minister of England, in 1840, said: ‘The day is not far
distant, and it may be very near, when we shall have to
fight the battle of the Reformation over again.’ The
Reformation cannot be completed until God’s people
are brought all the way back to the faith once
delivered to the church by Christ and His apostles.”
Bunch, SEOC, 186,187.

when Christianity thought Paganism was dead; but
in reality, the religion which was apparently
vanquished, had conquered.
Paganism baptized,
stepped into the church. In the days of Sardis this
history was repeated. Protestantism thought itself free
from the principles of the Dark Ages; but the plant was
sturdy and long lived, and although Protestantism reared
itself aloft like a mighty oak, the rootlets of the papacy
were planted with the oak, and soon the vine encircled
the tree, and sapped its very life. Protestantism reared
the structure, and the papacy is supported by it. ‘Be
watchful,’ says the divine message to Sardis, ‘and
strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to
die: for I have not found thy works perfect before
God.’ There was, at the time this message came, some
life still in the oak, but unless haste was made to
‘strengthen the things which remain,’ death would
follow.” Haskel, SSP, 75,76.

“Protestantism started well, but it did not continue
to advance in light. John Robinson, pastor of the
English refugee flock in Holland, emphasized this in his
farewell counsel to the Pilgrims as they were setting
forth in the ‘Mayflower’ for New England in 1620. He
charged them that the reformation meant walking in
the ever-increasing light to shine forth from Holy
Scripture. The Reformation was only begun, not
ended. He said:
“‘I charge you, before God and His blessed angels,
that you follow me no farther than you have seen me
follow the Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord has more truth
yet to break forth out of His holy word. I cannot
sufficiently bewail the condition of the reformed
churches, who are come to a period in religion, and
will go at present no farther than the instruments of
their reformation. Luther and Calvin were great and
shining lights in their times, yet they penetrated not into
the whole counsel of God. I beseech you remember it—
‘tis an article of your church covenant—that you be
ready to receive whatever truth shall be made known
to you from the written word of God.’” Burnside,
RWU, 54.

“(Revelation 3:1,2 quoted.) Here the problem is
solved. The persons here described have had light that
would have prompted them to altogether different
works, if they had followed the light and had
strengthened the things that remained that were ready to
die. The light which was glowing in their own hearts
when Jesus spoke to their souls, “Thy sins be forgiven
thee,” they might have kept alive by helping those
who needed help.
“The work to be done is plainly specified: ‘Be
watchful, and strengthen the things which remain,
that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works
perfect before God. Remember therefore how thou
hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent.
If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee
as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will
come upon thee.’ Many have heard and received the
word of life, and have been strongly moved by the truth,
but have allowed their souls to become cold, their faith
dim, through self-righteous-ness, self-importance, and
pride in the possession of a knowledge of truth which
they fail to practice. The truth which is not put in
practice, loses its power. The heart is closed to its divine
influence, and those who should be workers for Christ
are idle, and souls whom they might help are left in
discouragement and darkness and despair.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 352,353.

“(Rev. 3:2 quoted). You need to offer always the
sacred fire; for then Christ’s works, His love, His mercy,
His righteousness, will ascend before God, as a cloud of
holy, fragrant incense, wholly acceptable. But strange
fire has been offered in the use of harsh words, in selfimportance, in self-exaltation, in self-righteousness, in
arbitrary authority, in domineering, in oppression, in
restricting the liberty of God’s people, binding them
about by your plans and rules, which God has not
framed, neither have they come into His mind. All these
things are strange fire, unacknowledged by God, and
are a continual misrepresentation of His character.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 357,358.

“Let our prosperous institutions see to it that
they strengthen the things that remain which are
ready to die. How easily might the large church in
Battle Creek appropriate some of its means for the aid of
the poorer churches, which are nearly crushed under a
load of debt! Why is it that these sister churches are left
from year to year to struggle with poverty and debt?
Selfishness brings spiritual death. What great good our
more able churches might accomplish if they would
aid their sister churches, bringing them to a
condition of prosperity!” 8 Testimonies, 136.

REVELATION 3:3
Remember therefore how thou hast
received and heard, and hold fast, and
repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I

I Have Not Found Thy Works Perfect Before God.—

67

GEMS FROM REVELATION
their condition, showing them how to repent, and trying
to lead them step by step to Jesus Christ.” Manuscript
92, 1901.

will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt
not know what hour I will come upon thee.
Remember How Thou Hast Received and Heard.—
“As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so walk ye in Him.” Colossians 2:6.

“Because Protestants have lost much of what the
pioneers had, they are admonished to remember the past
glorious history and experience, and to return to ‘the
faith once delivered to the saints,’ but forgotten by
their children.” Bunch, SEOC, 189.

Hold Fast, and Repent.—
“ ‘Hold fast.’ This does not mean, Hold fast to
your sins; but, hold fast to the comfort, the faith, the
hope, that God has given you in His Word. Never be
discouraged. A discouraged man can do nothing.
Satan is seeking to discourage you, telling you it is no
use to serve God, that it does not pay, and that it is just
as well to have pleasure and enjoyment in this world.
But ‘what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul?’ You may have
worldly pleasure at the expense of the future world; but
can you afford to pay such a price?
“We are to ‘hold fast’ and live up to all the light
we receive from heaven. Why? Because God wants us
to grasp the eternal truth, and act as His helping
hand by communicating the light to those who are
not acquainted with His love for them. When you
gave yourself to Christ, you made a pledge in the
presence of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit—the
three great personal Dignitaries of heaven. ‘Hold
fast’ to this pledge.
“‘And repent.’ The life we live is to be one of
continual repentance and humility. We need to repent
constantly, that we may be constantly victorious.
When we have true humility, we have victory. The
enemy never can take out of the hand of Christ the one
who is simply trusting in His promises. If the soul is
trusting and working obediently, the mind is susceptible
to divine impressions, and the light of God shines in,
enlightening the understanding. What privileges we
have in Christ Jesus!
“A true sense of repentance before God does not
hold us in bondage, causing us to feel like persons in a
funeral procession.
We are to be cheerful, not
sorrowful. But all the time we are to be sorry that
after Christ had given His precious life for us, we gave
so many years of our life to the powers of darkness. We
are to feel sorrow of heart as we remember that after
Christ had given His all for our redemption, we used in
the service of the enemy some of the time and
capabilities which the Lord entrusted to us as talents to
use to His name’s glory. We are to repent because we
have not endeavored in every way possible to become
acquainted with the precious truth, which enables us to
exercise that faith which works by love and purifies the
soul.
“As we see souls out of Christ, we are to put
ourselves in their place, and in their behalf feel
repentance before God, resting not until we bring
them to repentance. If we do everything we can for
them, and yet they do not repent, the sin lies at their
door; but we are still to feel sorrow of heart because of

If Not Watching, I Will Come On Thee As a Thief.—
“The Sardis church seems to have been brought out
by the Reformation, after the dark period of the work of
‘Jezebel’—the apostate church. The church of Sardis
was told that she had been a live church; but when she
heard and rejected the doctrine of the Lord’s coming,
she placed herself where she was liable to be
overtaken by that event as by a ‘thief in the night.’
So, it is stated by the apostle Paul in 1 Thess. 5:1-5, will
be the condition of those who cry, ‘Peace and safety,’
when the Lord’'s coming is near. Those who follow the
light of truth are called the ‘children of the day,’ and the
Lord will not come on them as a thief. Loughborough,
GSAM, 172.
“‘Remember, therefore, how thou hast received
and heard, and hold fast, and repent.’ The truths
already received were indeed life; but a church, as well
as an individual, must make constant progress, or
they will suffer spiritual death.
“For nine years William Miller was convinced that
he ought to give his message to the churches; but he
waited, hoping that some recognized authority would
proclaim the glad news of a soon-coming Saviour. In
thus waiting, he but proved the truth of the message;
there was a name that they lived, but they were fast
dying. In 1831 Miller gave his first discourse on the
prophecies. He was a member of the Baptist church,
and in 1833, he received from this church, license to
preach. This was the very year in which appeared
another sign in the heavens—the third spoken of by the
Saviour in Matthew 24:29. In November, 1833, ‘the
stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree
casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a
mighty wind.’ God was calling to the dying church of
Sardis by the voice of man and by signs in the heavens.
‘If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee
as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will
come upon thee.’” Haskel, SSP, 77.
“But as the spirit of humility and devotion in the
church had given place to pride and formalism, love for
Christ and faith in his coming had grown cold.
Absorbed in worldliness and pleasure-seeking, the
professed people of God were blinded to the
Saviour’s instructions concerning the signs of His
appearing. The doctrine of the second advent had been
neglected; the scriptures relating to it were obscured by
misinterpretation until it was, to a great extent, ignored
and forgotten. The condition of the church at this time is

68

REVELATION 3
pointed out in the Saviour’s words in the Revelation,
‘Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead:’
and to those who refuse to arouse from their careless
security, the solemn warning is addressed, ‘If therefore
thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief,
and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon
thee.’” Great Controversy, 309,310.

56:12. We will go deeper into pleasure loving. But
Christ says, ‘Behold, I come as a thief.’ Rev. 16:15. At
the very time when the world is asking in scorn, ‘Where
is the promise of His coming?’ the signs are fulfilling.
While they cry, ‘Peace and safety,’ sudden destruction
is coming. When the scorner, the rejecter of truth, has
become presumptuous; when the routine of work in the
various money-making lines is carried on without regard
to principle; when the student is eagerly seeking
knowledge of everything but his Bible, Christ comes as
a thief.” Desire of Ages, 635.

“Jesus has left us word: ‘Watch ye therefore: for
ye know not when the Master of the house cometh, at
even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the
morning: lest coming suddenly He find you sleeping.
And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.’ We
are waiting and watching for the return of the Master,
who is to bring the Morning, lest coming suddenly he
find us sleeping. What time is here referred to? Not
to the revelation of Christ in the clouds of heaven to find
a people asleep. No; but to His return from His
ministration in the most holy place of the heavenly
sanctuary, when he lays off His priestly attire and
clothes Himself with garments of vengeance, and
when the mandate goes forth: ‘He that is unjust, let
him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy
still.’” 2 Testimonies, 190,191.

“Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness,
and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them
that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch ye
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass,
and to stand before the Son of man.” Luke 21:34-36.
Thou Shalt Not Know What Hour I Will Come.—
“But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that
day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the
children of light, and the children of the day; we are not
of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep,
as do others; but let us watch and be sober. For they that
sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken
in the night.” 1 Thess. 5:4-7.

“Solemn are the scenes connected with the closing
work of the atonement. Momentous are the interests
involved therein. The judgment is now passing in the
sanctuary above. For many years this work has been in
progress. Soon—none know how soon—it will pass to
the cases of the living. In the awful presence of God
our lives are to come up in review. At this time above
all others it behooves every soul to heed the Saviour’s
admonition: ‘Watch and pray: for ye know not when
the time is.’ Mark 13:33. ‘If therefore thou shalt not
watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt
not know what hour I will come upon thee.’ Rev. 3:3.
When the work of the investigative judgment closes, the
destiny of all will have been decided for life or death.”
Great Controversy, 490.

REVELATION 3:4
Thou hast a few names even in Sardis
which have not defiled their garments; and
they shall walk with me in white: for they
are worthy.
Thou Hast a Few Names Even in Sardis.—
“‘A few names even in Sardis,’ would seem to
imply a period of unparalleled worldliness in the
church. But even in this state of things, there are some
whose garments are not defiled, some who have kept
themselves
free
from
this
contaminating
influence. James 1:27 says, ‘Pure religion and undefiled
before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless
and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world.’” Smith, DR, 393.

“(Rev. 3: 3 quoted). The advent of Christ will
surprise the false teachers. They are saying, ‘Peace and
safety.’ Like the priests and teachers before the fall of
Jerusalem, they look for the church to enjoy earthly
prosperity and glory. The signs of the times they
interpret as foreshadowing this. But what saith the word
of Inspiration? ‘Sudden destruction cometh upon
them.’ 1 Thess. 5:3. Upon all who dwell on the face
of the whole earth, upon all who make this world
their home, the day of God will come as a snare. It
comes to them as a prowling thief.
“The world, full of rioting, full of godless pleasure,
is asleep, asleep in carnal security. Men are putting afar
off the coming of the Lord. They laugh at warnings.
The proud boast is made, ‘All things continue as they
were from the beginning.’ ‘Tomorrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant.’ 2 Peter 3:4; Is.

“At this time Bible Societies were established to
spread the Bible all around the world. Also, there began
to be a great missionary movement. William Carey and
others carried the light of God’s Word to distant parts of
the world.” PJ
“As the time, which was supposed to be the time of
the second advent approached, men of learning and
position helped spread the message. The light of this

69

GEMS FROM REVELATION
message flashed throughout the world. ‘Thou hast a few
names even in Sardis which have not defiled their
garments.’ Three years after Miller was convinced of
the near coming of Christ, that is, in 1821, Joseph
Wolff, known as the ‘missionary to Asia,’ began to give
the same message. He visited Egypt, Abyssinia,
Palestine, Syria, Persia, Bokhara, and India—
everywhere proclaiming the soon coming of the
Messiah. In 1837 …he visited Washington, where, in
the presence of all the members of the Congress of the
United States, he preached on the personal reign of
Christ.
“…Gaussen, gave the message of the soon coming
of Christ to the children of Geneva. In Scandinavia, the
truth was proclaimed by children; for God used childpreachers, when older persons were restricted by law.
“In 1838 Josiah Litch and William Miller
published an exposition of the ninth chapter of
Revelation, in which it was predicted that the Ottoman
Empire would fall in 1840. The exact fulfillment of this
prophecy on August 11, 1840, when the Turkish
government surrendered its independence, …was a
startling proof to many that prophecy could be understood, and that men were living in the end of time.”
Haskel, SSP, 77-79.

meek and lowly of heart, keeping the way of the
Lord, heaven will rejoice, for he will gain the victory.
God says, ‘He shall walk with me in white (with
unsullied garments), for he is worthy.’” Spalding &
Magan, 206.
They Shall Walk With Me in White.—
“The fifth state or the Sardis Church looks just
like the nominal church in 1844, when the [first and
second] third angel in Rev. 14. were giving their
messages: ‘The hour of his judgment is come,’ ‘Babylon
has fallen,’ ‘Come out of her, my people.’ connected
with the overpowering, soul-stirring Cry at Midnight,
‘Behold the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him.’
Here the Sardis Church was shaken to its centre; and
all those who really believed these messages began to
move out. It is true some were drove out; but no matter,
the work was done. Those whose fear of God rather
than man prevailed, cleared themselves from the
different orders and sects, and with all their various
views, they here merged and united together as in
apostolic times. Creeds and formulas passed away like
smoke from the chimney. They gloried in this heavenly
union, while rallying under these flying messages. And
every feature denoted the true state of the Philadelphia
Church, which signifies brotherly love of the fraternity.
They read the promises of Jesus, ‘that there were a
few names in Sardis which had not defiled their
garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for
they are worthy.’ We thought then there was more than
a few, but we are pretty well convinced now that Jesus
was right.” Bates, Waymarks, 76.

“But there are ‘a few names even in Sardis which
have not defiled their garments,’ etc.. To this church
the message of the coming of the Lord is given, and the
cry, Come out of her My people. A few hear, believe
and obey. These came out of all the several
denominations, and united upon the glorious theme
of Jesus’ coming, leaving their denominational tenets
behind, and formed the sixth church.” White, James,
The Seven Churches, R&H, 10/16,1856.

“What is justification by faith? It is the work of
God in laying the glory of man in the dust, and doing for
man that which it is not in his power to do for himself.
When men see their own nothingness, they are
prepared to be clothed with the righteousness of Christ.”
Review & Herald, 9/16/1902.

Not Defiled Their Garments.—
“There will be a remnant in decadent Protestantism
who will repent and carry the Reformation to
completion. They will be watching and waiting when
Jesus returns. Their character garments will not be
defiled by sin. While Christendom as a whole will be
unready for the crisis, a remnant will be prepared and
saved. (Joel 2:32; Rev. 12:17.)” Bunch, SEOC, 190.

“Let the children be taught that as they open their
minds to pure, loving thoughts and do loving and
helpful deeds, they are clothing themselves with His
beautiful garment of character. This apparel will
make them beautiful and beloved here and will hereafter
be their title of admission to the palace of the King. His
promise is: ‘They shall walk with Me in white: for
they are worthy.’” Education, 249.

“(Rev. 3:4,5 quoted). These words are given for
the people while they are in connection with the world,
subject to temptations and influences which are
deceiving and deluding. While they stay their mind
upon Him who is their sun and their shield, the
blackness and darkness that surround them will not
leave one spot or stain upon their garments. They
will walk with Christ. They will pray and believe
and work to save the souls that are ready to perish.
These are trying to break the bands that Satan has
fastened upon them, and they will not be put to shame if,
by faith they will make Christ their companion.
Temptations and deceptions will be constantly brought
up by the great deceiver to spoil the work of the human
agent, but if he trusts in God, if he is humble and

“Christ will clothe His faithful ones with His own
righteousness, that He may present them to His Father ‘a
glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing.’ Eph. 5:27. Their names stand enrolled in
the book of life, and concerning them it is written:
‘They shall walk with Me in white: for they are
worthy.’ Rev. 3:4.” Great Controversy, 484.
For They Are Worthy.—
“Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may
be accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.”

70

REVELATION 3
Luke 21:36.
“He that loveth father or mother more than me is
not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter
more than me is not worthy of me. And he that taketh
not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of
me.” Matthew 10:37,38.

other scriptures to be a symbol of exchanging iniquity
for righteousness. (See Zechariah 3:4,5.) ‘Take away
the filthy garments from him,’ is explained by the
language that follows, ‘Behold, I have caused thine
iniquity to pass from thee.’ ‘The fine linen,’ or the
white raiment, ‘is the righteous-ness of saints.’
Revelation 19:8.” Smith, DR, 384.

REVELATION 3:5
He that overcometh, the same shall be
clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot
out his name out of the book of life, but I
will confess his name before My Father, and
before His angels.

“Then, mothers, teach your children, line upon line,
and precept upon precept, that the righteousness of
Christ is the only dress in which they can be admitted
into heaven and that robed in this apparel they will be
constantly doing duties in this life which will glorify
God.” Child Guidance, 418.
“Whatever may have been your past experience,
however discouraging your present circumstances, if
you will come to Jesus just as you are, weak, helpless,
and despairing, our compassionate Saviour will meet
you a great way off, and will throw about you His arms
of love and His robe of righteousness. He presents us
to the Father clothed in the white raiment of His own
character. He pleads before God in our behalf, saying:
I have taken the sinner’s place. Look not upon this
wayward child, but look on Me.” Mount of Blessing, 9.

He That Overcometh.—
“Self is difficult to conquer. Human depravity in
every form is not easily brought into subjection to the
Spirit of Christ. But all should be impressed with the
fact that unless this victory is gained through Christ,
there is no hope for them. The victory can be gained;
for nothing is impossible with God. By His assisting
grace, all evil temper, all human depravity may be
overcome.” 4 Testimonies, 349.

“According to vs. 4 the white raiment appears to
represent moral purity. …It may also represent the
literal clothing of the saints in the kingdom. This is
described as a garment of light [Ps. 104:2] and is a
part of the spiritual body which the saints shall possess
in eternity. [1 Cor. 15:42-44. Phil. 3:20,21.]” Cooke,
#4-UR, 19.

“Let no one say, ‘I cannot overcome my defects of
character;’ for if this is your decision, then you cannot
have eternal life. The impossibility is all in your will. If
you will not, that constitutes the can-not. The real
difficulty is the corruption of an un-sanctified heart, and
an unwillingness to submit to the will of God. When
there is a determined purpose born in your heart to
overcome, you will have a disposition to overcome,
and will cultivate those traits of character that are
desirable, and will engage in the conflict with steady,
persevering effort. You will exercise a ceaseless
watchfulness over your defects of character; and will
cultivate right practices in little things. The difficulty of
overcoming will be lessened in proportion as the heart is
sanctified by the grace of Christ. Earnest, persevering
effort will place you on the vantage-ground of victory;
for he who strives to overcome in and through the
grace of Christ, will have divine enlightenment, and
will understand how great truths can be brought into
little things, and religion can be carried into the little
as well as into the large concerns of life.” Youth
Instructor, 9/7/1893.

I Will Not Blot Out His Name Out of Book of Life.—
“It is only by being overcomers to the end that our
names can be retained in that book (of Life). But all will
not gain the victory. Their names, of course, will be
blotted out. Reference is here made to some definite
point of time in the future for this work. ‘I will not,’
says Christ, blot out the names of the overcomers, which
is also saying, by implication, that at the same time He
will blot out the names of those who do not overcome.
Is not this the same time mentioned by Peter? ‘Repent
ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord.’ Acts 3:19.
“To say to the overcomer that his name shall not be
blotted out of the book of life, is to say also that his sins
shall be blotted out of the book wherein they are
recorded, to be remembered against him no more
forever. (Hebrews 8:12). It means that either his name
or his sins will be blotted out from the heavenly
records. What a precious thought it is that now we are
forgiven if we confess our transgressions! Then if we
remain faithful to God these sins will be blotted out at
the coming of Jesus.
“When that hour of decision shall come, which
cannot now be a great way in the future, how, reader,
will it be with you? Will your sins be blotted out, and

“We are to exert every energy of the soul in the
work of overcoming, and to look to Jesus for strength
to do what we cannot do of ourselves. No sin can be
tolerated in those who shall walk with Christ in white.
The filthy garments are to be removed, and Christ’s robe
of righteousness is to be placed upon us.”
5
Testimonies, 472.
White Raiment.—
“Being clothed with white raiment is explained in

71

GEMS FROM REVELATION
him will I also deny before my Father which is in
heaven.” Matt. 10:32,33.

your name be retained in the book of life? Or will
your name be blotted out of the book of life, and your
sins be left to bear their fearful record against you?”
Smith, DR, 385.

“Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and
of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of
him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.”
Mark 8:38.

“Very little self-denial and sacrifice is necessary in
order to put on a form of godliness and have the name
upon the church book; but to live in such a manner
that our ways will be pleasing to God, and our names
registered in the book of life, will require
watchfulness and prayer, self-denial and sacrifice on
our part.” 1 Testimonies, 405.

“ ‘He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed
in white raiment; and I will not’—Oh, how precious is
that ‘not’!—‘I will not blot his name out of the book
of life, but I will confess his name before My Father,
and before His angels.’ When the gates of the city of
God swing back on their glittering hinges, and the
nations who have kept the truth shall enter in, Christ will
be there to welcome us, to call us the blessed of the
Father, because we have overcome. He will welcome us
before the Father, and before His angels. As we enter
the kingdom of God, there to spend eternity, the trials
and the difficulties and the perplexities that we have
had here will sink into insignificance. Our life will
measure with the life of God.” Gen. Conf. Bulletin,
4/6/1903.

“And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called
holy, even every one that is written among the living
in Jerusalem.” Isaiah 4:3.
“Mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see
vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the
assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in
the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they
enter into the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am
the Lord God.” Ezekiel 13:9.
“Concerning the name of the non-overcomer
whose name had been originally registered in the book
of life, his name will be blotted out from that register.
“ ‘Let them be blotted out of the book of the
living [of life] and not be written with the righteous.’
Ps. 69:28.
“ ‘Whosoever hath sinned [and not repented and
forsaken] against me, him will I blot out of my book.’
Ex. 32:32.
“ ‘Let their name be blotted out.’ Ps. 109:13.
“ ‘Let me alone, that I may destroy them and
blot out their name from under heaven.’ Dt. 9:14.
“ ‘The Lord shall blot out his name [who turns
from Christ to other gods] from under heaven.’ Dt.
29:30.” Cooke, #4-UR, 22,23.

REVELATION 3:6:
He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the churches.
He That Hath an Ear.—
“All will hear His voice who are willing to be
corrected; but those who have been deceived by the
enemy are not willing to come to the light, lest their
deeds shall be reproved.” 5 Testimonies, 74.
“Those who are ever pressing a little closer to the
world, and becoming more like them in feelings, in
plans, in ideas, have left a space between them and the
Saviour, and Satan has pressed his way into this space,
and low, worldly-tainted, selfish plans become
interwoven with their experience. God’s voice is
addressing this class, which are not few: ‘He that
hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches.’ It is of consequence that you hear
attentively and obey. Come into close relationship with
Christ. Keep your souls in constant contact with the
world, and its customs will become your customs, its
practices will become your practices, if you place
yourselves where you will see and hear and feel and act
as they do.” Review & Herald, 6/7/1887.

I Will Confess His Name Before My Father, and
Before His Angels.—
“Christ taught that as men confessed or denied,
despised or honored Him here, they would be
confessed or denied by Him before His Father in
heaven and before the holy angels. (Matthew
10:32,33; Mark 8:38; Luke 12:8,9.) Who can fathom the
honor of being approved before the heavenly hosts!
Who can conceive of the bliss of that moment when we
shall be owned by the Lord of life before His Father as
those who have done His will, fought the good fight, run
the race, honored Him before men, overcome, and
whose names are worthy through His merits to stand
upon the imperishable record of the book of life forever
and ever!” Smith, DR, 385,386.

“Christ calls upon us to hear His words, that we
may know Him. ‘He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.’ We are not to hear as did those of whom the
apostles said, ‘The Word preached did not profit
them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard
it.’ Those who hear savingly are those who hear in
faith, and who give earnest heed to the things which

“Whosoever therefore shall confess me before
men, him will I confess also before my Father which
is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men,

72

REVELATION 3
they have heard, lest at any time they should let them
slip.” Signs, 1/27/1898.

of the nineteenth century which resulted from a study of
the prophecies, culminated in this advent movement.
Men from all denominations were convinced that the
coming of Christ was near. As they came out of the
various churches, they left sectarian names and
feelings behind, and every heart beat in unison as all
joined to give the alarm to the churches and to the
world, and pointed to the coming of the Son of man
as the believer’s true hope.
Selfishness and
covetousness were laid aside, and a spirit of consecration
and sacrifice was cherished. The Spirit of God was with
every true believer, and His praise upon every tongue.
Those who were not in that movement cannot fully
realize how great was the searching of heart, the
consecration to God, the peace and joy in the Holy
Spirit, and the pure, fervent love for one another
which true believers enjoyed.” Smith, DR, 386,387.

“Christ is ever sending messages to those who
listen for His voice. Thus today the very men who most
need divine instruction often fail of receiving it, because
they do not place themselves in communion with
heaven.” Ministry of Healing, 509.

THE SIXTH CHURCH:
PHILADELPHIA
REVELATION 3:7-13
7 And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write; These
things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of
David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no
man openeth;
8 I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door,
and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast
kept my word, and hast not denied my name.
9 Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say
they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to
come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved
thee.
10 Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will
keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all
the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.
11 Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that
no man take thy crown.
12 Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my
God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the
name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new
Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I
will write upon him my new name.
13 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches.

“It has been supposed that the Philadelphia church
reached to the end. This we must regard as a mistake, as
the seven churches in Asia represent seven distinct
periods of the true church, and the Philadelphia is the
sixth, and not the last state. The true church cannot be in
two conditions at the same time, hence we are shut up to
the faith that the Laodicean church represents the church
of God at the present time.
“The conditional promises to the Philadelphia
church are yet to be fulfilled to that portion of that
church who comply with the conditions, pass down
through the Laodicean state, and overcome.” White,
James, The Seven Churches, R&H, 10/16/1856.
“The message to the Philadelphian period reaches
to the end of time, and all who receive the crown will
have passed through its experiences. …The messages
to Sardis and to Philadelphia, separately cover a period
extending to the second coming of Christ; but in
addition to the experiences portrayed in the fifth and
sixth messages, that which is directed to Laodicea is also
applicable.” Haskel, SSP, 86,87.

REVELATION 3:7
And to the angel of the church in
Philadelphia write: These things saith He
that is holy, He that is true, He that hath the
key of David, He that openeth, and no man
shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth:

He That is True.—
“When God gave Jesus to our world, He gave all
heaven. This gift has secured for us our adoption into
God’s family. The Father’s promise is Yea and Amen in
Christ Jesus. Never will He falsify. Never will He
alter the thing that has gone out of His mouth. The
clouds of uncertainty and unbelief rolled back as the
Saviour cried out upon the cross, ‘It is finished.’ No
longer had the enemy power to tempt or annoy Him.
Holiness and justice united in the completion of the great
work of redemption. On the cross mercy and truth met
together, and righteousness and peace kissed each other.
Jesus had testified that God is true. Faith demands no
more. The doubting soul need not ask, Has God
forgotten to be gracious? Has He in anger shut up His
tender mercies? The answer comes clear and strong,
‘God so loved the world, that He gave His only
begotten Son that whosoever believeth in Him should
not perish, but have everlasting life.’ God’s word is

The Church in Philadelphia.—
“In this prophetic description of the seven
churches, we see the fall of the Sardis church is
immediately followed by the Philadelphia, or (as the
word signifies) brotherly love, church. Such, indeed,
were the 50,000 believers who, by the second angel’s
message, were brought out from all the varied
churches, and united in one bond of brotherly love on
the great cardinal truth of the immediate advent of
Christ.” Loughborough, GSAM, 172.
“The word ‘Philadelphia’ signifies ‘brotherly
love,’ and expresses the position and spirit of those
who received the Advent message up to the autumn
of 1844. The great religious awakening in the early part

73

GEMS FROM REVELATION
immutable.” Bible Echo, 7/23/1900.

may come freely with our petitions, and that he will
hear and answer. It is by a living faith in his power to
help, that we shall receive strength to fight the battles of
the Lord with the confident assurance of victory.”
Review & Herald, 7/9/1908.

He That Hath The Key of David.—
“A key is a symbol of power. The Son of God is
the rightful heir to David’s throne; and He is about to
take to Himself His great power and to reign; hence He
is represented as having the key of David. The throne
of David, or of Christ, on which He is to reign, is
included in the capital of His kingdom, the New
Jerusalem, now above, but which is to be located on
this earth, where He is to reign forever and ever.
(Revelation 21:1-5; Luke 1:32,33.)” Smith, DR, 387.

REVELATION 3:8
I know thy works: behold, I have set
before thee an open door, and no man can
shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and
hast kept My word, and hast not denied My
name.

“And the key of the house of David will I lay
upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall
shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open.” Isaiah
22:22.
“For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given:
and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and
his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The
mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of
Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace
there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and
upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with
judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will perform this.”
Isaiah 9:6,7.
“With the key Jesus opens the door through which
he will enter upon a work of judgment to receive and
establish His government or kingdom. Jesus entered the
Most Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary to begin this
work of judgment in 1844. See Dan. 7:13,14.” Stephen
Bohr, Sermon.

I Know Thy Works.—
“Of all the great religious movements since the
days of the apostles, none have been more free from
human imperfection and the wiles of Satan than was
that of the autumn of 1844. Even now, after the lapse
of many years, all who shared in that movement and
who have stood firm upon the platform of truth, still felt
the holy influence of that blessed work, and bear witness
that it was of God.” Great Controversy, 401.
Door.—

“I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he
shall be saved…” John 10:9.
I Have Set Before Thee an Open Door [to the Most
Holy Place].—
“To understand this language, it is necessary to
look at Christ’s position and work as connected with
His ministry in the sanctuary, or true tabernacle
above. (Heb. 8:2.) A figure, or pattern, of this heavenly
sanctuary once existed here upon earth in the sanctuary
built by Moses. (Exodus 25:8, 9; Acts 7:44; Hebrews
9:1,21, 23,24.)
The earthly building had two
apartments—the holy place and the most holy place.
(Exodus 26:33,34.) …In like manner the sanctuary in
which Christ ministers in heaven has two
apartments, for it is clearly stated in Hebrews 9:21-24
that ‘both the tabernacle and all the vessels of the
ministry’ were ‘patterns of things in the heavens.’ As
all things were made after their pattern, the heavenly
sanctuary has also furniture similar to that of the earthly.
For the antitype of the golden candlestick and altar of
incense, in the first apartment, see Revelation 4:5; 8:3;
and for the antitype of the ark of the covenant, with its
ten commandments, see Revelation 11:19. In the earthly
sanctuary the priests ministered. (Exodus 28:41,43;
Hebrews 9:6,7; 13:11.) The ministry of these priests
was a shadow of the ministry of Christ in the sanctuary
in heaven. (Hebrews 8: 4, 5.)
“A complete round of service was performed in the
earthly tabernacle once every year. (Hebrews 9: 7.) But
in the tabernacle above the service is performed once for
all. (Hebrews 7: 27; 9: 12.) At the close of the yearly

He That Openeth, and No Man Shutteth.—
“Jesus has risen up and shut the door of the holy
place of the heavenly sanctuary and has opened a door
into the most holy place and entered in to cleanse the
sanctuary.” Early Writings, 250.
“The enemies of the present truth have been
trying to open the door of the holy place, that Jesus
has shut, and to close the door of the most holy place,
which He opened in 1844, where the ark is, containing
the two tables of stone on which are written the ten
commandments by the finger of Jehovah.” Early
Writings, 43.
“A battle is continually going on between the
forces for good and the forces for evil, between the
angels of God and the fallen angels. We are beset before
and behind, on the right hand and on the left. The
conflict that we are passing through is the last we shall
have in this world. We are now in the midst of it. Two
parties are striving for the supremacy. In this conflict
we can not be neutral….
“The True Witness declares: ‘Behold, I have set
before thee an open door.’ Let us thank God with
heart and soul and voice; and let us learn to approach
unto him as through an open door, believing that we

74

REVELATION 3
typical service, the high priest entered the second
apartment, the most holy place of the sanctuary, to
make an atonement; and this work is appropriately
called the cleansing of the sanctuary. (Leviticus 16:
20, 30, 33; Ezekiel 45:18.) When the ministry in the
most holy place began, that in the holy place ceased; and
no service was performed there so long as the priest was
engaged in the most holy place. (Leviticus 16:17)
“A similar opening and shutting, or change of
ministration, must be accomplished by Christ when the
time comes for the cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary.
The time did come for this service to begin at the close
of the 2300 days, in 1844. To this event the opening and
shutting mentioned in the text under consideration can
appropriately apply, the opening being that of Christ’s
in the most holy place, and the shutting, its cessation
in the first apartment, or holy place.” Smith, DR, 386388.

are not benefited thereby.”
428,429,430.

“In the service of the earthly sanctuary, which ...is
a figure of the service in the heavenly, when the high
priest on the Day of Atonement entered the most holy
place, the ministration in the first apartment ceased.
God commanded: ‘There shall be no man in the
tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to
make an atonement in the holy place, until he comes
out.’ Lev. 16:17. So when Christ entered the holy of
holies to perform the closing work of the atonement, He
ceased His ministration in the first apartment. But
when the ministration in the first apartment ended,
the ministration in the second apartment began.
When in the typical service the high priest left the holy
on the Day of Atonement, he went in before God to
present the blood of the sin offering in behalf of all
Israel who truly repented of their sins. So Christ had
only completed one part of His work as our intercessor,
to enter upon another portion of the work, and He still
pleaded His blood before the Father in behalf of
sinners....
“While it was true that that door of hope and mercy
by which men had for eighteen hundred years found
access to God, was closed, another door was opened,
and forgiveness of sins was offered to men through
the intercession of Christ in the most holy. One part
of His ministration had closed, only to give place to
another. There was still an ‘open door’ to the heavenly
sanctuary, where Christ was ministering in the sinner’s
behalf.
“Now was seen the application of those words of
Christ in the Revelation, addressed to the church at this
very time: ‘These things saith He that is holy, he that
is true, He that hath the key of David, He that
openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no
man openeth; I know thy works: behold, I have set
before thee an open door, and no man can shut it.’
Revelation 3:7,8.
“It is those who by faith follow Jesus in the great
work of the atonement who receive the been-fits of
His mediation in their behalf, while those who reject
the light which brings to view this work of ministration

“No one should claim that he has all the light there
is for God’s people. The Lord will not tolerate this. He
has said, ‘I have set before thee an open door, and no
man can shut it.’ Even if all our leading men should
refuse light and truth, that door will still remain
open. The Lord will raise up men who will give the
people the message for this time.” Testimonies to
Ministers, 107.

Great Controversy,

The Door is Open.—
“(Rev. 3:8,9 quoted). Whenever tempted, we
have this open door to behold. No power can hide
from us the light of the glory which shines from the
threshold of heaven along the whole length of the
ladder we are to climb; for the Lord has given us
strength in His strength, courage in His courage, light in
His light. When the powers of darkness are overcome,
when the light of the glory of God floods the world, we
shall see and understand more clearly than we do today.
If we only realized that the glory of God is round
about us, that heaven is nearer earth than we
suppose, we should have a heaven in our homes while
preparing for the heaven above.”
Manuscript
92,1901.

“I was shown that the commandments of God and
the testimony of Jesus Christ relating to the shut door
could not be separated, and that the time for the
commandments of God to shine out with all their
importance, and for God’s people to be tried on the
Sabbath truth, was when the door was opened in the
most holy place. This door was not opened until the
mediation of Jesus was finished in the holy place …in
1844.” Early Writings, 42.
“The temple of God was opened in heaven, and
there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament.”
Rev. 11:19.
No Man Can Shut It.—
“Many and earnest were the efforts made to
overthrow their [Sabbathkeepers’] faith. None could fail
to see that if the earthly sanctuary was a figure or pattern
of the heavenly, the law deposited in the ark on earth
was an exact transcript of the law in the ark in heaven;
and that an acceptance of the truth concerning the
heavenly sanctuary involved an acknowledgment of the
claims of God’s law and the obligation of the Sabbath of
the fourth commandment. Here was the secret of the
bitter and determined opposition to the harmonious
exposition of the Scriptures that revealed the
ministration of Christ in the heavenly sanctuary. Men
sought to close the door which God had opened, and
to open the door which He had closed. But ‘He that
openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no
man openeth,’ had declared: ‘Behold, I have set
before thee an open door, and no man can shut it.’

75

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Revelation 3:7,8. Christ had opened the door, or
ministration, of the most holy place, light was shining
from that open door of the sanctuary in heaven, and the
fourth commandment was shown to be included in the
law which is there enshrined; what God had established,
no man could overthrow.” Great Controversy, 435.

while ‘they that were foolish took their lamps, and
took no oil with them,’ ‘the wise took oil in their
vessels with their lamps.’ The latter class had
received the grace of God, the regenerating,
enlightening power of the Holy Spirit, which renders
His word a lamp to the feet and a light to the path. In
the fear of God they had studied the Scriptures to learn
the truth, and had earnestly sought for purity of heart and
life. These had a personal experience, a faith in God
and in His word, which could not be overthrown by
disappointment and delay.” Great Controversy, 394.

“How hard men work to close that door; but
they are not able. John’s testimony is, ‘And the
temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was
seen in His temple the ark of His testament’ (Rev.
11:19). Beneath the mercy seat, within the ark, were the
two tables of stone, containing the law of Jehovah.
God’s faithful ones saw the light that shone forth to
them from the law, to be given to the world. And now
Satan’s intense activity is to close that door of light;
but Jesus says that no man can shut it. Men will turn
from the light, denounce it, and despise it, but it still
shines forth in clear, distinct rays to cheer and bless all
who will see it.” Faith & Works,46.

“I have manifested thy name unto the men, which
thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and
thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word.”
John 17:6.
“The good-ground hearers, having heard the word,
keep it. Satan with all his agencies of evil is not able to
catch it away. Merely to hear or to read the word is not
enough. He who desires to be profited by the Scriptures
must meditate upon the truth that has been
presented to him. By earnest attention and prayerful
thought he must learn the meaning of the words of
truth, and drink deep of the spirit of the holy
oracles.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 60.

“When the work of investigation shall be ended,
when the cases of those who in all ages have professed
to be followers of Christ have been examined and
decided, then, and not till then, probation will close,
and the door of mercy will be shut.”
Great
Controversy, 428.

“(Rev. 3:8 quoted.) Enoch walked with the unseen
God. In the busiest places of the earth, his Companion
was with him. Let all who are keeping the truth in
simplicity and love, bear this in mind. The men who
have the most to do have the greatest need of keeping
God ever before them.
When Satan presses his
suggestions upon their mind, they may, if they cherish a
‘Thus saith the Lord,’ be drawn into the secret
pavilion of the Most High. His promises will be their
safeguard. Amid all the confusion and rush of business,
they will find a quiet resting place. If they will place
their trust in God, He will be their resting place.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 13, 7.

“There was a shut door in Noah’s day. …There
was a shut door in the days of Abraham. …There was a
shut door in Christ’s day. …I was shown in vision, and
I still believe, that there was a shut door in 1844. All
who saw the light of the first and second angels’
messages and rejected that light, were left in
darkness. And those who accepted it and received the
Holy Spirit which attended the proclamation of the
message from heaven, and who afterward renounced
their faith and pronounced their experience a delusion,
thereby rejected the Spirit of God, and He no longer
pleaded with them.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 63.
Thou Hast a Little Strength.—
“A little that a righteous man hath is better than
the riches of many wicked.” Ps. 37:16.

Hast Not Denied My Name.—
“A spirit contrary to the spirit of Christ would deny
Him, whatever the profession. Men may deny Christ
by evil speaking, by foolish talking, by words that are
untruthful or unkind. They may deny Him by
shunning life’s burdens, by the pursuit of sinful
pleasure. They may deny Him by conforming to the
world, by uncourteous behaviour, by the love of their
own opinions, by justifying self, by cherishing doubt,
borrowing trouble, and dwelling in darkness. In all
these ways they declare that Christ is not in them. And
‘whosoever shall deny Me before men,’ He says, ‘him
will I also deny before My Father which is in
heaven.’” Desire of Ages, 357.

“If there are but one or two in a place, they can,
although few in number, so conduct themselves before
the world as to have an influence which will impress the
unbeliever with the sincerity of their faith.” 2
Testimonies, 633.
Hast Kept My Word.—
“The coming of Christ, as announced by the first
angel’s message, was understood to be represented by
the coming of the bridegroom. The wide-spread
reformation under the proclamation of His soon coming,
answered to the going forth of the virgins. In this
parable, as in that of Matthew 24, two classes are
represented. All had taken their lamps, the Bible, and by
its light had gone forth to meet the Bridegroom. But

REVELATION 3:9
Behold, I will make them of the
76

REVELATION 3
Jewish teachers. Today, as then, there are false
spiritual guides, to whose doctrines many listen eagerly.
It is Satan’s studied effort to divert minds from the hope
of salvation through faith in Christ and obedience to the
law of God. In every age the arch-enemy adapts his
temptations to the prejudices or inclinations of those
whom he is seeking to deceive. In apostolic times he
led the Jews to exalt the ceremonial law and reject
Christ; at the present time he induces many
professing Christians, under pretense of honoring
Christ, to cast contempt on the moral law and to
teach that its precepts may be transgressed with
impunity. It is the duty of every servant of God to
withstand firmly and decidedly these perverters of the
faith and by the word of truth fearlessly to expose their
errors.” Acts of the Apostles, 387.

synagogue of Satan, which say they are
Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will
make them to come and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee.
Synagogue of Satan.—
“Assemblies that worship God in spirit and in truth
are the Israel of God; assemblies that either worship
false gods, or the true God in a false manner, are the
synagogues of Satan: though they may profess to be
the only people of God, their profession is a lie.” Henry,
6MHC, 1133.
“The doctrine of consciousness after death, of the
spirits of the dead being in communion with the living,
has no foundation in the Scriptures, and yet these
theories are affirmed as truth. Through this false
doctrine the way has been opened for the spirits of devils
to deceive the people in representing them-selves as the
dead. Satanic agencies personate the dead and thus
bring souls into captivity. Satan has a religion, he has
a synagogue and devout worshipers. To swell the
ranks of his devotees, he used all manner of
deception.” Undated Manuscript 66.

“As the storm approaches, a large class who
have professed faith in the third angel’s message, but
have not been sanctified through obedience to the
truth, abandon their position, and join the ranks of
opposition. By uniting with the world and partaking of
its spirit, they have come to view matters in nearly the
same light; and when the test is brought, they are
prepared to choose the easy, popular side. Men of talent
and pleasing address, who once rejoiced in the truth,
employ their powers to deceive and mislead souls. They
become the most bitter enemies of their former
brethren. When Sabbath-keepers are brought before
the courts to answer for their faith, these apostates are
the most efficient agents of Satan to misrepresent and
accuse them, and by false reports and insinuations to stir
up the rulers against them.” Great Controversy, 608.

“I saw that since the second angel pro-claimed
the fall of the churches, they have been growing more
and more corrupt. They bear the name of being
Christ’s followers; yet it is impossible to distinguish
them from the world. Ministers take their texts from
the Word of God, but preach smooth things. To this the
natural heart feels no objection. It is only the spirit and
power of the truth and the salvation of Christ that are
hateful to the carnal heart. There is nothing in the
popular ministry that stirs the wrath of Satan, makes the
sinner tremble, or applies to the heart and conscience the
fearful realities of a judgment soon to come. Wicked
men are generally pleased with a form of piety
without true godliness, and they will aid and support
such a religion.
“Said the angel, ‘Nothing less than the whole
armor of righteousness can enable man to overcome the
powers of darkness and retain the victory over them.
Satan has taken full possession of the churches as a
body. The sayings and doings of men are dwelt upon
instead of the plain, cutting truths of the Word of
God. The spirit and friendship of the world are at
enmity with God. When the truth in its simplicity and
strength, as it is in Jesus, is brought to bear against the
spirit of the world, it at once awakens the spirit of
persecution. Very many who profess to be Christians
have not known God. They are Satan’s faithful
servants, notwithstanding they have assumed another
name.’” Early Writings, 273,274.

I Will Make Them to… Worship Before Thy Feet.—
“The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall
come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee
shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet;
and they shall call thee, The city of the Lord, The Zion
of the Holy One of Israel.” Isaiah 60:14.
“You think that those who worship before the
saint’s feet, will at last be saved. Here I must differ
with you; for God showed me that this class were
professed Adventists, who had fallen away, and
‘crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, and
put him to an open shame.’ And in the ‘hour of
temptation’, which is yet to come, to show out every
one’s true character, they will know that they are
forever lost; and overwhelmed with anguish of spirit,
they will bow at the saint’s feet.” A Word to the Little
Flock, 12.
“The 144,000 were all sealed and perfectly united.
On their foreheads was written, God, New Jerusalem,
and a glorious star containing Jesus’ new name. At our
happy, holy state the wicked were enraged, and would
rush violently up to lay hands on us to thrust us into
prison, when we would stretch forth the hand in the
name of the Lord, and they would fall helpless to the

Which Say They Are Jews, and Are Not, But Lie.—
“To substitute external forms of religion for
holiness of heart and life, is still as pleasing to the
unrenewed nature as it was in the days of these

77

GEMS FROM REVELATION
ground. Then it was that the synagogue of Satan
knew that God had loved us who could wash one
another’s feet and salute the brethren with a holy
kiss, and they worshiped at our feet.” Early Writings,
15.

affection and flagging missionary zeal. In the parable
the ten virgins, who represent the people of God who are
expecting the coming of the Bridegroom, ‘all
slumbered and slept’ while ‘the bridegroom tarried.’
(Matt. 25:1-5.)
“According to Hebrews 10:35-37, ‘the word of my
patience’ seems to have to do with the attitude of the
church during the delay of the Second Advent. It is
because of this delay that many cast away their
confidence and lose their reward. They do not live
and walk by faith but say in their hearts, ‘My Lord
delayeth His coming,’ which leads them to smite their
fellow servants and to eat and drink with the drunken.
(Matt. 24: 48-51.)” Bunch, SEOC, 206.

And to Know That I Have Loved Thee.—
“At our happy holy state the wicked were enraged,
and would rush violently up to lay hands on us to thrust
us into prison, when we would stretch forth the hand in
the name of the Lord, and they would fall helpless to the
ground. Then it was that the synagogue of Satan
knew that God had loved us....” 1 Testimonies, 59.
“No language can express the longing which the
disobedient and disloyal feel for that which they have
lost forever—eternal life. Men whom the world has
worshipped for their talents and eloquence now see these
things in their true light. They realize what they have
forfeited by transgression, and they fall at the feet of
those whose fidelity they have despised and derided,
and confess that God has loved them.” Great
Controversy, 655.

“Cast not away therefore your confidence, which
hath great recompence of reward. For ye have need of
patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise. For yet a little while, and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Now the
just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.” Hebrews 10:35-38.
I Also Will Keep Thee.—
“In the time of trial before us God’s pledge of
security will be placed upon those who have kept the
word of His patience. Christ will say to His faithful
ones: ‘Come, My people, enter thou into thy
chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide
thyself as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast.’ Isaiah 26:20. The Lion of
Judah, so terrible to the rejectors of His grace, will be
the Lamb of God to the obedient and faithful. The pillar
of cloud which speaks wrath and terror to the
transgressor of God’s law is light and mercy and
deliverance to those who have kept His commandments.
The arm strong to smite the rebellious will be strong
to deliver the loyal.” 6 Testimonies, 404.

REVELATION 3:10
Because thou hast kept the word of My
patience, I also will keep thee from the hour
of temptation, which shall come upon all the
world, to try them that dwell upon the
earth.
Because Thou Hast Kept the Word.—
“If ye continue in My word, then are ye My
disciples indeed.” John 8:31.
“If a man love me, he will keep my words: and
my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him.” John 14:23.

“For those who in the midst of conflict should
maintain their faith in God, the prophet was given the
words of commendation and promise: (Rev. 3:8-10
quoted.)” Acts of the Apostles, 587,588.

The Word of My Patience.—
“(Rev. 3:10 quoted). Before His second coming,
there will be such a time as the world has never seen.
God’s people will be saved from this; for He will hide
them in His ‘pavilion.’ ‘Here is the patience of the
saints: here are they that keep the commandments of
God, and the faith of Jesus.’ Patience will be
developed by keeping the commandments and by
clinging to the faith of Jesus.” Haskel, SSP, 84,85.

“Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore
will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he
hath known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will
answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will
deliver him, and honour him. With long life will I
satisfy him, and shew him my salvation.” Psalm 91:1416.

“The language of our text seems to indicate a
delay of the Second Advent beyond the expectation of
the church. Christ’s Advent was indeed very near at the
close of the Philadelphian period proper, when the
faithful of Christendom were expecting that great event
and had made preparation for it. But His coming has
been delayed by the entrance of the church into the
terrible Laodicean condition of lukewarmness in

“For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his
pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide
me; he shall set me up upon a rock.” Psalm 27:5.
From.—
“If the church endures, it will be kept from the hour
of trial to come on the earth. Does it mean that they will
be taken out and thus protected, or that they will be kept

78

REVELATION 3
within and shielded during that time? There are two
words in Greek translated ‘from’. One is ek, the other is
apo. The word here is ek. Nunn’s Short Syntax of New
Testament Greek explains these words as follows:
‘ek’—‘root meaning: out of, from inside.’

let Thee go, except Thou bless me.’”
Controversy, 619,620.

Great

“Many will be confronted by the spirits of devils
personating beloved relatives or friends and declaring
the most dangerous heresies. These visitants will appeal
to our tenderest sympathies and will work miracles to
sustain their pretensions. We must be prepared to
withstand them with the Bible truth that the dead know
not anything and that they who thus appear are the
spirits of devils.
“Just before us is the ‘hour of temptation, which
shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell
upon the earth.’ All whose faith is not firmly
established upon the word of God will be deceived
and overcome. Satan ‘works with all deceivableness
of unrighteousness’ to gain control of the children of
men; and his deceptions will continually increase. But
he can gain his object only as men voluntarily yield to
his temptations. Those who are earnestly seeking a
knowledge of the truth and are striving to purify
their souls through obedience, thus doing what they
can to prepare for the conflict, will find, in the God of
truth, a sure defense. ‘Because thou hast kept the
word of My patience, I also will keep thee’ (vs. 10), is
the Saviour’s promise. He would sooner send every
angel out of heaven to protect His people than leave one
soul that trusts in Him to be overcome by Satan.” Great
Controversy, 560.

“‘apo’—‘root meaning: away from, to depart from
. . . to be away, to be distant.’
“The use of the word ek here shows that they will
be protected from the trials, but will be within and
near by. If the expression meant to convey the idea that
they were taken out of the world the word that would
have expressed that idea was apo; but that word was not
used.” Straw, SR, 37.
The Hour of Temptation.—
“True Christians will be kept from falling, because
they have kept His word. In Deuteronomy 4:34 the
plagues of Egypt are called ‘temptations.’ Those who
keep the Word of Christ’s patience during the last crisis
will be kept from the seven last plagues. The language
indicates that pressure will be used to compel God’s
faithful remnant to let go their hold on His truth. It is to
this time that Rev. 12:17 applies.” Bunch, SEOC, 205.
“Though God's people will be surrounded by
enemies who are bent upon their destruction, yet the
anguish which they suffer is not a dread of persecution
for the truth's sake; they fear that every sin has not
been repented of, and that through some fault in
themselves they will fail to realize the fulfillment of
the Saviour's promise: I ‘will keep thee from the
hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the
world.’ Rev. 3:10. If they could have the assurance of
pardon they would not shrink from torture or death; but
should they prove unworthy, and lose their lives because
of their own defects of character, then God's holy name
would be reproached.
“On every hand they hear the plottings of treason
and see the active working of rebellion; and there is
aroused within them an intense desire, an earnest
yearning of soul, that this great apostasy may be
terminated and the wickedness of the wicked may come
to an end. But while they plead with God to stay the
work of rebellion, it is with a keen sense of self-reproach
that they themselves have no more power to resist and
urge back the mighty tide of evil. They feel that had
they always employed all their ability in the service of
Christ, going forward from strength to strength, Satan's
forces would have less power to prevail against them.
“They afflict their souls before God, pointing to
their past repentance of their many sins, and pleading the
Saviour’s promise: ‘Let him take hold of My strength,
that he may make peace with Me; and he shall make
peace with Me.’ Isaiah 27:5. Their faith does not fail
because their prayers are not immediately answered.
Though suffering the keenest anxiety, terror, and
distress, they do not cease their inter-cessions. They
lay hold of the strength of God as Jacob laid hold of the
Angel; and the language of their souls is: ‘I will not

“None but those who have fortified the mind with
the truths of the Bible will stand through the last great
conflict.” Great Controversy, 593.
“As the crowning act in the great drama of
deception, Satan himself will personate Christ. The
church has long professed to look to the Saviour’s
advent as the consummation of her hopes. Now the
great deceiver will make it appear that Christ has come.
In different parts of the earth, Satan will manifest
himself among men as a majestic being of dazzling
brightness, resembling the description of the Son of God
given by John in the Revelation. …He declared that
those who persist in keeping holy the seventh day are
blaspheming his name by refusing to listen to his angels
sent to them with light and truth. This is the strong,
almost overmastering delusion.” Great Controversy,
624.
Them That Dwell Upon the Earth.—
“By profession you say to the world:
My
citizenship is not here but above; while your works
decidedly say that you are a dweller on the earth.” 4
Testimonies, 51.
“And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship
him, whose names are not written in the book of life of
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.” Rev.
13: 8.

79

GEMS FROM REVELATION
(See notes under Rev. 11:10.)

“Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge,
shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing.” 2 Timothy 4:8.

The Philadelphia Experience.—
“Verse 10 pictures a world crisis. (Rev. 3:10
quoted.) It is evident that this is still future, which fact
is proof that the Philadelphian condition will be
revived and continue to the very end. It seems that the
last four of the seven churches continue in some respects
till the coming of Christ.” Bunch, SEOC, 204.

“The crown is the reward of character, and he
who receives one, will have been faithful to all the
light which shone upon his pathway. Heaven can be
enjoyed by those only, who have developed a character
in harmony with the truth. Every man is a candidate, but
only he who striveth lawfully, will inherit the crown.”
Haskel, SSP, 85.

REVELATION 3:11
Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast
which thou hast, that no man take thy
crown.

“When the Lord makes up His jewels, the true, the frank,
the honest, will be looked upon with pleasure. Angels
are employed in making crowns for such ones, and
upon these star-gemmed crowns will be reflected,
with splendor, the light which radiates from the
throne of God.” 5 Testimonies, 96.

Behold, I Come Quickly.—
“The second coming of Christ is here again
brought to view, and with more startling emphasis
than in any of the preceding messages. The nearness
of that event is here urged upon the attention of
believers. The message applies to a period when this
great event is impending. In this we have indubitable
evidence of the prophetic nature of these messages.
What is said of the first three churches contains no
allusion to the second coming of Christ, from the fact
that they do not cover a period in which that event could
be Scripturally expected. But with the Thyatira church,
the time had come when this great hope was just
beginning to dawn upon the church. The mind is carried
forward to this hope by a single allusion: ‘Hold fast till
I come.’
“The next state of the church, the Sardis period,
finds the church occupying a position still nearer that
event, and the great proclamation is brought to view
which was to herald Christ’s coming, and the duty of
watching is enjoined upon the church: ‘If thou shalt not
watch, I will come on thee as a thief.’ We reach the
Philadelphia church still later, and the nearness of the
same great event then leads Him who ‘is holy and true’
to utter the stirring declaration, ‘Behold, I come
quickly.’
“It is evident from this that these churches occupy
positions successively nearer the great day of the
Lord.…” Smith, DR, 389.

Let No Man Take Thy Crown.—
“By our faithfulness we are not depriving
anyone else of a crown. The verb rendered ‘to take’
has a number of definitions, one of which is ‘to take
away, snatch from, deprive of.’ Let no one, and no
thing, induce you to yield the truth, or pervert you
from the right ways of the Lord, for by so doing it
will cause you to lose the reward.” Smith, DR, 389.
“God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I
will not remove mine integrity from me.” Job 27:5.
“I saw one approaching you with firm tread and
grieved countenance. He said: ‘Let no man take your
crown.’ Have you forgotten the humiliation endured by
the Son of God in coming to our world, how He suffered
abuse, reproach, insult, hatred, mockery, and betrayal,
how He endured the shameful trial in the judgment hall
after having suffered the superhuman assaults of Satan
in the Garden of Gethsemane? Have you forgotten the
wild cry from the mob, ‘Crucify Him, crucify Him,’
and how He died as a malefactor? Is the servant
greater than His Lord? The followers of Jesus will
not be popular, but will be like their Master, meek
and lowly of heart.” 5 Testimonies, 501,502.
“I saw that some of God’s professed people are like
the man who hid his talent in the earth. They keep their
possessions and means from doing good to God’s cause.
They claim that it is their own, and that they have a right
to do what they please with their own; and souls are not
saved by any judicious effort they make with their
Lord’s money. As judgment passes upon the house of
God, the angels keep a faithful record of every man’s
work, their sentence is re-corded by their name, and the
angel is commissioned to spare them not, but to cut them
down at the time of slaughter. And that which was
committed to their trust is taken from them. Their
earthly treasure is then swept away, and they have lost
all. And the crowns they might have worn, had they

“Jesus says, ‘Behold, I come quickly.’ We should
keep these words ever in mind, and act as though we
do indeed believe that the coming of the Lord is nigh,
and that we are pilgrims and strangers upon the earth.”
5 Testimonies, 266.
Thy Crown.—
“Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for
when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life,
which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.”
James 1:12

80

REVELATION 3
been faithful, are put upon the heads of those saved
by the faithful servants whose means were constantly
in use for God. And everyone they have been the
means of saving, adds stars to their crown in glory, and
increases their eternal reward.” 1 Testimonies, 197.

permanence, and safety in the church, under the
figure of a heavenly building. When the time comes
for this part of the promise to be fulfilled, probation is
past, and the overcomer is fully established in the truth,
and sealed.” Smith, DR, 390.
“It may be that much work needs to be done in
your character building, that you are a rough stone,
which must be squared and polished before it can fill a
place in God’s temple. You need not be surprised if
with hammer and chisel God cuts away the sharp
corners of your character until you are prepared to
fill the place He has for you. No human being can
accomplish this work. Only by God can it be done.
And be assured that He will not strike one useless
blow. His every blow is struck in love, for your eternal
happiness.” 7 Testimonies, 264.

REVELATION 3:12
Him that overcometh will I make a
pillar in the temple of My God, and he shall
go no more out: and I will write upon him
the name of My God, and the name of the
city of My God, which is New Jerusalem,
which cometh down out of heaven from My
god: and I will write upon him My new
name.

“The precious stones represent the most perfect
Christians, who have been refined and polished by the
grace of God, and by affliction which they have endured
with much prayer and patience. Their obedience and
love resemble those of the great Pattern. Their lives
are beautified and ennobled by self-sacrifice. They
will endure the test of the burning day, for they are
living stones. ‘Him that overcometh will I make a
pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out.’” Life of Paul, 155.

My God.—
“Notice that Jesus, who is God, says that the
Father is his God four times in this verse. The
Philadelphian church will have a true concept of the
Godhead, composed of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit—three distinct eternal Beings.” PJ.
“Jesus saith to her [Mary Magdalene], Touch me
not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: But go to
my brethren, and say to them, I ascend to My Father,
and your Father; and to My God, and your God.” John
20:17.

And He Shall Go No More Out.—
“There is no more danger of his falling away, he
is the Lord’s forever, and his salvation is sure.” Smith,
DR, 390.

“And ye are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.” 1
Corinthians 3:23.

“Just as the pillar cannot be moved as long as
the building stands, so the Christian victor in the
closing crisis shall ‘go no more out’ of the temple of
God. His triumph is permanent. …There will be no
more backslidings.” Bunch, SEOC, 207.

“But I would have you know, that the head of
every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the
man; and the head of Christ is God.” 1 Corinthians
11:3.
“But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God,
is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the
sceptre of thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness,
and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows.” Hebrews 1:8,9.

“Those that overcome the world, the flesh, and
the devil, will be the favored ones who shall receive the
seal of the living God.” Testimonies to Ministers, 445.
I Will Write Upon Him.—
“From the moment the Christians overcome and
are sealed for heaven, they are labeled, if we may so
express it, as belonging to God and Christ, and
addressed to their destination, the New Jerusalem.
They are to have written upon them the name of God,
whose property they are, the name of the New
Jerusalem, to which place they are going, not old
Jerusalem where some are vainly looking. They also
have upon them the new name of Christ, by whose
authority they are to receive everlasting life, and enter
the kingdom. Thus sealed and labeled, the saints of God
are safe.” Smith, DR, 390.

“There are three living persons of the heavenly
trio; in the name of these three great powers—the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit—those who
receive Christ by living faith are baptized, and these
powers will co-operate with the obedient subjects of
heaven in their efforts to live the new life in Christ.”
Evangelism, 615.
A Pillar in the Temple of My God.—
“The overcomer is to be a pillar in the temple of
God, and go out no more. The temple here must
denote the church, and the promise of being made a
pillar in it is in the promise of a place of honor,

“The 144,000 were all sealed and perfectly
united. On their foreheads were the words God, New

81

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Jerusalem, and a glorious star containing Jesus’ new
name.” 1 Testimonies, 59.

My New Name.—
“To have written on him the new name of Jesus
means that the overcomer will reflect perfectly
Christ’s character.” Zurcher, COR, 55.

My God.—
“Jesus is talking. He is telling us that His God is
His Father. Jesus told Mary before He ascended to
heaven: ‘Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I
ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my
God, and your God.’ John 20:17. God the Father—
the Creator of all things—is the God of the Bible. We
are commanded to worship Him as the true God in Rev.
14:7.” PJ.

“We know that, when he shall appear, we shall be
like him; for we shall see him as he is.” 1 John 3:2.
“Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and
given him a name which is above every name.” Phil
2:9

The Name of My God.—
“And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount
Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand,
having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.”
Rev. 14:1.

REVELATION 3:13
He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the churches.
“He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth
mine ear to hear as the learned. The Lord GOD hath
opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither
turned away back.” Isaiah 50:4,5.

“All who enter will have the robe of Christ’s
righteousness, and the name of God will be seen in their
foreheads. This name is the symbol which the apostle
saw in vision, and signifies the yielding of the mind to
intelligent and loyal obedience to all of God’s
commandments.” Son & Daughters, 370.

“The Holy Spirit flashes conviction into the mind.
It is not the conviction that logical reasoning
produces; deeper meaning is grasped, and the sublime,
spiritual truths of the written word are impressed on the
heart.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 24.

“Even unto them will I give in mine house and
within my walls a place and a name better than of sons
and of daughters. I will give them an everlasting
name, that shall not be cut off.” Isa. 56:5.

“In ancient times God spoke to men by the mouth
of prophets and apostles. In these days he speaks to
them by the Testimonies of His Spirit. There was
never a time when God instructed His people more
earnestly than He instructs them now concerning His
will and the course that He would have them pursue.” 4
Testimonies, 147,148.

The Name of the City of My God.—
“Promising us ‘the name of the city of my God’
means that we can become citizens of New Jerusalem,
the capital of God’s universal kingdom.... It reminds
us of the promise in Daniel 7: 27, ‘The kingdom and
the dominion and the greatness of the kingdoms
under the whole heaven shall be given to the people
of the saints of the Most High.’” Maxwell, God Cares,
111.

“Those who not only hear but do the words of
Christ, make manifest in character the operation of
the Holy Spirit. The result of the internal operation of
the Holy Spirit is demonstrated in the outward conduct.
The life of the Christian is hid with Christ in God, and
God acknowledges those who are His, declaring, ‘Ye
are my witnesses.’ They testify that divine power is
influencing their hearts and shaping their conduct.
Their works give evidence that the Spirit is moving
upon the inward man; those who are associated with
them are convinced that they are making Jesus Christ
their pattern.” Review & Herald, 4/12/1896.

“And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man
was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish
her. The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the
people, that this man was born there. Selah.” Psalm
87:5,6.
“But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is
the mother of us all.” Gal. 4:26.
“And even after the saints are sealed with the seal
of the living God, His elect will have trials individually.
Personal afflictions will come; but the furnace is closely
watched by an eye that will not suffer the gold to be
consumed. The indelible mark of God is upon them.
God can plead that His own name is written there.
The Lord has shut them in. Their destination is
inscribed—‘GOD, NEW JERUSALEM.’ They are
God’s property, His possession.” Testimonies to
Ministers, 446.

THE SEVENTH CHURCH:
LAODICEA
REVELATION 3: 14-22
14 And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write;
These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the
beginning of the creation of God.
15 I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would
thou wert cold or hot.

82

REVELATION 3
periods of the true church, and the Philadelphia is the
sixth, and not the last state. The true church cannot be in
two conditions at the same time, hence we are shut up to
the faith that the Laodicean church represents the
church of God at the present time.
“The conditional promises to the Philadelphia
church are yet to be fulfilled to that portion of that
church who comply with the conditions, pass down
through the Laodicean state, and overcome.
“But, dear brethren, how humbling to us as a
people is the sad description of this church. And is
not this dreadful description a most perfect picture of
our present condition? It is; and it will be of no use to
try to evade the force of this searching testimony to the
Laodicean church. The Lord help us to receive it, and to
profit by it. What language could better describe our
condition as a people, than this addressed to the
Laodiceans?” White, James, The Seven Churches,
R&H, 10/16/1856.

16 So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot,
I will spue thee out of my mouth.
17 Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods,
and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked:
18 I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou
mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed,
and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint
thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest see.
19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous
therefore, and repent.
20 Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him, and he with me.
21 To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father
in his throne.
22 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches.

REVELATION 3:14
And unto the angel of the church of the
Laodiceans write: These things saith the
Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the
beginning of the creation of God.

“The Laodicean message applies to all who
profess to keep the law of God, and yet are not doers
of it.” (Review & Herald, 10/17/1899). 7BC, 962.
“The state of the Church represented by the foolish
virgins, is also spoken of as the Laodicean state. The
True Witness declares, [Rev. 3:15-21 quoted.] .” Review
& Herald, 8/19/1890.

The Church of Laodicea.—
“‘Laodicea’ signifies ‘the judging of the people,’
or, according to Cruden, ‘a just people.’ The message to
this church brings to view the closing scenes of
probation. It reveals a period of judgment. It is the
last stage of the church. Consequently it applies to
believers under the third angel’s message, the last
message of mercy before the coming of Christ. (Rev.
14:9-14.)
While the work of the great Day of
Atonement is in progress, and the investigative judgment
is going forward upon the house of God, there is a
period during which the just and holy law of God is
taken by the waiting church as their rule of life.” Smith,
DR, 391.

These Things Saith the Amen.—
“The Amen, one that is steady and unchangeable in all his purposes and promises, which are
all yea, and all amen.” Henry, 6MHC, 1135.
“For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in
him Amen, unto the glory of God by us.”
2
Corinthians 1:20.
“This is, then, the final message [the Amen] to
the churches before the close of probation. The
description given of the indifferent Laodiceans is fearful
and startling. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied, for the
Witness is ‘faithful and true.’” Smith, DR, 391.

“Whatever the meaning given to the name
Laodicea—‘a judged people,’ ‘judgment of the people,’
‘separation of the people,’ or ‘rejection of the people’—
it is always in relation to the final work of the church.
Therefore the period represented by Laodicea began
in 1844 at the beginning of the investigative judgment
(see Dan. 8:14).” Zurcher, COR, 56.

The Faithful and True Witness.—
“And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful
witness.” Rev. 1:5.

“I call upon our church members to read the whole
of the third chapter of Revelation, and to make an
application of it. The message to the church of the
Laodiceans applies especially to the people of God
today. It is a message to professing Christians who
have become so much like the world that no
difference can be seen [vs. 14-18 quoted].” Review &
Herald, 9/20/1903.

“A true witness delivereth souls: but a deceitful
witness speaketh lies.” Prov. 14:25.
“In hope of eternal life, which God, that can-not
lie, promised before the world began.” Titus 1:2.
“And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I
make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for
these words are true and faithful.” Rev. 21:5.

“It has been supposed that the Philadelphia church
reached to the end. This we must regard as a mistake, as
the seven churches in Asia represent seven distinct

“The word, the word revealed by God, this is to be
the foundation of your faith. Study the commandments

83

GEMS FROM REVELATION
of God and the testimony that Jesus has borne to the
truth. He is the faithful and true Witness.” Spalding &
Magan, 323.

REVELATION 3:15,16
I know thy works, that thou art neither
cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.
So then because thou are lukewarm,
and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out
of My mouth.

“Christ’s way of introducing Himself to the
Laodicea Christians was especially appropriate.... He
chose this title because He was talking to people who
were self-deceived. He wanted them to trust His
unpleasant diagnosis.” Maxwell, God Cares, 114.
“The Holy Spirit comes to the world as Christ’s
representative. It not only speaks the truth, but It is the
truth—the faithful and true Witness. It is the great
Searcher of hearts and is acquainted with the
characters of all. The Holy Spirit has often come to our
schools and has not been recognized, but has been
treated as a stranger, perhaps even as an intruder. Every
teacher should know and welcome this heavenly Guest.”
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students, 68.

I Know Thy Works.—
“Keep ever before you this truth: ‘Wherever I
am, whatever I do, Thou, God, seest me.’ It is not
possible for the least item of our conduct to escape
the observation of the One who says ‘I know thy
works.’ The depths of every heart are open to the
inspection of God. Every action, every purpose, every
word, is as distinctly marked as though there were only
one individual in the whole universe and all the
watchfulness and scrutiny of God were employed on his
deportment.” 5 Testimonies, 627.

“I asked the meaning of the shaking I had seen and
was shown that it would be caused by the straight
testimony called forth by the counsel of the True
Witness to the Laodiceans. This will have its effect
upon the heart of the receiver, and will lead him to exalt
the standard and pour forth the straight truth. Some will
not bear this straight testimony. They will rise up
against it, and this is what will cause a shaking among
God’s people.
“I saw that the testimony of the True Witness
has not been half heeded. The solemn testimony upon
which the destiny of the church hangs has been lightly
esteemed, if not entirely disregarded. This testimony
must work deep repentance; all who truly receive it will
obey it and be purified.” Early Writings, 270.

“Says the True Witness: ‘I know thy works.’
Angels of God who minister unto those who shall be
heirs of salvation are acquainted with the condition
of all and understand just the measure of faith
possessed by each individual. The unbelief, pride,
covetousness, and love of the world, which have existed
in the hearts of God’s professed people, have grieved the
sinless angels. As they have seen that grievous and
presumptuous sins exist in the hearts of many professed
followers of Christ, and that God has been dishonored
by their inconsistent, crooked course, they have been
caused to weep. And yet those most at fault, those who
cause the greatest feebleness in the church and bring a
stain upon their holy profession, do not seem to be
alarmed or convicted, but seem to feel that they are
flourishing in the Lord.” 2 Testimonies, 125.

“Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and
for ever.” Heb. 13:8.
The Beginning of the Creation of God.—
“Some attempt by this language to uphold the error
that Christ is a created being, dating His existence
anterior to that of any other created being or thing, next
to the self-existent and eternal God. But the language
does not imply that He was created; for the words, ‘the
beginning of the creation,’ may simply signify that
the work of creation, strictly speaking, was begun by
Him. ‘Without Him was not anything made.’ Others,
however, and more properly we think, take the word,
arche, to mean the ‘agent’ or ‘efficient cause,’ which is
one of the definitions of the word, understanding that
Christ is the agent through whom God has created
all things.” Smith, DR, 391.

“The motives, the purposes, the unbelief, the
suspicions and jealousies may be hid from men, but not
from Christ.” 3 Testimonies, 256.
“The home is too sacred a place to be polluted by
vulgarity, sensuality, recrimination, and scandal. Silence
the evil word, put away the unholy thought; for the True
Witness weighs every word, sets a value on every
action, and declares, ‘I know thy works.’
Signs,
11/14/92.
“Children and youth should never feel that it is
something to be proud of to be indifferent and careless
in meetings where God is worshiped. God sees every
irreverent thought or action, and it is registered in
the books of heaven. He says, ‘I know thy works.’
Nothing is hid from His all-searching eye.” Child
Guidance, 546,547.

“Is there significance in the emphasis on Christ as
Creator in the introduction to this final church? It is in
this final age of history that man has rejected the
truth of creation and accepted the alternative concept
of evolution. Therefore it is most relevant.” Cooke,
#6-UR, 3.

Thou Art (Lukewarm) Neither Cold nor Hot.—

84

REVELATION 3
“The only hope for Laodiceans is a clear view of
their standing before God, a knowledge of the nature of
their disease. They are neither cold nor hot; they
occupy a neutral position, and at the same time flatter
themselves that they are in need of nothing. The True
Witness hates this lukewarmness. He loathes the
indifference of this class of persons. Said He: ‘I would
thou wert cold or hot.’ Like lukewarm water they are
nauseous to His taste. They are neither unconcerned nor
selfishly stubborn. They do not engage thoroughly and
heartily in the work of God, identifying themselves with
its interests; but they hold aloof and are ready to leave
their posts when their worldly personal interests
demand it. The internal work of grace is wanting in
their hearts.” 4 Testimonies, 87,88.

‘hot’ means it is not difficult to conceive. The mind at
once calls up a state of intense zeal, when all the
affections, raised to the highest pitch, are drawn out for
God and His cause, and manifest themselves in
corresponding works. To be lukewarm is to lack this
zeal, to be in a state in which heart and earnestness are
wanting, in which there is no self-denial that costs
anything, no cross-bearing that is felt, no determined
witnessing for Christ, and no valiant aggression that
keeps the armor bright. Worst of all, it implies entire
satisfaction with that condition. But to be cold—what is
that? Does it denote a state of corruption, wickedness,
and sin, such as characterizes the world of unbelievers?
We cannot so regard it, for several reasons:
“It would seem harsh and repulsive to represent
Christ as wishing under any circumstances that persons
should be in such a condition, but He says, ‘I would
thou were cold or hot.’
“No state can be more offensive to Christ than that
of the sinner in open rebellion, with a heart filled with
every evil. It would therefore be incorrect to represent
Christ as preferring that state to any position which His
people can occupy while they are still retained as His.
“The threat of rejection in verse 16 is because they
are neither cold nor hot. It is as much as to say that if
they were either cold or hot, they would not be rejected.
But if by cold is meant a state of open worldly
wickedness, they would be rejected very speedily.
Hence such cannot be its meaning.
“We are brought to the conclusion that by this
language our Lord has no reference whatever to those
outside His church, but that He refers to three degrees of
spiritual affections, two of which are more acceptable to
him than the third. Heat and cold are preferable to
lukewarmness. But what kind of spiritual state is
denoted by the term ‘cold’? We may remark first that it
is a state of feeling. In this respect it is superior to
lukewarmness, which is a state of comparative
insensibility, indifference, and supreme self-satisfaction.
To be hot is also to be in a state of feeling. As ‘hot’
denotes joyous fervor, and a lively exercise of all the
affections, with a heart buoyant with the sensible
presence and love of God, so ‘cold’ would seem to
denote a spiritual condition characterized by a
destitution of these traits, yet one in which the
individual feels such destitution. This state is well
expressed by the language of Job, ‘Oh that I knew
where I might find Him!’ Job 23:3.
“In this state there is not indifference, nor is there
content: but there is a sense of coldness, unfitness,
and discomfort, and a groping and seeking after
something better. There is hope for a person in this
condition. What a man feels that he lacks and wants, he
will earnestly strive to obtain. The most discouraging
feature of the lukewarm is that they are conscious of no
lack, and feel that they have need of nothing. Hence it is
easy to see why our Lord should prefer to behold His
church in a state of comfortless coldness, rather than in a
state of comfortable, easy, indifferent lukewarmness. A
person will not long remain cold. His efforts will soon

“Says the True Witness: (Rev. 3:15,16 quoted).
Satan is willing that you should be a Christian in name,
for you can suit his purpose better. If you have a form
and not true godliness, he can use you to decoy others
into the same self-deceived way. Some poor souls will
look to you, instead of looking to the Bible standard, and
will come up no higher. They are as good as you, and
are satisfied.” 1 Testimonies, 162.
“It would be more pleasing to the Lord if
lukewarm professors of religion had never named
His name. They are a continual weight to those who
would be faithful followers of Jesus. They are a
stumbling block to unbelievers....” 1 Testimonies, 188.
“Halfhearted Christians are worse than infidels;
for their deceptive words and non-committal position
lead many astray. The infidel shows his colors. The
lukewarm Christian deceives both parties. He is neither
a good worldling nor a good Christian. Satan uses him
to do a work that no one else can do. (Letter 44, 1903).
7BC, 963.
“The church is composed of imperfect, erring men
and women, who call for the continual exercise of
charity and forbearance. But there has been a long
period of general lukewarmness; a worldly spirit
coming into the church, has been followed by
alienation, fault-finding, malice, strife, and iniquity.” 5
Testimonies, 104.
“God calls for a spiritual revival and a spiritual
reformation. Unless this takes place, those who are
lukewarm will continue to grow more abhorrent to the
Lord, until He will refuse to acknowledge them as His
children.” Review & Herald, 2/25/1902.
I Would Thou Wert Cold or Hot.—
“Three spiritual conditions are brought to view
in this message—the cold, the lukewarm, and the hot.
It is important to determine what condition they each
denote, in order to guard against wrong conclusions.
Three spiritual conditions which pertain to the church,
not to the world, are to be considered. What the term

85

GEMS FROM REVELATION
lead him to the fervid state. But if lukewarm, there is
danger of his remaining till the faithful and true Witness
is obliged to reject him as a nauseous and loathsome
thing.” Smith, DR, 391-394.

in their own eyes do not ask in faith, and receive the
blessing of God.” Mount of Blessing, 7.
“We must not for a moment think that there is
no more light, no more truth, to be given us. We are
in danger of becoming careless, by our indifference
losing the sanctifying power of truth, and com-posing
ourselves with the thought, ‘I am rich, and increased
with goods, and have need of nothing.’ While we
must hold fast to the truths which we have already
received, we must not look with suspicion upon any new
light that God may send.” Gospel Workers, 310.

I Will Spue Thee Out of My Mouth.—
“The figure of spewing out of his mouth means
that He cannot offer up your prayers or your
expressions of love to God. He cannot endorse your
teaching of His Word or your spiritual work in anywise.
He cannot present your religious exercises with the
request that grace be given you.” 6 Testimonies, 408.
“Unless they heed the counsel of the ‘faithful and
true Witness,’ and zealously repent and obtain ‘gold
tried in the fire,’ ‘white raiment,’ and ‘eyesalve,’ He
will spew them out of His mouth.” Early Writings, 108.

“ ‘The professors of religion of the present day,
in every church, are lovers of the world, con-formers
to the world, lovers of creature comfort, and aspirers
after respectability. They are called to suffer with
Christ, but they shrink from even reproach.... Apostasy,
apostasy, apostasy, is engraven on the very front of
every church; and did they know it, and did they feel it,
there might be hope; but, alas! They cry, “We are rich,
and increased in goods, and stand in need of
nothing.”’—Second Advent Library, tract No. 39.”
Great Controversy, 388.

“God will prove His people. Jesus bears patiently
with them, and does not spew them out of His mouth
in a moment. …If the message had been of as short
duration as many of us supposed, there would have been
no time for them to develop character.” 1 Testimonies,
186,187.
“God calls for a spiritual revival and a spiritual
reformation. Unless this takes place, those who are
lukewarm will continue to grow more abhorrent to the
Lord, until He will refuse to acknowledge them as His
children.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 128.

“There is nothing so offensive to God, or so
dangerous to the human soul, as pride and selfsufficiency. Of all sins it is the most hopeless, the
most incurable.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 227.
“It is by their actions, doubtless, not by their
words, that they say they are rich and increased with
goods. Having so much light and so much truth, what
can they want besides? If they defend the theory, and as
far as their outward life is concerned, conform to the
increasing light upon the commandments of God and the
faith of Jesus, is not their righteousness complete? Are
they not rich, and increased with goods, and in need of
nothing? Here is their failure. Their whole being
should cry out for the spirit, the zeal, the fervency,
the life, the power, of a living Christianity.” Smith,
DR, 397-398.

REVELATION 3:17
Because thou sayest, I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and knowest not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked:
Because Thou Sayest.—
“Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent, surely
his anger shall turn from me. Behold, I will plead with
thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned.”
Jeremiah 2:35.

Knowest Not That Thou Art Wretched, Miserable,
Poor, Blind, and Naked.—
“As man yields to temptation, and indulges in
sin, his mind becomes darkened. The moral sense is
perverted. The warnings of conscience are disregarded,
and its voice is less clearly heard. He gradually loses the
power to distinguish between right and wrong, until he
has no true sense of his standing before God. He may
observe the forms of religion and zealously maintain its
doctrines, while destitute of its spirit. His condition is
that described by the True Witness: (Rev. 3:17
quoted.) When the Spirit of God, by message of reproof,
declares this to be his condition, he cannot see that the
message is true. Is he therefore to reject the warning?
No. God has given sufficient evidence, so that all who
desire to do so may satisfy themselves as to the character
of the Testimonies; and, having acknowledged them to

Rich, Increased With Goods, & Needing Nothing.—
“Such the Laodiceans think is their condition.
They are not hypocrites, because they know not that
they are poor, miserable, blind, and naked.” Smith, DR,
394.
“He who feels whole, who thinks that he is
reasonably good, and is contented with his condition,
does not seek to become a partaker of the grace and
righteousness of Christ. Pride feels no need, and so it
closes the heart against Christ and the infinite blessings
He came to give. There is no room for Jesus in the heart
of such a person. Those who are rich and honorable

86

REVELATION 3
be from God, it is their duty to accept reproof, even
though they do not themselves see the sinfulness of their
course. If they fully realized their condition, what would
be the need of reproof? Because they know it not, God
mercifully sets it before them, so that they may repent
and reform before it shall be too late.” 5 Testimonies,
682.

nakedness of those who feel rich and increased with
goods?—It is the want of the righteousness of Christ. In
their own righteousness they are represented as clothed
with filthy rags, and yet in this condition they flatter
themselves that they are clothed upon with Christ’s
righteousness. Could deception be greater? As is
represented by the prophet, they may be crying, ‘The
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are we,’
while their hearts are filled with unholy traffic and
unrighteous barter. The courts of the soul-temple
may be the haunt of envy, pride, passion, evil
surmising, bitterness, and hollow formalism. Christ
looks mournfully upon his professed people who feel
rich and increased in the knowledge of the truth, and
who are yet destitute of the truth in life and character
and unconscious of their destitute condition.” R&H,
8/7/1894.

“A religion of vanity, words devoid of vitality, a
character destitute of moral strength—these are
pointed out in the solemn message addressed by the True
Witness to the churches, warning them against pride,
worldliness, formalism, and self-sufficiency. (Rev. 3:17
quoted.)” 5 Testimonies, 484.
“Not one of us will ever receive the seal of God
while our characters have one spot or stain upon
them. It is left with us to remedy the defects in our
characters, to cleanse the soul temple of every
defilement. Then the latter rain will fall upon us as the
early rain fell upon the disciples on the Day of
Pentecost.
We are too easily satisfied with our
attainments. We feel rich and increased with goods and
know not that we are ‘wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked.’ Now is the time to heed
the admonition of the True Witness: (Rev. 3:18
quoted.)” 5 Testimonies, 214,215.

Miserable.—
“Only one other place is this word used in NT: ‘If
in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all
men most miserable.’ ‘Miserable’ describes one who
wants to go to heaven, but in his present condition,
cannot.” Prewitt, Worship Talk, 12/2003.
Poor.—
“‘Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich
in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which He hath
promised to them that love Him?’ James 2:5. To be
‘rich’ is to have faith that works by love. The
Laodicean ‘poor’ is one who lacks this faith and
love.” Prewitt, Worship Talk, 12/2003.

“What, then, is the reason that God, contemplating
the condition of the church of Laodicea, sees one thing,
while Laodicea, considering her own status, beholds an
entirely different condition? The reason lies in the fact
that God and Laodicea are really looking at two different
things. Laodicea gazes upon material things. …But
God, the infinite Father of all, …looks beyond all
this. His awful gaze penetrates past Laodicea’s
schools, sanitariums, publishing institutions; past her
fine buildings and worthwhile equipment; past her
growing member-ship and constantly widening
sphere of influence, and looks only down upon
Laodicea’s heart.”
Dalrymple, “The Church of
Laodicea,” Signs, 11/14/1933.

Blind.—
“‘To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith
that is in Me.’ Acts 26:18. The blind are those who
are still under the power of sin, and whose sins are
still unforgiven.” Prewitt, Worship Talk, 12/2003.
“The greatest reason why the people of God are
now found in this state of spiritual blindness is that they
will not receive correction. Many have despised the
reproofs and warnings given them.” 3 Testimonies, 255.

“Rather than give up some cherished idea, or
discard some idol of opinion, many refuse the truth
which comes down from the Father of light. They trust
in self, and depend upon their own wisdom, and do not
realize their spiritual poverty. …As it was in the days of
Christ, so it is now; the Pharisees do not know their
spiritual destitution. To them comes the message,
(Rev. 3:17,18 quoted).” Desire of Ages, 280.

“Intellectual and earthly riches were powerless to
remove the defects of the Laodicean church, or to
remedy their deplorable condition. They were blind, yet
felt that they were well off. The Spirit of God did not
illumine their minds, and they did not perceive their
sinfulness; therefore they did not feel the necessity of
help.” 4 Testimonies, 88.

Wretched.—
“Only one other place is this word used in the NT
Scriptures: ‘O wretched man that I am! Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death.’ Rom. 7:24.
‘Wretched’ describes one who wants to overcome sin,
but can’t.” Prewitt, Worship Talk, 12/2003.

“In whom the god of this world hath blinded the
minds of them that believe not.” 2 Cor. 4:4.
“No stronger delusion can deceive the human
mind than that which makes them believe that they are

“What is it that constitutes the wretchedness, the

87

GEMS FROM REVELATION
right, and that God accept their works, when they are
sinning against Him.” 1 Testimonies, 407.

The gifts of God can be purchased only at the cost of
moral endeavor, humble repentance, and courageous
faith. All the truth and wisdom and understanding we
have acquired have cost us something in time and
effort, if not in actual money. The person who is not
willing to sacrifice and endure to attain the heavenly
treasure, must remain without it, for it will be given to
no one without a price.” Bunch, SEOC, 235.

Naked.—
“Laodicea is deceived because of her blindness and
self-deception. If her eyes could be opened, there would
quickly follow the confession of Isaiah 64:6: ‘But we
all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and
our iniquities, like wind, have taken us away.’”
Bunch, SEOC, 238.

“ ‘God does nothing for man without his
cooperation.... We are to strive, wrestle, agonize,
watch, pray, lest we shall be overcome by the wily
foe.... His power awaits the demand of those who would
overcome.’ Manuscript 26a, 1892.

“ ‘Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and
beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, longsuffering; Forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, … And above all these
things, put on charity.” Col. 3:12,13. One who is
‘naked’ lacks this clothing.” Prewitt, Worship Talk,
12/2003.

“This is the significance of the Lord’s counsel
given in the message to the Laodiceans: ‘I counsel thee
to buy of Me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest
be rich.’ (Rev. 3:18). The price paid is to strive with
all our power to overcome to obtain the greatest
treasure on earth—a character that will stand the
test. Then, when we have done all within our power,
the Lord will graciously pour out His Spirit in the latter
rain, ‘the perfecting latter rain.’”
Were, 144,000
Sealed!, 65,66.

REVELATION 3:18
I counsel thee to buy of Me gold tried in
the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white
raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and
that the shame of thy nakedness do not
appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve,
that thou mayest see.

“Heed the counsel of the True Witness. Buy gold
tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich, white raiment
that thou mayest be clothed, and eyesalve that thou
mayest see. Make some effort. These precious
treasures will not drop upon us without some
exertion on our part. We must buy—‘be zealous and
repent’ of our lukewarm state. We must be awake to see
our wrongs, to search for our sins, and to zealously
repent of them.” 1 Testimonies, 142.

I Counsel Thee to Buy of Me.—
“This shows at once to the deceived Laodiceans
the things they lack, and the extent of their destitution.
It shows, too, where they can obtain those things in
which they are so fearfully poor, and brings before them
the necessity of speedily obtaining them. The case is
so urgent that our great Advocate in the court above
sends us special counsel on this point. The fact that He
who has condescended to point out our lack and counsel
us to buy, is the One who has these things to bestow and
invites us to come to Him for them, is the best possible
guarantee that our application will be respected and
our requests granted.
“But by what means can we buy these things?—
Just as we buy all other gospel graces. ‘Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no
money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and
milk without money and without price.’ Isaiah 55:1.
We thus buy by the asking, buy by throwing away
the worthless baubles of earth and receiving priceless
treasures in their stead, buy by simply coming and
receiving, buy, giving nothing in return.” Smith, DR,
395.

“The purchase which Christ recommends to us is
only complying with the conditions He has given us.
True grace, which is of inestimable value, and which
will endure the test of trial and adversity, is only
obtained through faith and humble, prayerful
obedience. Graces that endure the proofs of affliction
and persecution, and evidence their soundness and
sincerity, are the gold which is tried in the fire and
found genuine. Christ offers to sell this precious
treasure to man: ‘Buy of Me gold tried in the fire.’
The dead, heartless performance of duty does not make
us Christians. We must get out of a lukewarm condition
and experience a true conversion, or we shall fail of
heaven.” 4 Testimonies, 89.
Gold Tried in the Fire.—
“That the trial of your faith being much more
precious than of gold that perishes, though it be tried
with fire, might be found unto praise and honor and
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.” 1 Peter 1:7.

“Christ virtually says to the Laodiceans, ‘Thou hast
nothing to give, but thou must give all that thou hast.’
The price is one that even the beggar can pay. It places
all on an equality as far as spiritual riches are concerned.
The price is penitence, confession, and self-surrender.

“Gold literally considered is the comprehensive
name for all worldly wealth and riches. Figuratively, it
must denote that which constitutes spiritual riches.

88

REVELATION 3
place with selfishness and unbelief, all the remaining
precious traits will soon be skillfully removed by his
deceitful hand, and the game will be lost.”
2
Testimonies, 36,37.

What grace, then, is represented by the gold, or
rather, what graces? Doubtless no one single grace
can be said to answer to the full import of that term. The
Lord said to the church of Smyrna that He knew their
poverty, but they were rich. That testimony shows that
their riches consisted of that which was finally to put
them in possession of a crown of life. Says James,
‘Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs
of the kingdom which He hath promised to them that
love Him?’ James 2:5. ‘Faith,’ says Paul, ‘is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen.’ Heb. 11:1. To be ‘rich toward God,’ rich in
the spiritual sense, is to have a clear title to the promises,
to be an heir of that ‘inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in
heaven for you.’ 1 Peter 1:4. ‘If ye be Christ’s, then
are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the
promise.’ Galatians 3:29. How do we obtain this
heirship?—In the same way that Abraham obtained the
promise, that is, through faith. (Romans 4: 13,14.)
“No wonder, then, that the entire eleventh chapter
of Hebrews should be devoted to this important subject,
setting forth the mighty achievements that have been
obtained, through faith. In Hebrews 12:1, the grand
conclusion of the argument is given when Christians are
exhorted to lay aside every weight, and the sin (of
unbelief) that so easily besets them.
“Nothing will sooner dry up the springs of
spirituality, and sink us into utter poverty in reference to
the things of the kingdom of God, than to let faith go out
and unbelief come in. Faith must enter into every action
that is pleasing in his sight. In coming to Him, the first
thing is to believe that He is. It is through faith, as the
chief agent under the grace which is the gift of God, that
we are to be saved. (Hebrews 11:6; Eph. 2:8.)
“From this it would seem that faith is a principal
element of spiritual wealth. But if, as already remarked,
no one grace can answer to the full import of the term
‘gold,’ so doubtless other things are included with faith.
‘Faith is the substance of things hoped for.’ Hence
hope is an inseparable accompaniment of faith.
(Hebrews 11:1; Romans 8:24,25.) Again Paul tells us
that faith works by love, and speaks in another place of
being ‘rich in good works.’ (Galatians 5:6; 1
Timothy 6:18.) Hence love cannot be separated from
faith. We then have before us the three things associated
together by Paul in 1 Corinthians 13—faith, hope, and
charity, or love; and the greatest of these is charity,
which is ‘rich in good works.’ Such is the gold tried
by fire which we are counseled to buy.” Smith, DR,
395-397.

“Jacob’s history is also an assurance that God will
not cast off those who have been deceived and tempted
and betrayed into sin, but who have returned unto Him
with true repentance. While Satan seeks to destroy this
class, God will send His angels to comfort and protect
them in the time of peril. The assaults of Satan are
fierce and determined, his delusions are terrible; but the
Lord’s eye is upon His people, and His ear listens to
their cries. Their affliction is great, the flames of the
furnace seem about to consume them; but the
Refiner will bring them forth as gold tried in the fire.
God’s love for His children during the period of their
severest trial is as strong and tender as in the days of
their sunniest prosperity; but it is needful for them to
be placed in the furnace of fire; their earthliness
must be consumed, that the image of Christ may be
perfectly reflected.” Great Controversy, 621.
“The gold tried in the fire is faith that works by
love. Only this can bring us into harmony with God.
We may be active, we may do much work; but without
love, such love as dwelt in the heart of Christ, we can
never be numbered with the family of heaven.” Christ’s
Object Lessons, 158.
“It is contrition and faith and love that enable the
soul to receive wisdom from heaven. Faith working by
love is the key of knowledge, and everyone that loveth
"knoweth God." 1 John 4:7.” Desire of Ages, 139.
White Raiment.—
“He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in
white raiment.” Revelation 3:5.
“Whatever may have been your past experience,
however discouraging your present circumstances, if you
will come to Jesus just as you are, weak, helpless, and
despairing, our compassionate Saviour will meet you
a great way off, and will throw about you His arms of
love and His robe of righteousness. He presents us to
the Father clothed in the white raiment of His own
character. He pleads before God in our behalf, saying:
I have taken the sinner's place. Look not upon this
wayward child, but look on Me. Does Satan plead
loudly against our souls, accusing of sin, and claiming us
as his prey, the blood of Christ pleads with greater
power.
“‘Surely, shall one say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength. ...In the Lord shall all the
seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.’ Isaiah
45:24,25.” Mount of Blessing, 9.

“The gold mentioned by Christ, the True Witness,
which all must have, has been shown me to be faith and
love combined, and love takes the precedence of
faith. Satan is constantly at work to remove these
precious gifts from the hearts of God’s people. All are
engaged in playing the game of life. Satan is well aware
that if he can remove love and faith, and supply their

“Only the covering which Christ Himself has
provided can make us meet to appear in God’s presence.
This covering, the robe of His own righteousness, Christ

89

GEMS FROM REVELATION
will put upon every repenting, believing soul. (Rev.
3:18 quoted). This robe, woven in the loom of heaven,
has in it not one thread of human devising. Christ in
His humanity wrought out a perfect character, and this
character He offers to impart to us. By His perfect
obedience He has made it possible for every human
being to obey God’s commandments. When we submit
ourselves to Christ, the heart is united with His heart,
the will is merged in His will, the mind becomes one
with His mind, the thoughts are brought into
captivity to him; we live His life. This is what it means
to be clothed with the garments of His righteousness.
Then as the Lord looks upon us, He sees, not the fig-leaf
garment, not the nakedness and deformity of sin, but His
own robe of righteousness, which is perfect obedience to
the law of Jehovah.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 311,312.

and poor, and blind, and naked, and will become so
small in his own estimation that he will prefer Christ to
himself, and will lay hold on eternal life.”
6
Testimonies, 82.
“The eyesalve is that wisdom and grace which
enables us to discern between the evil and the good,
and to detect sin under any guise. God has given His
church eyes which He requires them to anoint with
wisdom, that they may see clearly.” 4 Testimonies,
88,89.
“In His work on this earth, Christ saw how, by a
disregard of the injunctions of God, in regard to
righteousness and true doctrines, evil would be made
almost indistinguishable from good. At times He
looked upon the deceiving power of Satan, and saw that
the wrong-doing of evil workers must be met.” Special
Testimonies, Series B, 7.

Eyesalve, That Thou Mayest See.—
“The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of
your calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the saints. And what is the exceeding
greatness of His power to us-ward who believe,
according to the working of His mighty power.”
Ephesians 1:18,19.

When This Counsel is Heeded.—
“When the truth begins to purify them and purge
away their dross and sin, as it surely will when it is
received in the love of it, the one who has this great
work done for him will not feel that he is rich and
increased in goods and has need of nothing.” Early
Writings, 118.

“The eyesalve must denote that by which our
spiritual discernment is quickened. There is but one
agent revealed to us in the word of God by which this is
accomplished, and that is the Holy Spirit. In Acts 10:38
we read that ‘God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the
Holy Ghost.’ ...[John] wrote to the church in his first
epistle as follows: ‘But ye have an unction from the
Holy One, and ye know all things.... But the
anointing which ye have received of Him abideth in
you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as
the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is
truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye
shall abide in Him.’ 1 Jn. 2:20,27. By referring to His
Gospel, it is found that the work which John here sets
forth as accomplished by the anointing is exactly the
same that he there attributes to the Holy Spirit. ‘The
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in My name, He shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.’ Jn. 14:26. (See
also Jn. 16:13.)” Smith, DR, 395-396.

“We thank God that there are souls who realize that
they are in need of something which they do not
possess—gold of faith and love, white raiment of
Christ’s righteousness, eyesalve of spiritual discernment. If you possess these precious gifts, the temple
of the human soul will not be like a desecrated
shrine.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 358.
“When this counsel is heeded, the ‘loud cry’ of
Revelation 18:1 will sound throughout the world.”
Haskel, SSP, 89.
“God leads His people on, step by step. He brings
them up to different points calculated to manifest
what is in the heart. Some endure at one point, but
fall off at the next. At every advanced point the heart is
tested and tried a little closer. If the professed people of
God find their hearts opposed to this straight work, it
should convince them that they have a work to do to
overcome, if they would not be spewed out of the mouth
of the Lord. ...Those who come up to every point, and
stand every test, and overcome, be the price what it
may, have heeded the counsel of the True Witness,
and they will receive the latter rain, and thus be
fitted for translation.” 1 Testimonies, 187,188.

“The eye is the sensitive conscience, the inner
light, of the mind. Upon its correct view of things the
spiritual healthfulness of the whole soul and being
depends. The 'eyesalve,' the Word of God, makes the
conscience smart under its application, for it convicts of
sin. But the smarting is necessary that the healing may
follow, and the eye be single to the glory of God.”
Review & Herald, 11/23/1897.

REVELATION 3:19
As many as I love, I rebuke and
chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent.

“Beholding Jesus in His loveliness, in His selfdenial and self-sacrifice, the self-sufficient rich man
will see himself in contrast as wretched, and miserable,

As Many As I Love, I Rebuke and Chasten.—

90

REVELATION 3
“My son, despise not thou the chastening of the
Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him: For
whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth
every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure chastening,
God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he
whom the father chasteneth not?
“But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are
partakers, than are ye bastards, and not sons.
Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not
much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits,
and live?” Hebrews 12: 5-9.

arouse to zealous repentance and a putting away of
those sins which have brought them into such a
deplorable condition of poverty, blindness, wretchedness, and fearful deception. I was shown that the
pointed testimony must live in the church. This alone
will answer to the message to the Laodiceans. Wrongs
must be reproved, sin must be called sin, and iniquity
must be met promptly and decidedly, and put away
from us as a people.” 3 Testimonies, 260.
“We often sorrow because our evil deeds bring
unpleasant consequences to ourselves; but this is not
repentance. Real sorrow for sin is the result of the
working of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit reveals the
ingratitude of the heart that has slighted and grieved the
Saviour, and brings us in contrition to the foot of the
cross. By every sin Jesus is wounded afresh; and as we
look upon Him whom we have pierced, we mourn for
the sins that have brought anguish upon Him. Such
mourning will lead to the renunciation of sin.” Desire
of Ages, 300.

“In this last vision I was shown that which fully
justifies my course in publishing personal testimonies.
When the Lord singles out individual cases and specifies
their wrongs, others, who have not been shown in vision,
frequently take it for granted that they are right, or
nearly so. If one is reproved for a special wrong,
brethren and sisters should carefully examine themselves
to see wherein they have failed and wherein they have
been guilty of the same sin…. In rebuking the wrongs
of one, He designs to correct many. But if they fail to
take the reproof to themselves, and flatter themselves
that God passes over their errors because He does
not especially single them out, they deceive their own
souls and will be shut up in darkness and be left to
their own ways to follow the imagination of their own
hearts.” 2 Testimonies, 112,113.

“The sin against the Holy Ghost is the sin of
persistent refusal to respond to the invitation to
repent.” Review & Herald, 6/29/1897.
“Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out
my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto
you.” Proverbs 1:23.

“‘As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten.’ But
many will not receive the message that Heaven in mercy
sends them. They cannot endure to be told of their
neglect of duty and of their wrongs, their selfishness,
their pride and love of the world.
“Those who are reproved by the Spirit of God [in
the Testimonies for the Church] should not rise up
against the humble instrument. It is God, and not an
erring mortal, who has spoken to save them from ruin.
Those who despise the warning will be left in blindness
to become self-deceived. But those who heed it, and
zealously go about the work of separating their sins
from them in order to have the needed graces, will be
opening the door of their hearts that the dear Saviour
may come in and dwell with them. This class you will
ever find in perfect harmony with the testimony of the
Spirit of God.” 3 Testimonies, 257.

“I asked the meaning of the shaking I had seen
and was shown that it would be caused by the straight
testimony called forth by the counsel of the True
Witness to the Laodiceans. This will have its effect
upon the heart of the receiver, and will lead him to exalt
the standard and pour forth the straight truth. Some will
not bear this straight testimony. They will rise up
against it, and this is what will cause a shaking
among God's people.
“I saw that the testimony of the True Witness has
not been half heeded. The solemn testimony upon which
the destiny of the church hangs has been lightly
esteemed, if not entirely disregarded. This testimony
must work deep repentance; all who truly receive it
will obey it and be purified.” Early Writings, 270.
“I was shown that the testimony to the Laodiceans
applies to God’s people at the present time, and the
reason it has not accomplished a greater work is because
of the hardness of their hearts. ...It is designed to arouse
the people of God, to discover to them their
backslidings, and to lead to zealous repentance, that
they may be favored with the presence of Jesus, and be
fitted for the loud cry of the third angel.” 1
Testimonies, 186.

“But He says, ‘As many as I love, I rebuke and
chasten’ (with messages of reproof and warning) (Rev.
3:19). These reproofs I am not ignorant of. I have given
warnings because the Spirit of the Lord has
constrained me to do so, and have uttered reproofs
because the Lord has given me words of reproof. I
have not shunned to declare the whole counsel of God,
which has been given me for the church.” (1893)
Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 67.

What Might Have Been.—
“We were assembled in the auditorium of the
Tabernacle. Prayer was offered, a hymn was sung, and

Be Zealous and Repent.—
“The people of God must see their wrongs and

91

GEMS FROM REVELATION
prayer was again offered. Most earnest supplication
was made to God. The meeting was marked by the
presence of the Holy Spirit. The work went deep, and
some present were weeping aloud.
“One arose from his bowed position and said that
in the past he had not been in union with certain ones
and had felt no love for them, but that now he saw
himself as he was. With great solemnity he repeated the
message to the Laodicean church:
“Because thou sayest, I am rich, and in-creased
with goods, and have need of nothing.” In my selfsufficiency this is just the way I felt,’ he said. ‘ “And
knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked.” I now see that this
is my condition. My eyes are opened. My spirit has
been hard and unjust. I thought myself righteous, but
my heart is broken, and I see my need of the precious
counsel of the One who has searched me through and
through. Oh, how gracious and com-passionate and
loving are the words, “I counsel thee to buy of Me gold
tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white
raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the
shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint
thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest see.”’ Rev.
3:17,18.
“The speaker turned to those who had been
praying, and said: ‘We have something to do. We must
confess our sins, and humble our hearts before God.’
He made heartbroken confessions and then stepped
up to several of the brethren, one after another, and
extended his hand, asking forgive-ness. Those to
whom he spoke sprang to their feet, making confession
and asking forgiveness, and they fell upon one another’s
necks, weeping. The spirit of confession spread
through the entire congregation. It was a Pentecostal
season. God’s praises were sung, and far into the
night, until nearly morning, the work was carried on.
“The following words were often repeated, with
clear distinctness: ‘As many as I love, I rebuke and
chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent. Behold, I
stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear My
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and
will sup with him, and he with Me.’ Verse 19, 20.
“No one seemed to be too proud to make heartfelt
confession, and those who led in this work were the ones
who had influence, but had not before had courage to
confess their sins. There was rejoicing such as never
before had been heard in the Tabernacle.
“Then I aroused from my unconsciousness, and for
a while could not think where I was. My pen was still in
my hand. The words were spoken to me: ‘This might
have been. All this the Lord was waiting to do for
His people. All heaven was waiting to be gracious.’ I
thought of where we might have been had thorough
work been done at the last General Conference, and an
agony of disappointment came over me as I realized that
what I had witnessed was not a reality.” 8 Testimonies,
104-106.

REVELATION 3:20
Behold, I stand at the door, and knock:
if any man hear My voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with Me.
Behold, I Stand at the Door, and Knock.—
“Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in
the streets: She crieth in the chief places of concourse,
in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her
words, saying, How long, ye simple ones, will ye love
simplicity? And the scorners delight in the their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my
reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I
will make known my words unto you.” Proverbs
1:20-23.
“The church is in the Laodicean state. The
presence of God is not in her midst.” Last Day Events,
49.
“Every warning, reproof, and entreaty in the
Word of God, or through His messengers, is a knock
at the door of the heart. It is the voice of Jesus
asking for entrance. With every knock unheeded, the
disposition to open becomes weaker. The impressions
of the Holy Spirit if disregarded today, will not be as
strong tomorrow. The heart becomes less impressible,
and lapses into a perilous unconsciousness of the
shortness of life, and of the great eternity beyond. Our
condemnation in the judgment will not result from the
fact that we have been in error, but from the fact that we
have neglected heaven-sent opportunities for learning
what is truth.” Desire of Ages, 489,490.
“So great is the unwillingness of the Lord to
leave you, and such is His love toward you, that
notwithstanding your life has not been in accordance
with His will, and your works and ways have been
offensive to Him, the Majesty of heaven condescends
to beg the privilege of making you a visit and leaving
you His blessing: ‘Behold, I stand at the door, and
knock.’ The mansions in glory are His, and the joy of
that heavenly abode; yet He humbles Himself to seek
an entrance at the door of your heart, that He may
bless you with His light and make you to rejoice in His
glory.” 2 Testimonies, 224.
“‘Know ye not that ye are the temple of God,
and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any
man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy;
for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.’ 1
Cor. 3:16,17. No man can of himself cast out the evil
throng that have taken possession of the heart. Only
Christ can cleanse the soul temple. But He will not
force an entrance. He comes not into the heart as to the
temple of old; but He says, (Rev. 3:20 quoted.)” Desire
of Ages, 161.

92

REVELATION 3
“I saw that many have so much rubbish piled up
at the door of their heart that they cannot get the
door open. Some have difficulties between themselves
and their brethren to remove. Others have evil tempers,
selfish covetousness, to remove before they can open the
door. Others have rolled the world before the door of
their heart, which bars the door. All this rubbish must be
taken away, and then they can open the door and
welcome the Saviour in.” 1 Testimonies, 143.

Holy Spirit. In proportion as we work with the Holy
Spirit’s influence will the truth find admission to the
soul, and transform the character. The truth must be
received in the love of it, with meekness and with love.”
Review & Herald, 7/19/1887.
“‘Know ye not that ye are the temple of God,
and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man
defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the
temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.’ 1 Cor.
3:16, 17. No man can of himself cast out the evil throng
that have taken possession of the heart. Only Christ can
cleanse the soul temple. But He will not force an
entrance. He comes not into the heart as to the temple
of old; but He says, ‘Behold, I stand at the door, and
knock: if any man hear My voice, and open the door,
I will come in to him.’ Rev. 3:20. He will come, not for
one day merely; for He says, ‘I will dwell in them, and
walk in them; ...and they shall be My people.’ ‘He will
subdue our iniquities; and Thou wilt cast all their sins
into the depths of the sea.’ 2 Cor. 6:16; Micah 7:19. His
presence will cleanse and sanctify the soul, so that it
may be a holy temple unto the Lord, and ‘an
habitation of God through the Spirit.’ Eph. 2:21, 22.”
Desire of Ages, 161,162.

“Jesus will not force open the door. You must
open it yourselves and show that you desire His presence
by giving Him a sincere welcome. If all had made
thorough work in clearing away the world’s rubbish
and preparing a place for Jesus, He would have
entered and abode with you, and would have done a
great work through you for the salvation of others.” 2
Testimonies, 217.
“The church is in the Laodicean state. The
presence of God is not in her midst.” Last Day Events,
49.
If Any Man Hear My Voice, And Open the Door.—
“Remember that the Lord of life never forces an
entrance. He condescends to come and knock, and seek
admittance; but He takes up His abode in those hearts
only where He is then a welcome and invited guest.
Smith, DR, 401,402.

“The Spirit of God, as it comes into the heart by
faith, is the beginning of the life eternal. What
promise is less fulfilled in the church than that of the
endowment of the Holy Spirit? Here is our greatest
need. Let the spirit of controversy be put away, and let
us seek for the living testimony of the Spirit of God.
The teacher must be baptized with the Holy Spirit.
Then the mind and spirit of Christ will be in him,
and he will confess Christ in a spiritual and holy life.
He will give evidence that the truth he has received has
not been merely in theory, but that he has been sanctified
through the truth. He can talk of Christ and him crucified
in language that savors of heaven. He can present the
will of God to man because his own heart has been
brought into submission, and has been glorified by the
Spirit of God. The sun of righteousness is risen upon
him, that he may reflect its brightness to the world.”
Review & Herald, 2/9/1892.

“To the lowly, the suffering, the faithful, the
patient, who are alive to their weakness and
insufficiency, are given words of encouragement:
(Rev. 3:20 quoted.)” 5 Testimonies, 484.
“Your work will be made wholly successful if
Jesus is abiding with you, for He has said, ‘Without Me
ye can do nothing.’ Jesus stands knocking at the door
of your hearts, and yet, for all this some say continually,
‘I cannot find Him.’ Why not? He says, ‘I stand here
knocking.’ Why do you not open the door and say,
‘Come in, dear Lord’? I am so glad for these simple
directions as to the way to find Jesus. If it were not
for them, I should not know how to find Him whose
presence I desire so much. Open the door now, and
empty the soul-temple of the buyers and sellers, and
invite the Lord to come in.” Review & Herald,
9/28/1888.

And Will Sup with Him, and He with Me.—
“How forcible and touching is the figure!
Friend with friend, partaking of the cheerful and
social meal! Mind with mind, holding free and
intimate converse! What a festal scene must that be
where the King of glory is a guest! …Nor are we
required to furnish the table for this exalted Guest. This
He does Himself, not with the gross nutriment of earth,
but with viands from His own heavenly storehouse.”
Smith, DR, 402.

I Will Come in to Him.—
“If you will listen to the voice that now speaks to
you, if you will respond without delay to the knocking at
the door of your heart, ‘Come in, Lord Jesus, that I may
sup with Thee, and Thee with me,’ the heavenly Guest
will enter. When this element, which is all divine,
abides with you, there is peace and rest.” Adventist
Home, 350.

“A banquet has been prepared for us. The Lord
has spread before us the treasures of His word.”
Manuscript 70, 1901.

“The light will gain no admission into the soul
unless the door of the heart is open to welcome the

93

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“There is neither hope in Sardis nor Laodicea; out
of this experience must the victors come into that of
Philadelphia…brotherly love. He has no promise for
Laodicea as a whole (corporately)…but the individual
who opens the heart’s door and lets Christ in, who
comes into that wonderful communion with the
divine Lord, will by that very process come into the
condition of brotherly love (Philadelphia). They will
constitute the remnant.” (M.C. Wilcox) Signs of the
Times, 1/17/1911.

the right hand of His Father on the throne that rules the
universe. He is to occupy this position till the conquest
of this rebel world is completed. ‘The Lord said unto
my Lord, Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make
Thine enemies Thy footstool.’ Ps. 110:1. (See also 1
Cor. 15:24,25.)
“When the conflict is over, Jesus will occupy the
throne of David, which was the throne of Adam and the
throne of this world before it was usurped by Satan, who
since then has been ‘the prince of this world.’ (Eze.
21:27; Luke 1:31-33; Matt. 25:31; Isa. 9:6,7.) This is
the throne Christ promises to share with the victors
over the Laodicean condition of lukewarmness and
self-righteousness.” Bunch, SEOC, 252,253.

“Jesus Christ offers us something very special to
eat as He sups with us. It is the ‘little book open’
mentioned in Rev. 10:2, 8-10. The book of Daniel was
unsealed in 1798, and for eating was offered to John,
who represents the Second Advent movement. Not only
are we commanded to eat it, but Jesus holds it out to us
in His own hand. ‘And he said unto me, Take it, and
eat it up….’ Rev. 10:8,9.” PJ

“In this verse there is not only a glorious promise,
but there is also an important doctrine. We learn by this
that Christ reigns consecutively upon two thrones.
One is the throne of His Father, the other is His own
throne. He declares ...that He has overcome, and is now
set down with His Father in his throne. He is now
associated with the Father in the throne of universal
dominion, placed at His right hand, far above all
principality, power, might, and dominion. (Ephesians
1:20-22.) While in this position, He is a priest-king. He
is a priest, ‘a minister of the sanctuary;’ but at the
same time He is ‘on the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in the heavens.’ Hebrews 8:1,2. This
position and work of our Lord was thus predicted by the
prophet Zechariah: ‘Speak unto him, saying, Thus
speaketh the Lord of hosts (God), saying, Behold the
man whose name is The Branch (Christ); and He shall
grow up out of His place, and he shall build the
temple of the Lord: ...and He (Christ) shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon His (God’s) throne;
and He (Christ) shall be a priest upon His (God’s)
throne: and the counsel of peace (in the sacrifice and
priestly work of Christ in behalf of repenting man) shall
be between them both.’ Zech. 6: 12,13.
“But the time is coming when He is to change His
position, and leaving the throne of His Father, take His
own throne. This must be when the time comes for the
reward of the overcomers, for when they enter upon
their reward, they are to sit with Christ on His throne, as
He has overcome, and is now seated with the Father
upon His throne. This change in the position of Christ is
set forth by Paul:
“‘Then cometh the end, when He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father;
when He shall have put down all rule and all
authority and power. For He must reign, till He hath
put all enemies under His feet. The last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death. For He hath put all things
under His feet. But when he saith all things are put
under Him, it is manifest that He is excepted, which
did put all things under Him. And when all things
shall be subdued unto Him, then shall the Son also
Himself be subject unto Him that put all things
under Him, that God may be all in all.’ 1 Cor. 15:2428.

REVELATION 3:21
To him that overcometh will I grant to
sit with Me in My throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with My Father
in His throne.
Him that Overcometh Will Sit with Me.—
“The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David; He will
not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy body [Jesus] will I set
upon thy throne. If thy children will keep My
covenant and My testimony that I shall teach them,
their children shall also sit upon thy throne for
evermore.” Psalm 132:11,12.
“In the kingdom of God, position is not gained
through favoritism. It is not earned, nor is it received
through an arbitrary bestowal. It is the result of
character. The crown and the throne are the tokens of
a condition attained—tokens of self-conquest
through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
“Long afterward, when John had been brought into
sympathy with Christ through the fellowship of His
sufferings, the Lord Jesus revealed to him what is the
condition of nearness to His kingdom. (Rev. 3:21
quoted.) The one who stands nearest to Christ will be he
who has drunk most deeply of His spirit of selfsacrificing love—love that ‘vaunteth not itself, is not
puffed up,... seeketh not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinketh no evil’ (1 Cor. 13: 4,5)—love that
moves the disciple, as it moved our Lord, to give all, to
live and labor and sacrifice even unto death, for the
saving of humanity.” Acts of the Apostles, 543.
“They [the redeemed] shall reign for ever and
ever.” Rev. 22:5.
Two Thrones.—
“From Hebrews 8:1 we learn that Christ is now at

94

REVELATION 3
“...From this it will be seen that the kingdom which
Christ delivers up to the Father is that which he holds at
the present time upon His Father’s throne, where He
tells us He is now seated. He delivers up this kingdom
at the end of His priestly mediation, when the time
comes for Him to take His own throne. After this He
reigns on the throne of His father David, and is subject
only to God, who still retains His position upon the
throne of universal dominion. In this reign of Christ the
saints participate. ‘To him that overcometh will I
grant to sit with Me in My throne.’ ‘They live,’ says
John, dating from the first resurrection, ‘and reigned
with Christ a thousand years.’ Rev. 20:4. This we
understand to be a special reign, or for a special purpose,
as will be noticed in that chapter, for the actual reign of
the saints is to be ‘forever and ever.’ Daniel 7: 18, 27.
How can any earthly attraction divert our gaze from this
enduring and heavenly prospect? Smith, DR, 403-405.

as our "Father which is in heaven is perfect.” Desire of
Ages, 311,312.
“(Rev. 3:21 quoted.) We can overcome. Yes;
fully, entirely. Jesus died to make a way of escape for
us, that we might overcome every evil temper, every sin,
every temptation, and sit down at last with Him.” 1
Testimonies, 144.
“Everyone who enters the pearly gates of the city
of God will enter there as a conqueror, and his greatest
conquest will have been the conquest of self.” 9
Testimonies, 183.
“Those who would overcome must put to the tax
every power of their being. They must agonize on
their knees before God for divine power. Christ came
to be our example, and to make known to us that we may
be partakers of the divine nature.” Selected Messages,
Vol. 1, 409.

“He ‘shall sit and rule upon His throne; and He
shall be a priest upon His throne.’ Not now ‘upon the
throne of His glory;’ the kingdom of glory has not yet
been ushered in. Not until His work as a mediator shall
be ended will God ‘give unto Him the throne of His
father David,’ a kingdom of which ‘there shall be no
end.’ Luke 1:32,33. As a priest, Christ is now set
down with the Father in His throne. Rev. 3:21. Upon
the throne with the eternal, self-existent One is He who
‘hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows,’ who
‘was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin,’ that He might be ‘able to succor them that are
tempted.’ ‘If any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father.’ Isaiah 53:4; Hebrews 4:15; 2:18; 1 John
2:1. His intercession is that of a pierced and broken
body, of a spotless life. The wounded hands, the pierced
side, the marred feet, plead for fallen man, whose
redemption was purchased at such infinite cost.” Great
Controversy, 416.

“Christ was a perfect overcomer; and we must be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing, without spot or
blemish. The redemption which Christ achieved for man
was at infinite cost to Himself. The victory we gain
over our own evil hearts and over the temptations of
Satan will cost us strong effort, constant
watchfulness, and persevering prayer; and we shall
then not only reap the reward, which is the gift of eternal
life, but shall increase our happiness on earth by a
consciousness of duty performed, and by the greater
respect and love of those about us.” 4 Testimonies, 39.
“The apostle declares that he who would gain
special victories and make higher attainments in
righteousness must be ‘temperate in all things.’
Temperance in eating and drinking at our tables, as
well as the exercise of temperance in every other
respect, is essential if we would overcome as Christ
overcame.” 4 Testimonies, 215.

Even As I Also Overcame.—
“[Jesus] was in all points tempted like as we are,
yet without sin.” Hebrews 4:16.
“There hath no temptation taken you but such as is
common to man [Jesus]; but God is faithful, who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that
ye may be able to bear it.” 1 Corinthians 10:13.

“When a man is earnestly engaged day by day in
overcoming the defects in His character, he is cherishing
Christ in his soul-temple; the light of Christ is in him.
Under the bright beams of the light of Christ’s
countenance his entire being becomes elevated and
ennobled. He has the peace of heaven in his soul. ...By
resisting or enduring temptation, circumstances are
controlled by the might of the will in the name of
Jesus. This is overcoming as Christ overcame. ‘This is
the victory that overcometh the world, even our
faith.’ (1 John 5:4).” 4 Testimonies, 346.

“Christ is the ladder that Jacob saw, the base
resting on the earth, and the topmost round reaching to
the gate of heaven, to the very threshold of glory. If that
ladder had failed by a single step of reaching the earth,
we should have been lost. But Christ reaches us where
we are. He took our nature and overcame, that we
through taking His nature might overcome. Made
"in the likeness of sinful flesh" (Rom. 8:3), He lived a
sinless life. Now by His divinity He lays hold upon the
throne of heaven, while by His humanity He reaches
us. He bids us by faith in Him attain to the glory of the
character of God. Therefore are we to be perfect, even

“The means by which we can overcome the wicked
one is that by which Christ overcame—the power of the
Word.” Desire of Ages, 258.
“The lower passions have their seat in the body and
work through it. The words ‘flesh’ or ‘fleshly’ or
‘carnal lusts’ embrace the lower, corrupt nature; the

95

GEMS FROM REVELATION
flesh of itself cannot act contrary to the will of God. We
are commanded to crucify the flesh, with the affections
and lusts. How shall we do it? Shall we inflict pain on
the body? No; but put to death the temptation to sin.
The corrupt thought is to be expelled. Every thought
is to be brought into captivity to Jesus Christ. All
animal propensities are to be subjected to the higher
powers of the soul. The love of God must reign
supreme; Christ must occupy an undivided throne. Our
bodies are to be regarded as His purchased possession.
The members of the body are to become the instruments
of righteousness.” Adventist Home, 127,128.

“Enter your closets with the Bible in your hand,
and there commune with God, having an ear to hear
what the Spirit saith unto you. Let your heart be
humbled and teachable, softened and subdued by the
Holy Spirit. If you find that your former views are not
sustained by the Bible, it is for your eternal interest to
learn this as soon as possible; for when God speaks in
His Word, our preconceived opinions must be yielded
up and our ideas brought into harmony with a ‘Thus
saith the Lord.’ Christ said, ‘Sanctify them through
thy truth; thy word is truth.’ With submissive spirit
you are to obey the truth at any cost, knowing that the
precepts of the Bible are the word of the eternal God.”
Southern Work, 47.

Eighth Promise to Overcomer in Revelation.—
“He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and
I will be his God, and he shall be my son.” Rev. 21:7.

“Your mind was given that you might understand
how to work. Your eyes were given that you might be
keen to discern your God-given opportunities. Your
ears are to listen for the commands of God. Your
knees are to bow three times a day in heartfelt prayer.
Your feet are to run in the way of God’s
commandments. Thought, effort, talent, should be put
into exercise that you may be prepared to graduate into
the school above and hear from the lips of One who has
overcome all temptations in our behalf the words: ‘To
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down
with My Father in His throne.’” 6 Testimonies, 298.

REVELATION 3:22
He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the churches.
Let Him Hear.—
“The Saviour bade His disciples: ‘Take heed
therefore how ye hear.’ And he speaks of a certain
class that hear and will not understand lest they should
be converted and be healed. Again He said: ‘Take
heed what ye hear.’ ‘He that is of God heareth God’s
words.’
“Those who listen to the words of Christ heard and
reported His teaching just according to the spirit that was
in them. It is ever thus with those who hear God’s word.
The manner in which they understand and receive it
depends upon the spirit which dwells in their hearts.
“...If persons listen to God’s message of reproof,
warning, or encouragement while their hearts are filled
with prejudice, they will not understand the true import
of that which was sent them to be a savor of life unto
life. Satan stands by to present everything to their
understanding in a false light. But the souls that are
hungering and thirsting for divine knowledge will
hear aright, and will obtain the precious blessings
that God designs to convey to them. Their minds are
under the influence of His Holy Spirit, and they hear
aright. When hearts are purified from selfishness and
egotism, they are in harmony with the message God
sends them.
The perceptions are quickened, the
sensibilities refined. Like appreciates like. ‘He that is
of God heareth God’s words.’” 5 Testimonies,
695,696

“The final appeal is made by the Holy Spirit for all
who have ears to listen to the message of Christ to the
church of the Laodiceans. It indicates that the voice of
Christ is also the voice of the Holy Spirit, because
they always speak in unison.” Bunch, SEOC, 253.
“And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to
the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.” Is. 30:21.
Summary.—
“The seven churches mentioned by John in
Revelation 1 and 2 signify
(1) the Active Church, sound in doctrine but
deficient in love;
(2) the Poor but Rich Church;
(3) the Heretical Church;
(4) the Church of the False Prophetess;
(5) the Dying Church;
(6) the Loyal Church (Re.3:8 - thou has a little
strength);
(7) the Lukewarm, Self-Satisfied Church.” From:
hubpages.com/hub/prophecy-isaiah

“Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the
LORD hath spoken.” Jer. 13:15.

96

REVELATION 4

97

GEMS FROM REVELATION

98

REVELATION 4

REVELATION 4
opened in heaven,’ not into heaven. This expression
reads literally in the Greek, ‘Behold a door open in
heaven.’ It was not an opening of heaven itself before
the mind of John, as in the case of Stephen (Acts 7:56),
but some place in heaven was open before him, and he
was permitted to behold what was taking place within.
That what John saw open was the heavenly
sanctuary, will plainly appear from other parts of the
book.” Smith, DR, 407.

A VIEW IN THE HOLY PLACE
REVELATION 4:1-11
1 After this I looked, And, behold, a door was opened in heaven:
and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet
talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee
things which must be hereafter.
2 And immediately I was in the spirit; and, behold, a throne was
set in heaven, and one sat on the throne.
3 And he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine
stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight
like unto an emerald.
4 And round about the throne were four and twenty seats: and
upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting. Clothed in
white raiment; and they had on their head crowns of gold.
5 And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings
and voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the
throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.
6 And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto
crystal: and in the midst of the throne, were four beasts full of
eyes before and behind.
7 And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a
calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast
was like a flying eagle.
8 And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him;
and they were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night,
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is,
and is to come.
9 And when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to
him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever.
10 The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on
the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever end ever, and cast
their crowns before the throne, saying,
11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and
power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created.

“The first apartment is identified by the things
which it contains. When John was called in vision to
ascend to the place of God’s throne, the heavenly
temple, a door was opened in heaven, and the throne of
God was revealed to his view. This is manifestly the
door of the heavenly temple, for the throne of God
which it discloses to view is within that temple. Ps.11:4;
Rev.16:17. That it was the first apartment of that temple
into which he looked, is evident from what he saw
therein. ‘And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and
thundering and voices; and there were seven lamps of
fire burning before the throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God.’ Rev.4:5. Here is a plain reference to the
seven lamps which burned in the first apartment of the
earthly sanctuary. Lev.24:2-4.” Andrews, JEO, 67.
“The holy places of the sanctuary in heaven are
represented by the two apartments in the sanctuary on
earth. As in vision the apostle John was granted a view
of the temple of God in heaven, he beheld there ‘seven
lamps of fire burning before the throne.’ Rev. 4:5.
...Here the prophet was permitted to behold the first
apartment of the sanctuary in heaven; and he saw
there the ‘seven lamps of fire’ and ‘the golden altar,’
represented by the golden candlestick and the altar of
incense in the sanctuary on earth.” Great Controversy,
414,415.

REVELATION 4:1
After this I looked, And, behold, a
door was opened in heaven: and the first
voice which I heard was as it were of a
trumpet talking with me; which said, Come
up hither, and I will shew thee things which
must be hereafter.

“The door was opened to the Holy Place of the
heavenly sanctuary in 31 AD for Christ’s ascension
to heaven. Chapter 4 is a presentation of the Holy Place
of the heavenly sanctuary. The Father, in His movable
throne and all heaven are there waiting for the arrival of
Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, who had just been slain.”
PJ

After This.—
“A new scene and a new vision now open before
us. The expression ‘after this’ does not denote that
what is recorded in Revelation 4 and onward was to take
place after the fulfillment of everything recorded in the
three preceding chapters. It means only that after the
prophet had seen and heard what is there recorded,
he had the new view which he now introduces.”
Smith, DR, 407.

The First Voice As It Were of a Trumpet.—
“This is the voice of Jesus, whose voice is like a
trumpet—the same voice he heard when he saw Jesus on
the seventh-day Sabbath in Ch. 1:10.” PJ
Come Up Hither.—
“And the two disciples heard him speak, and they

A Door Was Opened in Heaven.—
“Let it be noticed that John says, ‘A door was

99

GEMS FROM REVELATION
followed Jesus. [John was one of these two disciples.]
“Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and
saith unto them, What seek ye? They said unto him,
Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,)
where dwellest thou?
“He saith unto them, Come and see. They came
and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day:
for it was about the tenth hour.” John 1:37-39.

550 references made to Old Testament passages.”
Bunch, TR, 3.
Things Which Must Be Hereafter.—
“I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I
am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell
and of death. Write the things which thou hast seen, and
the things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter.” Revelation 1:18,19.

“John had followed Jesus withersoever He went
while He was on earth. But Jesus was just a pilgrim and
a stranger on the earth, and had no where to lay his head.
John, too, a prisoner on Patmos island, had no where to
lay his head. Now John hears the voice of Jesus again,
saying, ‘Come up here John, and see where I dwell. I
will shew you things.’
“This invitation is given to us and repeated
continually till we reach the heavenly abode of Jesus.
Thus, in the first four seals, depicting every stage of
church apostasy, we have the invitation given to God’s
people four times to ‘Come, and see.’” PJ

“Compare this with Revelation 1:1. The great
object of the Revelation seems to be the presentation
of future events which will inform, edify, and comfort
the church.” Smith, DR, 407.
“And now I have told you before it come to
pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe.”
John 14:29.

“Infinite Love has cast up a pathway upon which
the ransomed of the Lord may pass from earth to heaven.
That path is the Son of God. Angel guides are sent to
direct our erring feet. Heaven’s glorious ladder is let
down in every man’s path, barring his way to vice and
folly. He must trample upon a crucified Redeemer
ere he can pass onward to a life of sin. Our heavenly
Father’s voice is calling us, Come up hither.... The
humble, trusting ones are guided and protected in the
way of peace. But He who is infinite in wisdom
compels none to accept Heaven’s most precious gift—
compels none to walk in the path which has been cast up
at such a cost. Every one is permitted to choose for
himself the narrow, shining steep path that leads to
heaven, or that broader and easier way which ends in
death.” Our High Calling, 11.

REVELATION 4:2
And immediately I was in the spirit;
and, behold, a throne was set in heaven, and
one sat on the throne.
Immediately.—
“In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead
shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.”
1Cor. 15:52.

“The temple of God is opened in heaven, and the
threshold is flushed with the glory of God which is
for every church that will love God and keep His
commandments. We need to study, to meditate, and to
pray. Then we shall have spiritual eyesight to discern
the inner courts of the celestial temple. We shall catch
the themes of song and thanksgiving of the heavenly
choir round about the throne. When Zion shall arise and
shine, her light will be most penetrating, and precious
songs of praise and thanksgiving will be heard in the
assemblies of the saints.” 6 Testimonies, 368.

In the Spirit.—
“Once before in this book we have had the
expression, ‘I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day’
(Revelation 1:10), where it was taken to express the fact
that John had a vision upon the Sabbath, or true Lord’s
day. If it there expressed the state of being in vision, it
would denote the same thing here. Consequently the
first vision ended with Revelation 3, and a new one is
here introduced. Nor is it any objection to this view
that previous to this, as is learned from the first verse of
this chapter, John was in such a spiritual state as to be
able to look up and see a door open in heaven, and to
hear a voice like a mighty sound of a trumpet calling
him up to a nearer prospect of heavenly things. Stephen,
also, full of the Holy Ghost, looked up and saw the
heavens open, and the Son of man on the right hand of
God. To be in the Spirit denotes a high state of spiritual
elevation.” Smith, DR, 408.

I Will Shew Thee Things.—
“These events are portrayed in symbols. We
must not forget that the last book of the Bible is ‘God’s
picture book’ in which the whole message of the
Scriptures is summarized and dramatized. The figures
and symbols of the Apocalypse are drawn largely
from the Old Testament. It has been said that of the
404 verses in the Revelation, 265 contain expressions
drawn from the Old Testament, and that there are at least

A Throne Was Set in Heaven.—
“God’s throne …is a living, moving throne.
Sometimes it was seen at the ‘threshold of the
house’—at the door—and again it ‘stood over the
cherubim.’ Eze. 9:3; 10:18; Rev. 4:1-6. ‘Whither the
Spirit was to go,’ that is, wherever God desired to go,
the throne went. Eze. 1: 12,20. We must therefore
conclude that when Christ at his ascension entered the
holy place to begin His work as High Priest in the

100

REVELATION 4
heavenly sanctuary, God with His living throne,
moved to ‘the threshold of the house,’ that is, to the
door of the holy place, to welcome His Son.” Peck,
PATH, 94.
One Sat on the Throne.—
“John’s reverent reticence to describe the Ruler
of the universe in terms that might seem in any way
anthropomorphic is apparent from the fact that he
describes Him simply by the participle kathemenos,
‘sitting,’ without stating what or who was sitting. He
implies only that a presence was upon the throne.
Such a reference to the Father stands in striking contrast
with the detailed description of the Son (ch. 1:13-16);
but the Son is human as well as divine, and can therefore
be described appropriately in human terms.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 767.

“God met them at the door of the tabernacle—the
door of the first apartment. ‘Then a cloud covered the
tent of the congregation and the glory of the Lord
filled the tabernacle. And Moses was not able to
enter into the tent of the congregation, because the
cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled
the tabernacle.’ Exodus 40:34,35.
“ ‘And the Lord spoke suddenly unto Moses,
and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye
three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And
they three came out. And the Lord came down in the
pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the
tabernacle and called Aaron and Miriam and they
both came forth.’ Numbers 12:4,5.
“Isn’t it remarkable? God stood in the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.
“ ‘And Moses and Aaron went from the
presence of the assembly unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon
their faces: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto
them. And the Lord spake unto Moses.’ Number
20:6,7.
“…This shows that at times God did dwell in the
first apartment of the earthly tabernacle; and so in the
great antitypical heavenly temple, we can expect the
presence of God to preside in the first apartment as well
as in the second apartment.” Cooke, #7-UR, 5.

“The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord’s
throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try,
the children of men.” Psalm 11:4.
“A glorious high throne from the beginning is the
place of our sanctuary.” Jeremiah 17:12.
“...I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high
and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.” Isaiah
6:1.

“Inside the sanctuary, the first room was called
the holy place. The table of the bread of the Presence
(the ‘table of shewbread,’ Numbers 4:7, KJV) was
located there. It represented God’s heavenly throne, and
the bread on it represented our living Saviour.”
“...The assumption that God’s celestial throne is
located only in the heavenly most holy place overlooks
the fact that in Old Testament times God’s presence was
not always confined to the most holy place but was
sometimes represented in the holy place. See, for
example, Exodus 33:9 and Ezekiel 9:3. It also overlooks
the symbolic purpose of the table of the bread of the
Presence (the table of shewbread, KJV).
“Hebrews 8:1, 2, written in the first century AD,
unequivocally portrays Jesus as High Priest already
seated on the Father’s throne in the heavenly sanctuary.
Revelation 4 and 5, also written in the first century,
likewise locates the Lamb at the throne of God.
“By contrast, Daniel 7:9-14 foretells an occasion
after the close of the 1260 year-days (that is,
sometime after 1798), when thrones would be set up
in a new location, the Father would move to these
thrones and take His seat upon one of them, and
numerous other living beings would join Him there.
After books were opened and the judgment was set, the
Son of man would move to the new location in order to
resume His position close to His Father.
“The simple and logical conclusion to be drawn is
that at His ascension in AD 31 Jesus went at once to
the side of the Father, seated on heaven’s celestial
equivalent of the table of the bread of the Presence
(the table of shewbread) in the heavenly sanctuary’s

“The Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was
white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure
wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as burning fire.” Daniel 7:9.
“The Father’s person I could not behold, for a
cloud of glorious light covered Him. I asked Jesus if
His Father had a form like Himself. He said He had, but
I could not behold it, for said He, ‘If you should once
behold the glory of His person, you would cease to
exist.’” Early Writings, 54.
Only One Being on the Throne.—
“Only God the Father is seen on the throne. Rev.
3:21 says that Jesus would sit with His Father on that
throne. The fact that only the Father is seen would
mean that Jesus Christ had not yet ascended in this
prophetic view given to John.” PJ
Location of the Throne.—
“It is informative to notice that even in the first
apartment of the earthly tabernacle, sometimes the
presence of God was manifested in such a way that the
priests were unable to enter into the sanctuary at all.
“ ‘This shall be a continual burnt offering
throughout your generations at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord:
where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee. And
there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the
tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.’ Exodus
29:42,43.

101

GEMS FROM REVELATION
vast and glorious ‘holy place.’ In that location, John
saw Him break open the seven seals.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 163,171,172.
“The throne ...might correspond to the table of
shewbread in the holy place, since the table is the only
article of sanctuary furniture not mentioned explicitly in
Revelation.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 208.

me in my throne,
Even as I also overcame,
And am set down with my Father in his throne.
“...The Father’s throne (4:2ff.), the overcoming
of Christ (5:5), and Christ’s joining the Father on His
throne (5:6ff.) are the central themes of Revelation 4
and 5. Not until Revelation 7 are the redeemed
explicitly permitted to join in the rejoicing and the
worship of the heavenly court (7:9-12). Just as the
reward of the saints is related to Christ’s in
Revelation 3:21, so the two throne scenes of
Revelation 5 and 7:9ff. are related, although
separated chronologically.
“The introductory scene of the seals (Rev 4-5) is,
therefore, an elaboration of the latter part of 3:21
(concerning Christ’s overcoming and enthronement).
The praise scene of 7:9-17 fulfills the promise that the
overcomer will join Christ on His throne. Between the
two throne scenes is chapter 6. Therefore, the seals of
chapter 6 correspond to the assertion of 3:21 [‘to him
that overcometh’]; they span the time from the
overcoming of the Lamb to the reward of the sealed.
“The seals of chapter 6 have to do with the ongoing
period in which God’s people are in the process of
overcoming.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 202,203.

A Moveable Throne.—
“His throne was like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as burning fire.” Daniel 7:9.
“When Christ at His ascension entered the holy
place to begin His work as High Priest in the heavenly
sanctuary, God with His living throne, moved to ‘the
threshold of the house,’ that is, to the door of the holy
place, to welcome His Son.” Peck, PATH, 94.
The Throne Scene.—
“The throne scene is not the investigative
judgment of Daniel 7:9,10.
“a. The Revelation scene is not designated a
judgment; the Daniel scene is (Dan. 7:10,26).
“b. The Revelation scene has only one book: It is
in the Father’s hand; it is closed and sealed; no being in
the universe except the Lamb can open it; the book is
never opened in the vision. By contrast, in the Daniel
scene there are two or more books. They are open, and
it is implied that they were opened for the Ancient of
days by the attending holy beings (Dan. 7:10).” Biblical
Research Inst., 1SOR, 178.
“The sanctuary scene in chapters 4-5 is the first
view of the heavenly sanctuary in the book. It is best
identified with the inauguration or dedication service
of the ancient sanctuary. The central focus is on the
consequences of the cross, one of which was the
establishment of Christ’s reign in the heavenly
sanctuary.
“The portrayal is definitely not a judgment scene as
one might expect if the Day of Atonement were in view.
In fact, the explicit language of judgment is totally
absent from the scene. The only time a Greek word
for judging appears in the first half of the book is in
Revelation 6:10, and there the assertion is that God
has not yet begun to judge! Since the sanctuary scene
in Revelation 5 precedes the opening of the seals, the
evidence that the fifth seal occurs in a time of ‘not
judging’ is decisive in locating the seals in the general
Christian Era.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR,
187,188.

REVELATION 4:3
And he that sat was to look upon like a
jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a
rainbow round about the throne, in sight
like unto an emerald.
He That Sat Was to Look Upon.—
“Being again in heavenly vision, John first beheld a
throne set in heaven, and the Divine Being seated upon
it. The description of the appearance of this personage,
clothed in garments of mingled colors, is such as at
once to suggest to the mind a monarch vested with
his royal robes. About the throne there was a rainbow,
which added grandeur to the scene, and reminds us that
though He who sits upon the throne is an almighty and
absolute ruler, He is nevertheless the covenantkeeping God.” Smith, DR, 408.
A Jasper.—
“Japer is noted for its purity and brilliancy and is
thought by some to be the modern diamond. It is
called ‘a stone most precious’ and has a crystalline
clearness with a purple hue.” Bunch, TR, 4.

The Framework of the Seven Seals Vision.—
“The best starting point for a study of the seals and
their context is Revelation 3:21. Although the passage
functions as the climax of all the promises to the
overcomer (Rev. 2-3), its language provides a summary
overview of the content of the seven seals:
“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with

“[The New Jerusalem] Having the glory of God.
Her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like
a jasper stone, clear as crystal.” Rev. 21:11.
“And he shewed me a pure river of water of life,
clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God
and of the Lamb.” Revelation 22:1
A Sardine Stone.—

102

REVELATION 4
“The sardius is also exceedingly precious and
beautiful and is of a bright red or carnation color.”
Bunch, TR, 4.
“Pliny …notes that this stone was to be found at
Sardis, and accordingly took the name of that city. Here
it describes a brilliant red light.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 767.

divine judgments, the Saviour, interceding with the
Father in his behalf, points to the bow in the clouds, to
the rainbow around the throne and above His own
head, as a token of the mercy of God toward the
repentant sinner.
“With the assurance given to Noah concerning the
Flood, God Himself has linked one of the most precious
promises of His grace: ‘As I have sworn that the
water of Noah should no more go over the earth; so
have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor
rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart, and the
hills be removed; but My kindness shall not depart
from thee, neither shall the covenant of My peace be
removed, saith Jehovah that hath mercy on thee.’ Is.
54:9,10.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 107.

A Jasper and a Sardine Stone.—
“The colors of the jasper and sardine stone, clear
and red, remind us of the water and blood that flowed
from Jesus’ side. And thus, with John we see that the
Father’s heart of love to us is the same as Christ’s that
was pierced for us at Calvary.
“The jasper and the sardine stones were also the
last and first stones set in the high priest’s
breastplate. And on each of these stones were engraved
the names of the children (the twelve tribes) of Israel.
(See Ex. 28:15-21.) This tells us, too, that we are
continually thought of and cared for in God’s heart
of love.” PJ
A Rainbow.—
“I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a
token of a covenant between me and the earth. And it
shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth,
that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: And I will
remember my covenant, which is between me and you
and every living creature of all flesh.” Gen. 9:13-15.

About the Throne.—
“As a token of the covenant between Father and
Son, the bow was placed about the throne. ‘Justice and
judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy
and truth shall go before thy face,’ for ‘mercy and
truth are met together; righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.’ After the flood, the rainbow in the
cloud was but a faint reflection of the constant reminder
in heaven of the everlasting covenant made for the
salvation of man before the foundation of the world.”
Haskel, SSP, 95.

“As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud
in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the
brightness round about. This was the appearance of the
likeness of the glory of the Lord. And when I saw it, I
fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that
spake.” Ezekiel 1:28.

“The rainbow about the throne is an assurance
that God is true; that in Him is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. We have sinned against Him and are
undeserving of His favor; yet He Himself has put into
our lips that most wonderful of pleas: ‘Do not abhor
us, for Thy name’s sake, do not disgrace the throne
of Thy glory: remember, break not Thy covenant
with us.’ Jeremiah 14:21. He has pledged Himself to
give heed to our cry when we come to Him confessing
our unworthiness and sin. The honor of His throne is
staked for the fulfillment of His word to us.” 8
Testimonies, 23.

“The rainbow spanning the heavens with its arch of
light is a token of ‘the everlasting covenant between
God and every living creature.’ Genesis 9:16. And
the rainbow encircling the throne on high is also a
token to God’s children of His covenant of peace.”
Education, 115.

“The rainbow of promise encircling the throne on
high is an everlasting testimony that ‘God so loved the
world....’ It testifies to the universe that God will never
forsake His people in their struggle with evil. It is an
assurance to us of strength and protection as long as the
throne itself shall endure.” Desire of Ages, 493.

“As the bow in the cloud is formed by the union of
the sunlight and the shower, so the rainbow encircling
the throne represents the combined power of mercy
and justice. It is not justice alone that is to be
maintained; for this could eclipse the glory of the
rainbow of promise above the throne; men could see
only the penalty of the law. Were there no justice, no
penalty, there would be no stability to the government of
God. It is the mingling of judgment and mercy that
makes salvation complete. It is the blending of the two
that leads us, as we view the world’s Redeemer, and the
law of Jehovah, to exclaim, ‘Thy gentleness hath made
me great.’” Review & Herald, 12/13/1892.

“By faith let us look upon the rainbow round about
the throne, the cloud of sins confessed behind it. The
rainbow of promise is an assurance to every humble,
contrite, believing soul, that his life is one with Christ,
and that Christ is one with God. The wrath of God will
not fall upon one soul that seeks refuge in Him. God
Himself has declared, ‘When I see the blood, I will
pass over you.’ ‘The bow shall be in the cloud; and I
will look upon it, that I may remember the
everlasting covenant.’” Testimonies to Ministers,
157,158.

“When man by his great wickedness invites the

103

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The rainbow was round about the throne. No
matter which direction God looked, He could see this
token of His promise to us, assuring us that the floods
of His wrath will never overwhelm his children, even
when His enemies are swept away with the deluge of
destruction.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 42.

heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by
him, and for him.” Colossians 1:16.
“I beheld till the thrones were cast down (placed),
and the Ancient of days did sit….” Dan. 7:9.

“When we study the divine character in the light
of the cross we see mercy, tenderness, and
forgiveness blended with equity and justice. We see
in the midst of the throne One bearing in hands and feet
and side the marks of the suffering endured to reconcile
man to God. We see a Father, infinite, dwelling in light
unapproachable, yet receiving us to Himself through the
merits of His Son. The cloud of vengeance that
threatened only misery and despair, in the light
reflected from the cross reveals the writing of God:
Live, sinner, live! ye penitent, believing souls, live! I
have paid a ransom.” Acts of the Apostles, 333.

Elders.—
“These are apparently the oldest and wisest among
created beings in the government of God, closely
associated with the angels.” PJ

“The ruling principles of God's throne are justice
and mercy. It is called the Throne of Grace. Would
you have divine enlightenment, go to the Throne of
Grace. You will be answered from the Seat of Mercy.
A compact entered into by the Father and the Son to
save the world through Christ, who would give Himself
that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but
have eternal life. No human power or angelic power
could make such a covenant. The rainbow above the
Throne is a token that God through Christ binds
Himself to save all who believe on Him. The
covenant is as sure as the throne. Then why are we
so unbelieving, so distrustful?” Manuscript Releases,
Vol. 1, 109.

Four and Twenty Elders.—
“King David divided the typical priesthood into 24
courses, and this order was still in vogue at the time of
Christ. See Luke 1: 5,8,9. Each of these 24 courses was
under the direction of a ‘prince,’ ‘elder,’ or ‘governor.’
...The earthly sanctuary and its priest-hood and services
were typical of the heavenly. The author of the book of
Hebrews declares that the typical were the ‘figures of
the true’ and ‘the patterns of the things in the
heavens.’ (Heb. 9: 9,23,24). The twenty-four elders
seated on thrones encircling the throne of God in the
heavenly temple, are therefore doubtless princes in
charge of the 24 courses of the heavenly service.
They doubtless each have many assistants as in the
typical service.” Bunch, TR, 6,7.

A Brilliant Scene.—
“John employs the names of three precious
stones—jasper, carnelian (sardius), and emerald—to
convey the majestic presence of God, the brilliance that
emanates from His throne. The scene brings to mind the
psalmist’s characterization of God as one enveloped in
light (Ps. 104:2), and the apostle Paul’s portrayal of
Him as dwelling ‘in unapproachable light’ (1 Tim.
6:16).” Battistone, God’s Church, 63.

Four and Twenty Elders.—
“Some interpreters see the 24 elders as angels, not
as human beings. They point out that the elders are
portrayed as ministering the prayers of the saints (ch.
5:8), a work, they say, that would hardly be committed
to humans.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 768.

“For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light
shall we see light.” Psalm 36:9.

“The four and twenty elders are always associated
with the angelic class in the Scriptures:
“And when those beasts give glory and honour and
thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever
and ever, The four and twenty elders fall down before
him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth
for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the
throne.” Rev. 4:9,10. (Here, as in Rev. 4:4, the 24
elders are seen before Christ arrives in Rev. 5:6.)
“And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many
angels round about the throne and the beasts and the
elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands.” Rev. 5:11.
“And all the angels stood round about the throne,
and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before
the throne on their faces, and worshipped God.” Rev.
7:11.
“And the four and twenty elders and the four
beasts fell down and worshipped God that sat on the
throne, saying, Amen; Alleluia.” Rev. 19:4. In this last
mention of the 24 Elders, they are not counted with the
group of “much people” in Rev.19: 1, or with the “great
multitude” of Rev. 19: 6.
“Angels have white robes and crowns, but more

REVELATION 4:4
And round about the throne were four
and twenty seats: and upon the seats I saw
four and twenty elders sitting. Clothed in
white raiment; and they had on their head
crowns of gold.
Twenty four Seats (Thrones) Around Throne.—
“For by him were all things created, that are in

104

REVELATION 4
importantly, they are the ones that bear our prayers up to
heaven. (Remember Jacob’s ladder, John 1: 51.) The
Spirit of Prophecy writings confirms the identity of
the 24 elders as angels. See comments under Rev. 5:5
and Rev. 7:13,14 for evidence.” PJ

Lucifer, before he fell, shared in the rulership of the
universe. Lucifer declared: ‘I will exalt my throne
above the stars of God.’ Isa. 14:13.
“Lucifer had a throne. He had ruling power and
many other angels also have ruling power in the
kingdom of God. The apostle Paul says: ‘…unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly places’ (Eph.
3:10.) What is a principality? A domain ruled over by a
prince. Undoubtedly, an angelic prince. Our God is a
great sharer. He shares His rule, He shares His counsel.
Our God is a wonderful sharer.” Cooke, #7-UR, 8,9.

“There is the throne, and around it the rainbow of
promise. There are cherubim and seraphim [ed. note:
the four beasts]. The commanders of the angel hosts
[ed. note: the 24 elders], the sons of God, the
representatives of the unfallen worlds, are assembled.
The heavenly council before which Lucifer had
accused God and His Son, the representatives of those
sinless realms over which Satan had thought to establish
his dominion—all are there to welcome the Redeemer.
They are eager to celebrate His triumph and to glorify
their King.” Desire of Ages, 834.

“The angels would sing a lovely song, then they
would cease singing and take their crowns from their
heads and cast them glittering at the feet of the lovely
Jesus, and with melodious voices cry, ‘Glory, Alleluia!’”
Early Writings, 66.

“The angels were marshaled in companies, each
division with a higher commanding angel at its head.”
Early Writings, 145.

“Angels were hovering over the place, witnessing
the scene, but only one was commissioned to go and
strengthen the Son of God in His agony. There was no
joy in heaven. The angels cast their crowns and harps
from them and with the deepest interest silently watched
Jesus. They wished to surround the Son of God, but the
commanding angels suffered them not, lest, as they
should behold His betrayal, they should deliver Him; for
the plan had been laid, and it must be fulfilled.” Early
Writings, 167.

Clothed in White Raiment.—
“And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at
the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain.” John 20:12.
“And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the
angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and
rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His
countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white
as snow.” Matt. 28:2,3.

REVELATION 4:5
And out of the throne proceeded
lightnings and thunderings and voices: and
there were seven lamps of fire burning
before the throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God.

“The white garments (garments that priests would
wear) show that they are without sin (not that they had
once sinned.) The 24 elders represent a priestly class of
strong angels.” PJ
“And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and
his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh….” Lev.
6:10.
They Had On Their Heads Crowns of Gold.—
“Crowns denote authority, kingship. How is it that
there are those by the throne who have kingly authority?
Does God share his rule? Does the Creator delegate
authority? Yes! He permits others to share in His
eternal counsels. But does God require counsel? No!
Our God is omniscient.
“ ‘Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or
being his counselor hath taught him? With whom
took he counsel, and who instructed him in the path
of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed
to him the way of understanding? Isa. 40:13,14.
“God does not need counselors; yet it appears that
He shares His counsel with His created beings. God is a
great sharer. He is not a dictator. He is not autocratic.
As intelligent creatures share in His counsels, in a
special sense they come to learn and to know God. The
Most High shares His rule with angelic beings.

Out of the Throne.—
“The throne of God is a throne of life; not an
inanimate throne of stones, but a living and moving
throne. As John looked, he saw lightnings and heard
thunderings and voices. He is viewing the center of
creation—the throne of God. It is the great body of
life, the source of all law. By the power which centers
there, worlds are held in space, and suns complete their
circuits. The power which holds the universe in space,
and binds atoms together, emanates from this throne of
life.” Haskel, SSP, 96,97.
“For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light
shall we see light.” Ps. 36:9.
“He giveth to all life, and breath, and all things.”
Acts 17:25.

105

Lightnings and Thunderings and Voices.—
“Angels are the ministers sent forth to do the will
of Him who sits as King. Some are light-bearers to

GEMS FROM REVELATION
worlds, others are guardian angels for little children
upon earth; but whatever the mission, whether great or
small, as measured in humanity’s scales, there is the
same obedience to the mandates of Jehovah. Issuing
from the presence of the Father, clothed in the
reflection of His own light, those messengers
disappear like flashes of lightning. The commands
given, when spoken in an unknown tongue, sounded
like the roar of the sea, or like deep and distant
thunder. Other men have heard God speak when His
voice sounded like thunder.” Haskel, SSP, 97.

Seven Lamps of Fire.—
“In these lamps of fire we have the antitype of the
golden candlestick of the typical sanctuary, with its
seven ever-burning lamps. This candlestick was
placed by divine direction in the first apartment of the
earthly sanctuary. (Exodus 25:31,32,37; 26:35; 27:20.)
Now when John tells us that a door was open in heaven,
and in the apartment thus disclosed to view he sees the
antitype of the candlestick of the earthly sanctuary, it is
good proof that he is looking into the first apartment of
the sanctuary above.” Smith, DR, 410,411.

“A fiery stream issued and came forth from
before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him.”
Daniel 7:10.

Seven Lamps are in the Holy Place.
“The holy places of the sanctuary in heaven are
represented by the two apartments in the sanctuary on
earth. As in vision the apostle John was granted a view
of the temple of God in heaven, he beheld there ‘seven
lamps of fire burning before the throne.’ Rev. 4:5.
...Here the prophet was permitted to behold the first
apartment of the sanctuary in heaven; and he saw
there the ‘seven lamps of fire’ and ‘the golden altar,’
represented by the golden candlestick and the altar of
incense in the sanctuary on earth.” Great Controversy,
414,415.

“When we read Ezekiel’s vision of the throne, it is
significant to notice how he described the movements of
the angelic beings, who are the messengers of Jehovah.
This description throws light on the expression of verse
5. Ezekiel says:
“ ‘And the fire was bright, and out of the fire went
forth lightning. The living creatures ran and returned
as the appearance of a flash of lightning.’” Ezekiel
1:13,14.
“ ‘And when they went, I heard the noise of
their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice
of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an
host: when they stood, they let down their wings.’
Ezek. 1:24.
“What a sensational experience!
“ ‘And the sound of the cherubims’ wings was
heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the
Almighty God when he speaketh.’ Ezek. 10:5.
“As these mighty beings take off, like a flash of
lightning from the throne and return, there is a sound
like thunder. We could have a little whisper of this
when we recall the big military air bases and the taking
off of powerful fighter aircraft. But what a contrast to
the throne of God, the center of the universe, a place of
tremendous activity. As the messengers of God at the
behest of the Infinite, flash their way to and from the
throne to the vast universe, ‘there proceed lightnings
and thunderings and voices.’ We suggest this is what
the apostle is describing when he gazes at the activity
and atmosphere of the throne.” Cooke, #7-UR, 11,12.

Lamps in Heaven Correspond to Lamps on Earth.—
“In the Christian era—the Dispensation of the
Spirit—the things of the kingdom of God have two main
applications. In the heavenly realm they have a literal
application, but in the earthly realm of the kingdom
of grace, they have a spiritual application.
“…In heaven there are literal lampstands, or
lamps. On earth there are spiritual lamps, or
candlesticks. [Rev. 1:20.] They are the seven
churches, in other words, the Christian church.
“In heaven there is literal light in the
lampstands. On earth, there is spiritual light in the
lampstands—the light of the Holy Spirit—the light of
truth.” Cooke, #7-UR, 14,15.
Which Are the Seven Spirits of God.—
“He saw also the seven spirits of God, which, in
the earthly tabernacle, were typified by the seven
lamps upon the golden candlestick. These stood
before the throne. This was the ever present, allpervading Spirit of Jehovah, in which all life has its
origin.” Haskel, SSP, 97.

“The bright light going among the living creatures
with the swiftness of lightning represents the speed
with which this work will finally go forward to
completion.” 5 Testimonies, 754.

“Grace be unto you, and peace, from ...the seven
Spirits which are before his throne.” Rev. 1:4.
“And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne
and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders,
stood a Lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns
and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God
sent forth into all the earth.” Rev. 5:6.

“One look at the throne with lightning, thunder and
voices reminds us that ‘It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God.’ Heb. 10:31. Anciently
when God was preparing to give His Ten
Commandments from Mt. Sinai there were lightning,
thunder and a loud voice so that the Israelites
trembled before God. Ex.19:16,18.” Metcalf, GPDR, 79.

“And the spirit of the LORD shall rest upon him,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of

106

REVELATION 4
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the
fear of the LORD.” Isaiah 11:2.

minister in the very presence of God. They are closer to
the throne than the four and twenty elders. They are on
the four sides of the throne. All that the throne stand
for, they stand for.” Thiele, OSIR, 84.

Reminiscent of Scenes Fifty Days After Passover: (Mt.
Sinai and Pentecost).—
“And it came to pass on the third day in the
morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and
a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the
trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in
the camp trembled.” Exodus 19:16.

Four Beasts.—
“It is an unhappy translation which has given us the
word ‘beasts’ in this verse. The Greek word zoon,
denotes properly ‘a living creature.’ ...The word is
very different from therion, [wild beast], used to
designate the prophetic beasts in the 13th and following
chapters.” Smith, DR, 411.

“And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like
as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with
other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.” Acts
2:3,4.

“This is the living creature that I saw under the
God of Israel by the river of Chebar; and I knew that
they were the cherubims.” Eze. 10:20.
“Cherubim and seraphim, and angels that excel in
strength, stand at God’s right hand…” Acts of the
Apostles, 154.

REVELATION 4:6
And before the throne there was a sea of
glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of
the throne, were four beasts full of eyes
before and behind.
Before the Throne, A Sea of Glass, Like Crystal.—
“The throne was high and lifted up, as Jeremiah
saw it. Ezekiel describes the throne as above a
firmament, having the appearance of ‘terrible
crystal.’ And this crystal firmament, or expanse, rested
above the heads of four living creatures, which were full
of eyes. John was accustomed to the placid waters of
the Mediterranean, and the space about the throne is
described by him as ‘a sea of glass like unto crystal.’”
Haskel, SSP, 97,98.

“The Bible is its own interpreter, and these same
living creatures are referred to thirty-eight times in the
Scriptures and the symbols are divinely interpreted. No
person can read Isa. 6:1-8; Eze. 1:1-14; 10:1-20, without
recognizing the same symbols and realizing that they
represent the same celestial beings. In these Old
Testament prophecies they are called ‘cherubim’ and
‘seraphim’ which represent the highest orders of the
angelic host who minister next to the throne of God.
It is not strange that the symbols should be somewhat
different, for this is true of all the symbolic prophecies,
even when the symbols represent the same events,
persons, or organizations.
The symbols in the
Apocalypse combine the features of the cherubim and
the seraphim of the visions of Isaiah and Ezekiel.
“...Ezekiel declares over and over again that the
living creatures around the throne of God are the
‘cherub’ or ‘cherubim.’ ‘And every one had four
faces: the first face was the face of a cherub, and the
second face was the face of a man, and the third the
face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.
And the cherubims were lifted up. This is the living
creature that I saw by the river Chebar.’ (Eze.
10:14,15). That the living creatures of the Apocalypse
are the same is the conclusion of many Bible students.
‘The living creatures are the cherubim. The curtain
and veil which formed the sides of the Most Holy
Place were wrought with cherubim in cunning work,
so that one entering that sacred spot was surrounded
by them.’ (The Expositor’s Bible). While there were
only two ‘anointed covering cherubim,’ that there
were many more is evident from the fact that pictures of
them were woven into the curtains of the Holy of Holies
of the Tabernacle and Temple.” Bunch, TR, 12.

“And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads
of the living creatures was as the colour of the terrible
crystal, stretched forth over their heads above. …And
above the firmament that was over their heads was the
likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire
stone.” Ezekiel 1:22,26.
“Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and
Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel: And they saw
the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it
were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were
the body of heaven in his clearness.” Exodus 24:9,10.
“We can only faintly imagine the brilliance of
the illumination caused by the ruby-red sardius and the
brilliant jasper lights from the Occupant of the throne,
and the emerald green light from the encircling bow,
mingled with the white and red lights from the flashes of
lightning and blazing torches, all reflected in the
glittering pavement of the sapphire-like stones of
fire.” Bunch, TR, 10.

What is the Role of the Seraphim and Cherubim?—
“ ‘This is the living creature that I saw... under
the God of Israel.’ Ezek. 10:20. They are under God.
They uphold God.

In the Midst of the Throne.—
“Their closeness to the throne would indicate that
they are personages of great importance. They stand and

107

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“ ‘Above the firmament [or platform of the
throne] that was over their heads was the likeness of a
throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and
upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the
appearance of a man above it.’ Ezek. 1:2.
“In Ezekiel, chapters 1 and 10, the prophet
describes a vision of the throne of God. He saw a
gigantic chariot-like vehicle approaching from the
northern heavens. It was comprised of mighty wheels
that were as high as the sky. These wheels were living
wheels, formed of the cherubim, and on top of these
gigantic living wheels was a firmament [or platform]
and on the platform was the throne and on the throne
was one ‘as the appearance of a man.’ The Spirit of
Prophecy states that this was ‘the eternal One.’
Testimonies, Vol. 5, 751. The special role of the
cherubim and the seraphim is to transport the Deity,
to transport God. This seems to be God’s chosen
method, when He travels in state. He travels via the
cherubim. …Our great God is enthroned upon the
cherubim, and as they flash their way through the
vast regions of space, God, as it were, flies as He
travels in state upon His throne. ‘The chariots of
God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels:
the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the Holy
Place.’ Ps. 68:17.
“…‘I beheld till the thrones were cast down [or
placed in position] and the Ancient of Days did sit…
his throne was like the fiery flame and his [its] wheels
as burning fire.’ Daniel 7:9.
“Notice how the prophet describes the same scene:
‘I saw the Father rise from the throne and in a
flaming chariot, go into the holy of holies within the
veil and sit down.’ Early Writings, 55.
“Even in the heavenly sanctuary, the Father is
transported by the cherubim in the form of a glorious,
fiery chariot. The prophet then describes how after the
Ancient of Days had been transported to the second
apartment of the vast temple, where the ‘judgment was
set,’ the Son of Man, Jesus, was taken by ‘the clouds of
heaven’ into the presence of the Father.
“ ‘Behold one like the Son of Man came with the
clouds of heaven and came to the Ancient of Days
and they [the angels] brought him [the Son] near
before him [the Father].’ Daniel 7:13.
“Who were the ‘clouds of heaven’? This is a term
describing the angels of God. Notice how the prophet
confirms this: ‘Then a cloudy chariot, with wheels like
flaming fire, surrounded by angels, came to where Jesus
was. He stepped into the chariot and was borne to the
holiest, where the Father sat.’ Early Writings, 55.
“What a description! What glory! How vast must
be the heavenly sanctuary!” Cooke, #7-UR,

eagle. These were their ensigns, their guards, their
coverings, the symbols of powers by which they were
protected and guided.... To cover and guard, is thought
to be the proper signification of the word cherub.... A
vision of the cherubim, then, is a vision of them that
cover, protect, guard and keep.’—The Apocalypse,
Seiss, Vol. 1, pp.256,257. The four living creatures
representing the cherubim are therefore the
guardians, keepers, protectors, and coverings of the
throne of God.” Bunch, TR, 13.
“Around the throne were seraphim, as guards
about the great King, and they reflected the glory that
surrounded them. As their songs of praise resounded in
deep notes of adoration, the pillars of the gate trembled,
as if shaken by an earthquake. With lips unpolluted by
sin, these angels poured forth the praises of God. ‘Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts,’ they cried; ‘the whole
earth is full of His glory.’ (See Isa. 6:1-8.)” Gospel
Workers, 21.
Full of Eyes.—
“The many eyes ‘before and behind’ and ‘within’
would indicate perfection of wisdom and vision,
unlimited intelligence and ceaseless vigilance. ...The
cherubim messengers of the Lord fly swiftly to every
place and see everything. In Rev. 5:7 ‘the seven Spirits
of God’ are symbolized by the ‘seven eyes’ of the
Lamb which are ‘sent forth into all the earth.’” Bunch,
TR, 13.
“ ‘Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones [children]; for I say unto you, that in
heaven their angels do always [continually] behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven.’ Matt. 18:10.
“The angels of God are continually conscious of,
continuously have in sight, the face of God. They are
always aware of every expression on the face of God.
We suggest that this is the significance of the phrase that
they are ‘full of eyes’. No matter where they are, no
matter in what direction they face, they behold the face
of God and are supremely sensitive to every sign and
every expression from the Eternal One.” Cooke, #7-UR,
21.
“And their whole body, and their backs, and
their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full
of eyes round about, even the wheels that they four had.”
Ezekiel 10:12.
“And the four beasts had each of them six wings
about him; and they were full of eyes within.”
Revelation 4:8.
Before and Behind.—
“Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid
thine hand upon me.” Psalms 139:5.

“It is believed that the functions of the cherubim
are to ‘keep’ and ‘guard.’ The first time they are
mentioned is in Genesis 3:24 where they are
commissioned to ‘keep the way of the tree of life.’
‘Israel marched through the wilderness under the four
banners of the lion, young ox, the man, and the flying

108

REVELATION 4
but in chronology, representing the four different
stages of trial through which the church should pass
in her pilgrimage in the wilderness of this world,
before she would enter the visible kingdom of her
glorious Redeemer, the New Jerusalem, and reign on
the earth. And every individual Christian, who may live
any length of time after his conversion, passes through
some or all of these states of trial.
“...The first, on the east, was to follow the standard
of Judah; that on the south side, and second in the
march, was the standard of Reuben; on the west side,
Ephraim, and his, was the third standard in the march;
on the north side was Dan’s standard and Dan brought
up the rear in the march of the Jews through the
wilderness. What their several standards were, I cannot
tell, except that of Judah, which marched in front,
immediately after the ark, which in all probability was a
lion. And our ‘first beast,’ under consideration was
‘like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and the
third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast
was like a flying eagle.’ These represent the four grand
divisions of the gospel church, when the church went
forth, bold as a lion, preaching and proclaiming the
gospel among all nations. The second state or division
of the church was the times of persecution and slaughter
by the Roman emperors, represented by the calf. The
third state of the church was in Constantine’s day, when
the church enjoyed privileges as a man, and became
independent, and like a natural man, proud, avaricious,
and worldly. The fourth and last state of trial was when
the anti-Christian beast arose; and, under the scourge of
this abomination, the church having two wings given
her, like the wings of an eagle, she flew into the
wilderness, where, a place being prepared for her, she is
nourished from the face of the serpent a thousand two
hundred and threescore days. Rev. 12:6,14.” Miller,
Evidence, 162,163

REVELATION 4:7
And the first beast was like a lion, and
the second beast like a calf, and the third
beast had a face as a man, and the fourth
beast was like a flying eagle.
The Four Living Creatures.—
“These four living creatures represent four phases
of the character of God. The first was like a lion, the
second like a calf, or an ox, as Ezekiel says, the third had
the face of a man, and the fourth was like a flying eagle.
This again establishes the fact that when the plan of
redemption was laid, all heaven was in unison with the
plan. Ezekiel and John, one before Christ’s advent,
the other after, describe the same thing, showing that
the New Testament is but the unfolding of the Old.”
Haskel, SSP, 98.

“As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the
face of a man, and the face of a lion, on the right side:
and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they
four also had the face of an eagle. Thus were their
faces.” Ezekiel 1:10,11.

REVELATION 4:8
And the four beasts had each of them
six wings about him; and they were full of
eyes within: and they rest not day and night,
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

“Similar imagery is used in the first chapter of
Ezekiel. The qualities which would seem to be signified
by the emblems are strength, perseverance, reason,
and swiftness—strength of affection, perseverance in
carrying out the requirements of duty, reason in
comprehending the divine will, and swiftness in
obeying.” Smith, DR, 412.

Six Wings.—
“Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six
wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he
covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.” Isaiah 6:2.

“These four living creatures were represented in
the location of the twelve tribes of Israel around the
sanctuary in the wilderness. On each side of the
sanctuary three tribes pitched their tents and each of the
four sides had an ensign or a flag. On the east side was
the symbol of a lion; on the north was the flying eagle;
to the west there was the symbol of an ox; and on the
south side the symbol was that of a man.” Metcalf,
GPDR, 79.

“These wings are the graces of the Spirit, as is
strongly implied by Ezekiel 1:12, ‘And they went every
one straight forward; whither the spirit was to go,
they went; and they turned not when they went.’
‘With two they covered their face’—humility and
repentance; ‘with two they covered their feet,’—that
is, they walked by two of the graces, faith and patience,

“The four beasts is a figurative representation of
the whole New Testament church, not only in character,

109

GEMS FROM REVELATION
faith in God and patient in tribulation; ‘and with two
they did fly’—hope and love. They ‘mount up with
wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary,
walk and not faint,’ says the prophet Isaiah, 40:31.”
Miller, Evidence, 165.

praise to God that issues forth from the beings of
heaven.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 769.

Full of Eyes.—
“Seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God
sent forth into all the earth.” Revelation 5:6.

Holy, Holy, Holy.—
“The seraphim around the throne are so filled
with reverential awe as they behold the glory of God,
that they do not for an instant look upon them-selves
with admiration. Their praise is for the Lord of hosts.
As they look into the future, when the whole earth shall
be filled with His glory, the triumphant song is echoed
from one to another in melodious chant, ‘Holy, holy,
holy, is the Lord of hosts.’ They are fully satisfied to
glorify God; abiding in His presence, beneath His smile
of approbation, they wish for nothing more. In bearing
His image, in doing His bidding, in worshiping Him,
their highest ambition is reached.” Gospel Workers,
21.

(See more comments on Rev. 4:6.)
They Rest Not.—
“ ‘O happy unrest!’ beautifully exclaims John
Wesley. The theme of their constant worship is, ‘Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is,
and is to come.’ No sublimer strain ever issued from
created lips. They repeat it ‘day and night,’ or
continually, these terms only denoting the manner in
which time is reckoned here, for there can be no night
where the throne of God is. (Rev. 21:23,25.)
“We mortals are likely to tire of the repetition of
the simple testimony we bear here to the goodness and
mercy of God. We are sometimes tempted to say
nothing, because we cannot continually say
something new. But may we not learn a profitable
lesson from the course of these holy beings above, who
never grow weary of the ceaseless repetition of these
words, ‘Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty;’ and to
whom these words never grow old, because their hearts
ever glow with a sense of His holiness, goodness, and
love? Praise does not become to them monotonous,
for with every utterance they gain a new view of the
attributes of the Almighty. They reach a greater height
of comprehension in their vision of His perfections; the
horizon expands before them; their hearts enlarge; and
the new emotions of adoration draw from them a fresh
utterance of their holy salutation, new even to
themselves, ‘Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty!’
“So, even with us here, though words are often
repeated concerning the goodness, the mercy, and the
love of God, the value of his truth, and the attractions of
the world to come, these should not grow stale upon the
ear. We should all our lives be rising to new
conceptions of the blessings embraced in these glorious
themes.” Smith, DR, 412,413.

“There rose up before him a vision of Jehovah
sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, while the train
of His glory filled the temple. On each side of the
throne hovered the seraphim, their faces veiled in
adoration, as they ministered before their Maker and
united in the solemn invocation, ‘Holy, holy, holy, is
the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of His
glory,’ until post and pillar and cedar gate seemed
shaken with the sound, and the house was filled with
their tribute of praise. Isaiah 6:3.
“As Isaiah beheld this revelation of the glory and
majesty of his Lord, he was overwhelmed with a sense
of the purity and holiness of God.” Prophets & Kings,
307.

“Never will it be forgotten that He whose power
created and upheld the unnumbered worlds through the
vast realms of space, the Beloved of God, the Majesty of
heaven, He whom cherub and shining seraph
delighted to adore—humbled Himself to uplift fallen
man; that He bore the guilt and shame of sin, and the
hiding of His Father’s face, till the woes of a lost world
broke His heart and crushed out His life on Calvary’s
cross.” Great Controversy, 651.

“The praise could not be tiresome and monotonous,
for that is contrary to the spirit of heaven. On what
grounds?
“Firstly, the praise would undoubtedly be
spontaneous. God would accept no other praise. But
how could ceaseless praise be continually spontaneous?
We suggest that the Person of the Deity is so aweinspiring, so impressive, so moving, so overwhelming,
that the cherubim as they behold their great and
wonderful God, cannot contain themselves. They
gaze upon the face of God. Face exhibits character and
God’s character is absolute perfection. What a face
must the face of the Father be! One day ‘we shall see
His face’. When we see that face, we too, will be unable
to contain ourselves and will also burst forth into praise.
We suggest that this is the spontaneous praise of the
living creatures associated with the throne.
“A second element connected with this continual
praise is that it must undoubtedly express itself in the
most delightful and moving music. This would produce
a beautiful atmosphere and probably the theme would be
sung in countless variations.” Cooke, #7-UR, 26,27.
“It is generally believed that the cherubim host,
under the leadership of the first of the anointed covering
cherubs, are the leaders in the praise services of the
heavenly court.” Bunch, TR, 15.

Day and Night.—
“Night brings an intermission to most human
activities, but it has no effect on the ceaseless stream of

110

REVELATION 4
hath created these things.’ ‘Thus saith the Lord that
created the heaven; God Himself that formed the
earth and made it: ...I am the Lord; and there is
none else.’ Isaiah 40:25,26; 45:18. Says the Psalmist:
‘Know ye that the Lord He is God: it is He that hath
made us, and not we ourselves.’ ‘O come, let us
worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord
our Maker.’ Ps. 100:3; 95:6. And the holy beings who
worship God in heaven state, as the reason why their
homage is due to Him: ‘Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory and honor and power: for Thou hast
created all things.’” Great Controversy, 436-437.

“The commanding angels first struck the note, and
then every voice was raised in grateful, happy praise,
and every hand skillfully swept over the strings of the
harp, sending forth melodious music in rich and perfect
strains.” Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 1, 209.
“Let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it
is holy. 5 Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his
footstool; for he is holy. 9 Exalt the Lord our God, and
worship at his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy.”
Psalm 99:3,5,9.

“Worship Him that made heaven, and earth,
and the sea, and the fountains of waters.” Rev. 14:7.

Which ... Is to Come.—
“The Greek language has words for saying ‘who is
to be,’ just as English does. But in Revelation 4:8 ...the
living creatures don’t use them. Instead, they use Greek
words that mean ‘who ... is to come,’ or, translated more
simply, ‘the one who comes.’” Maxwell, God Cares,
158.

Thou [the Father] Hast Created All Things.—
“In the beginning God created the heavens and
the earth.” Genesis 1:1.
For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the
LORD made the heavens. Honour and majesty are
before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.”
Psalm 96:5, 6.

“In all places where I record my name I will come
unto thee, and I will bless thee.” Ex. 20:24.
“God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble.” Ps. 46:1.
“Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the
Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he
shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former
rain unto the earth.” Hosea 6:3.

“And to make all men see what is the fellowship of
the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath
been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ.” Ephesians 3:9.

REVELATION 4:9-11
And when those beasts give glory and
honour and thanks to him that sat on the
throne, who liveth for ever and ever.
The four and twenty elders fall down
before him that sat on the throne, and
worship him that liveth for ever end ever,
and cast their crowns before the throne,
saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory and honour and power: for thou hast
created all things, and for they pleasure they
are and were created.

“Whenever the sacred writers wish to point out the
true God in distinction from false gods of every
description, an appeal is made to the great facts of
creation, upon which the fourth commandment is based.
(See 2 Kings 19:15; 2 Chron. 2:12; Neh. 9:6; Psalm 96:5;
115:4-7,15; 121:2; 124:8; 134:3; 146:6; Isaiah 37:16; 42:5;
44:24; 45:12; 51:13; Job 9:8; Jeremiah 10:10-12; 32:17; 51:15;
Acts 4:24; 14:15; 17:23, 24.)” Smith, DR, 460.

Elders Fall Down and Cast Crowns Before Him.—
(See notes under Revelation 4:4.)

For Thy Pleasure.—
“Or, ‘by thy will.’ It pleased God to bring the
universe into existence and to give life to its creatures.
He saw that it was good to do so. There was nothing
desirable from His point of view in being alone in an
empty universe. It pleased Him that the universe
should be peopled with intelligent beings, capable of
appreciating and reflecting His infinite love and
perfect character. This was His purpose in creating
them.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 769.
‘For thy pleasure [or through Thy will], they are,
and were created.’ God willed, and all things came
into existence; and by the same power they are preserved
and sustained.” Smith, DR, 413.

Thou Art Worthy to be Worshipped.—
“The duty to worship God is based upon the fact
that He is the creator and that to Him all other beings
owe their existence. And wherever, in the Bible, His
claim to reverence and worship, above the gods of the
heathen, is presented, there is cited the evidence of His
creative power. ‘All the gods of the nations are idols;
but the Lord made the heavens.’ Ps. 96:5. ‘To whom
then will ye liken Me, or shall I be equal? Saith the
Holy One. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who

111

“There are no evolutionary modernists among
the worshipers before the throne of God. While many
on earth are giving the glory of creation to chance and
natural law, around the throne of God in heaven the
glory and honor of creation is ascribed to the Creator of
all things. See Ps. 33:1-9.” Bunch, TR, 15

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 5
Testimonies, 267.

REVELATION 5:1-14
1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a
book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.
2 And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who
is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?
3 And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth,
was able to open the book, neither to look thereon.
4 And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open
and to read the book, neither to look thereon.
5 And one of the elders said unto me, weep not: behold, the Lion
of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the
book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.
6 And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had been
slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven
Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.
7 And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him
the sat on the throne.
8 And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and the four
and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of
them harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers
of the saints.
9 And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and nation.
10 And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we
shall reign on the earth.
11 And I beheld and I heard the voice of many angels round
about the throne and the beasts and the elders: and the number of
them was ten thousand time ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands;
12 Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honour, and glory, and blessing.
13 And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power,
be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever.
14 And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty
elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.

REVELATION 5:1
And I saw in the right hand of him that
sat on the throne a book written within and
on the backside, sealed with seven seals.
And I Saw.—
“This is not a new vision, but a new incident in
the vision of the previous chapter. The praise service
ended, the prophet’s attention is again called to the
Occupant of the throne, and he is privileged to behold
one of the most sublime scenes ever witnessed in
prophetic vision.” Bunch, TR, 16.
In the Right Hand.—
“The right hand of the Eternal seemed to have been
extended through the veil of glory that enveloped His
person, and in it was a book, or scroll. The books of the
time of the vision were in the form of scrolls. ‘On the
right hand’ is said to be the literal rendering. The right
hand was open and the scroll lay on the open palm
waiting for someone to take it. It was really a scroll of
scrolls, or seven scrolls in one.” Bunch, TR, 16.

INTRODUCTION.—
“Chapter 5 marks Christ’s arrival (after His
ascension from earth) for his inauguration as our great
High-priest in the heavenly sanctuary at Pentecost,
31 AD. Here, in the Holy Place, He will minister as
High Priest for 1810 years until the anti-typical Day of
Atonement. He has prevailed and opens the seven-sealed
book in His Father’s hand.” PJ

A Book.—
“The question arises, What can this book mean? It
cannot mean the book of Revelation, for John was
commanded not to seal the sayings of this book, Rev.
22:10. Neither could it be the prophecies, for they were
commanded to be read every Sabbath day by the Jews,
and were so read. Yet John tells us, in our context,
‘That no man, neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor
under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to
look thereon; and I wept much, because no man was
found worthy to open and to read the book, neither to
look thereon.’ We see, plainly, that it could not apply
to the law, nor the prophets, to the Old or New
Testaments, for these were committed to the Jews, and
also unto us Gentiles, and were to be read by all men;
but this book they could not open, read, nor look
thereon.” Miller, Evidence, 178,179.

“The fifth chapter of Revelation needs to be
closely studied. It is of great importance to those who
shall act a part in the work of God for these last days.
There are some who are deceived. They do not realize
what is coming on the earth. Those who have permitted
their minds to become clouded in regard to what
constitutes sin, are fearfully deceived. Unless they make
a decided change, they will be found wanting when God
pronounces judgment upon the children of men.” 9

“[Rev. 5:1-3 quoted.] There in His open hand lay
the book, the roll of the history of God’s providences,
the prophetic history of nations and the church.
Herein was contained the divine utterances, His
authority, His commandments, His laws, the whole
symbolic counsel of the Eternal, and the history of all
ruling powers in the nations. In symbolic language
was contained in that roll the influence of every
nation, tongue, and people from the beginning of

112

REVELATION 5
earth’s history to its close.
“This roll was written within and without. John
says: [Rev. 5:4-5;5:8-14; 6:8-11; 8:1-4, quoted]. The
vision as presented to John made its impression upon his
mind. The destiny of every nation was contained in that
book. John was distressed at the utter inability of any
human being or angelic intelligence to read the
words, or even to look thereon.” (Letter 65, 1898)
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 12, 296,297.
“When Pilate washed his hands saying, ‘I am
innocent of the blood of this just person,’ the priests
joined with the ignorant mob in declaring passionately,
‘His blood be on us, and on our children.’ Matt.
27:24,25.
“Thus the Jewish leaders made their choice. Their
decision was registered in the book which John saw
in the hand of Him that sat upon the throne, the book
which no man could open. In all its vindictiveness this
decision will appear before them in the day when this
book is unsealed by the Lion of the tribe of Judah.”
Christ’s Object Lessons, 294.
“Before He came to earth, the plan lay out before
Him, perfect in all its details. But as He walked among
men, He was guided, step by step, by the Father's
will.” Desire of Ages, 147.
“All who choose Christ's kingdom of love and
righteousness and peace, making its interest paramount
to all other, are linked to the world above, and every
blessing needed for this life is theirs. In the book of
God's providence, the volume of life, we are each
given a page. That page contains every particular of
our history; even the hairs of the head are numbered.
God's children are never absent from His mind.”
Desire of Ages, 313.
“The work of Christ on earth was hastening to a
close. Before Him, in vivid outline, lay the scenes
whither His feet were tending. Even before He took
humanity upon Him, He saw the whole length of the
path He must travel in order to save that which was lost.
Every pang that rent His heart, every insult that was
heaped upon His head, every privation that He was
called to endure, was open to His view before He laid
aside His crown and royal robe, and stepped down from
the throne, to clothe His divinity with humanity. The
path from the manger to Calvary was all before His eyes.
He knew the anguish that would come upon Him. He
knew it all, and yet He said, ‘Lo, I come: in the volume
of the Book it is written of Me, I delight to do Thy
will, O My God: yea, Thy law is within My heart.’ Ps.
40:7, 8.” Desire of Ages, 410.
Parallel With Newly Crowned Kings.—
“The sealed scroll in God’s right hand contains the
destiny He‘s planned for the world, which Jesus has
agreed to accomplish. A certain parallel can be seen in
Moses’ decree that a newly crowned king had to take the

book of the covenant from the priests and to make a
copy of it so that he would faithfully execute his reign
according to God’s will (Deut. 17:18-20; 2 Kings 11:12;
23:1-3). The sealed scroll of Revelation 5, however,
contains God’s plan for all human history, including the
end-time scenario as unfolded in the rest of Revelation.
With the transfer of the prophetic scroll, the fate of
humankind is placed into the hands of the glorified
Jesus. His possession of the scroll signifies His right to
rule over all humankind because of what He has done
and who He is..” LaRondelle, LFTLD, 40.
Written Within and on the Backside.—
“This roll was written within and without. ...There
were no blanks in the book. There was space for no
more writing.” Letter 65, 1898.
“O lord, thou hast searched me, and known me.
Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou
understandest my thought afar off. Thou compassest
my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with
all my ways. For there is not a word in my tongue, but,
lo, O LORD, thou knowest it altogether.” Psalm
139:1-4.

Jeremiah’s Sealed Book.—
“The prophet Jeremiah was inspired to record an
actual land transaction that throws light on [redeeming
title deeds]. Jeremiah was commanded by God to buy a
parcel of land. The account reveals how the book in the
hand of God of Rev. 5 can be none other than a book
containing title deeds. It is a book of redemption.
“ ‘The word of the Lord came to me saying,
Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall
come unto thee, saying, Buy thee my field that is in
Anathoth: for the right of redemption is thine to buy
it.
“So Hanameel mine uncle’s son came to me in the
court of the prison according to the word of the LORD,
and said unto me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in
Anathoth, which is in the country of Benjamin: for the
right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine;
buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the word of
the LORD.
“And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle’s
son, that was in Anathoth, and weighed him the money,
even seventeen shekels of silver.
“And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed it,
and took witnesses, and weighed him the money in the
balances. So I took the evidence of the purchase, both
that which was sealed according to the law and
custom, and that which was open: And I gave the
evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah,
the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of Hanameel mine
uncle’s son, and in the presence of the witnesses that

113

GEMS FROM REVELATION
subscribed the book of the purchase, before all the Jews
that sat in the court of the prison.
“And I charged Baruch before them, saying, Thus
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Take these
evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both which is
sealed, and this evidence which is open; and put them
in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many days.”
Jeremiah 32:6-14.
“Notice that Jeremiah ‘subscribed the evidence.’
The margin reads, ‘I wrote in a book and sealed it.’
Thus a record of the land transaction was kept in a book
or scroll.
“…This clearly shows that the purchaser wrote two
documents—one he sealed, the other he left open for the
witnesses to read, and then they signed the sealed scroll,
making it authentic. Thus the scroll ‘was written
within, and on the back side sealed,’ with seals or
signatures. This coincides with the book of Rev. 5
‘written within and on the back side, sealed with
seven seals.’ It undoubtedly concerns title deeds.”
Cooke, #8-UR, 12,13.

that excel in strength, stand at God’s right hand, ‘all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them
who shall be heirs of salvation.’ Hebrews 1:14.” Acts
of the Apostles, 154.

Seven (Seals).—
“Seven is a combination of two other unique
numbers, namely 3 and 4. ...Four is often linked with
the world. Dan. 2. Four metals in symbol of mankind.
Dan. 7. Four beasts. Rev. 7:1. Four winds. Four
seasons. Four quarters of the earth. Four kinds of
seed—world. ...Many sevens are divided into Three
and Four. ...Seven Seals—4 Horsemen and 3 signs of
Advent. [Seven trumpets—Of the seven, three are called
‘woes’.]” Burnside, RWU, 70.

Who is Worthy to Open the Book?—
“Who could be found worthy to open the book, and
to loose the seals thereof? A pause ensued. In silence
the universe owned its inability and unworthiness to
enter into the counsels of the Creator.” Smith, DR, 416.

The Importance of This Book.—
“When we note the details concerning this book, it
is clear that it is a book of primary importance to the
heavenly hosts. First of all, it is in the Father’s right
hand, denoting power and authority. Secondly, a strong
or mighty angel proclaims to the universe concerning it.
Thirdly, that it is sealed with seven seals. Fourthly, the
reaction of John, when he concluded that there was no
one able to open the book, was so unusual. In the
exalted atmosphere of heaven, it says, ‘he wept much’.
This indicates something important about the book.
Finally, when they did find one who was worthy to open
the book, the overwhelming response of the heavenly
hosts to the discovery, speaks of the book’s importance.”
Cooke, #8-UR, 1,2.

REVELATION 5:2
And I saw a strong angel proclaiming
with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the
book, and to loose the seals thereof?
A Strong Angel.—
“Invisible armies of light and power attend the
meek and lowly ones who believe and claim the
promises of God. Cherubim and seraphim, and angels

“His [John’s] soul was wrought up to such a point
of agony and suspense that one of the strong angels had
compassion on him, and laying his hand on him
assuringly, said, ‘Weep not: behold, the Lion of the
tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to
open the book, and to loose the seven seals there-of’
[vs. 5].” Manuscript Releases, Vol.12, 296. [Ed. note:
The KJV calls the ‘strong angel’ and ‘elder.’]
With a Loud Voice.-“And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now
is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our
God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our
brethren is cast down, which accused them before our
God day and night.” Rev. 12:10. [This verse happens at
the same time.]

“‘Worthy’ has to do with both character and
rank. The qualifications for the task of breaking the
seals were such that no created being could meet the
requirement.
On the part of God there was no
withholding of His purposes, for the scroll was not
grasped in His hand, but lying in His open palm waiting
for any to take it who was ‘worthy.’” Bunch, TR, 16.
“Before the assembled inhabitants of heaven the
King declared that none but Christ, the Only Begotten
of God, could fully enter into His purposes, and to
Him it was committed to execute the mighty counsels
of His will. The Son of God had wrought the Father’s
will in the creation of all the hosts of heaven; and to
Him, as well as to God, their homage and allegiance
were due.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 36.
“It was Satan that prompted the world’s rejection
of Christ. The prince of evil exerted all his power and
cunning to destroy Jesus; for he saw that the Saviour’s
mercy and love, His compassion and pitying tenderness,
were representing to the world the character of God.
Satan contested every claim put forth by the Son of
God and employed men as his agents to fill the Saviour’s
life with suffering and sorrow. The sophistry and
falsehood by which he had sought to hinder the work
of Jesus, the hatred manifested through the children
of disobedience, his cruel accusations against Him
whose life was one of unexampled goodness, all
sprang from deep-seated revenge. The pent-up fires of
envy and malice, hatred and revenge, burst forth on
Calvary against the Son of God, while all heaven gazed

114

REVELATION 5
upon the scene in silent horror.” Great Controversy,
501.
“Satan saw that his disguise was torn away. His
administration was laid open before the unfallen angels
and before the heavenly universe. He had revealed
himself as a murderer. By shedding the blood of the
Son of God, he had uprooted himself from the
sympathies of the heavenly beings. Henceforth his
work was restricted. Whatever attitude he might
assume, he could no longer await the angels as they
came from the heavenly courts, and before them
accuse Christ’s brethren of being clothed with the
garments of blackness and the defilement of sin. The
last link of sympathy between Satan and the heavenly
world was broken.” Desire of Ages, 761.
“Heaven’s arches rang as the challenge was given.
It was not a reproof, but a call to all the universe of God,
to witness anew the glory of the Son of man. This was
a fresh unfolding of the plan of salvation.” Haskel, SSP,
102.
“The reason the strong angel is asking the question,
„Who is worthy to open the books and to loose the seals
thereof?‟ is not because the angels don‟t know the
answer, but because the angels want to hear the answer.
It is Jesus, „the Lord strong and mighty, The Lord
mighty in battle,‟ the “Lion of the tribe of Judah.‟ They
know that Jesus is worthy. Satan has been unmasked,
and cast down from heaven. They can see clearly now.
They just want to hear the answer. This characteristic of
the angels is seen in the following description of Christ‟s
ascension to heaven found in Desire of Ages, 833:
“As they drew near to the city of God, the
challenge is given by the escorting angels—
“ „Lift up your heads, O ye gates; And be ye lift
up, ye everlasting doors; And the King of glory shall
come in.‟
Joyfully the waiting sentinels respond,-"Who is this King of glory?"
“This they say, not because they know not who
He is, but because they would hear the answer of
exalted praise—
‘The Lord strong and mighty, The Lord mighty
in battle! Lift up your heads, O ye gates; Even lift them
up, ye everlasting doors; And the King of glory shall
come in.‟
“Again is heard the challenge, "Who is this King
of glory?" for the angels never weary of hearing His
name exalted. The escorting angels make reply—
“„The Lord of hosts; He is the King of glory.‟
Psalm 24:7-10.‟ Desire of Ages, 833.
“This characteristic of the angels is also seen in
Revelation 7:13,14 where an elder [a strong angel] asks
John a question, but John tells him that he knows the
answer.” PJ
“ ‘The seals are successively opened; giving final
access to its (the roll’s) contents as a perfect whole,

when the events symbolized by the seals shall have
been past.... The opening of the seals means the
successive steps by which God in Christ clears the way
for the final reading of the book at the visible setting
up of Christ’s kingdom.’ Fausset, Commentary, VI,
674.” Thiele, OSIR, 115.

REVELATION 5:3,4
And no man in heaven, nor in earth,
neither under the earth, was able to open the
book, neither to look thereon.
And I wept much, because no man was
found worthy to open and to read the book,
neither to look thereon.
No Man.—
“For I beheld, and there was no man; even among
them, and there was no counselor, that, when I asked of
them, could answer a word.” Isa.41:28.
“There is none righteous, no, not one: There is
none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh
after God. They are all gone out of the way. …For
all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.”
Romans 3:9-12, 23.
In Heaven, Nor in Earth, Neither Under the Earth.—
“The Jews used the expression, ‘heaven, earth and
the underworld’ to embrace the whole universe. See
Ex. 20:4; Phil. 2:10. Neither angels nor men know the
secret purposes of God. Also to answer the challenge
must involve the commission to bring to pass the
contents of the scroll.” Bunch, TR, 17.
No Man Was Able (Except Christ).—
“Man has not been made a sin-bearer, and he
will never know the horror of the curse of sin which
the Saviour bore.
No sorrow can bear any
comparison with the sorrow of Him upon whom the
wrath of God fell with overwhelming force. Human
nature can endure but a limited amount of test and trial.
The finite can only endure the finite measure, and human
nature succumbs; but the nature of Christ had a greater
capacity for suffering; for the human existed in the
divine nature, and created a capacity for suffering to
endure that which resulted from the sins of a lost world.
The agony which Christ endured, broadens, deepens, and
gives a more extended conception of the character of sin,
and the character of the retribution which God will bring
upon those who continue in sin. The wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ to the repenting, believing sinner.” (Manuscript
35, 1895). 5BC, 1103.
I Wept Much.—
“The vision as presented to John made its
impression upon his mind. The destiny of every nation
was contained in that book. John was so distressed at

115

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the utter inability of any human being or angelic
intelligence to read the words, or even to look there-on,
his soul was wrought up to such a point of agony and
suspense, that one of the strong angels had com-passion
on him, and laying his hand on him assuringly, said,
‘Weep not behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the
root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and
loose the seven seals thereof.’” (Letter 65, 1898).
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 12, 296-297.
“John saw that no one was worthy, and that Jesus
the Lamb had to bear the penalty for our sins on the
cross. We are purchased by the blood of the Lamb. John
saw the terrible agony of Jesus on the cross as He
suffered for his (John’s) sins. He wept much. He wept
much, too, because he knew that very few would value
the redemption price paid for them.” PJ
No Man Was Found Worthy.—
“For all have sinned and come short of the glory
of God.” Rom. 3:23.
“I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto
him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee, And am no more worthy to be called thy son.”
Luke 15:18,19.
To Open.—
“To open, you need a key and Jesus has the keys
now. See Revelation 1:18.” PJ

REVELATION 5:5
And one of the elders said unto me,
weep not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of
Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to
open the book, and to loose the seven seals
thereof.
One of the Elders (Strong Angels) Said Weep Not.—
“His [John’s] soul was wrought up to such a point
of agony and suspense that one of the strong angels had
compassion on him, and laying his hand on him
assuringly, said, ‘Weep not: behold, the Lion of the
tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to
open the book, and to loose the seven seals there-of’
[verse 5].” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 12, 297.
The Lion of the Tribe of Juda.—
“Once again the Saviour was presented to John,
under the symbol of the ‘Lion of the tribe of Judah,’
and of ‘a Lamb as it had been slain.’ These symbols
represent the union of omnipotent power and selfsacrificing love. As the Lion of Judah, Christ will
defend his chosen ones and bring them off victorious,
because they accepted him as ‘the Lamb of God, which
taketh away the sin of the world.’ Christ the slain
Lamb, who was despised, rejected, the victim of Satan's

wrath, of man’s abuse and cruelty—how tender his
sympathy with his people who are in the world! And
according to the infinite depths of his humiliation and
sacrifice as the Lamb of God, will be his power and
glory as the Lion of Judah, for the deliverance of his
people.” Home Missionary, 11/1/1893.
“Another
prophet said that
when
Nebuchadnezzar
removed the crown
from the last of the
kings of Judah, the
throne and kingdom
‘shall be no more,
until he come whose
right it is: and I will
give it Him.’ See
Eze. 21:25-27. It has
been said that the lion
was the emblem
embroidered on the
standard of the tribe
of Judah as they marched through the wilder-ness.
Christ ‘sprang out of Judah’ and because He is ‘the
Son of David’ He will occupy the long vacant throne
of David and reign forever. The plan of redemption,
made possible by the cross of Calvary, will eventually
place Christ on the throne of this world as King of kings.
His Calvary victory gave Him the authority to unlock the
house of David. See Isa. 22:22; Rev. 3:7. Therefore He
alone can break the seals of the scroll of the events
that lead to the kingship of the ‘Lion of the tribe of
Judah.’ The kingdom of Israel under David was the
type and figure of the restored kingdom under Shiloh.”
Bunch, TR, 19.
“The Lion of Judah symbolism is, of course, based
on the promise of rulership to the tribe of Judah (Gen
49:9-10). Combining this with the symbolism of the
‘Root of David’ yields the idea that the enthrone-ment of
the Lamb implies the reestablishment of the eternal
Davidic dynasty promised in the OT. The Lamb is the
promised Messiah. Thus, Jesus is under-stood to have
reestablished the Davidic dynasty when He proclaimed
the arrival of His kingdom (Matt. 12:28; Luke 17:2021).” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 220.
The Lion and the Lamb.—
“These symbols represent the union of
omnipotent power and self-sacrificing love. The Lion
of Judah, so terrible to the rejectors of His grace, will
be the Lamb of God to the obedient and faithful.”
Acts of the Apostles, 589.
The Root of David.—
“I am the root and the offspring of David.” Rev.
22:16.

116

REVELATION 5
“Christ was the source and sustainer of David
in his position and power. That David’s position was
specially ordained of Christ, and that he was specially
sustained by Him, there can be no doubt. David was the
type, Christ the antitype. David’s throne and reign over
Israel was a type of Christ’s reign over His people. He
shall reign upon ‘the throne of His father David.’
Luke 1:32,33. As Christ appeared in the line of David’s
descendants when He took upon Himself our nature, he
is also called ‘the offspring of David,’ and ‘a rod out
of the stem of Jesse.’ Isaiah 11:1,10; Rev. 22:16. His
connection with the throne of David being thus set forth,
and His right thus shown to rule over the people of God,
there was a propriety in entrusting to Him the opening of
the seals.” Smith, DR, 417,418.
“Massive rocks are torn asunder by the noiseless
power of the root. Hidden beneath the soil its power is
mighty. So the power of the Root of David, hidden in
the heart, can break the strongest bands of sin. The
Saviour speaks of those who had no root in themselves
as not being able to endure tribulation. The Root of
David bears the tree of righteousness. None can be
trees of righteousness who have not this pure and
holy Root hidden in the soil of the heart.” Haskel,
SSP, 103.
“The root of the righteous shall not be moved.”
“The root of the righteous yieldeth fruit.” Proverbs
12: 3,12.
Hath Prevailed.—
“The word ‘prevailed’ is translated from the same
word translated ‘overcome’ in [Rev.] 3:21.” Bunch, TR,
18.
“These words indicate that the right to open the
book was acquired by a victory gained in some
previous conflict. We find the account of this triumph
set forth later in this chapter. The next scene introduces
us to the great work of Christ as the Redeemer of the
world, and the shedding of His blood for the remission
of sin and the salvation of man. In this work He was
subjected to the fiercest assaults of Satan. But he
endured temptation, bore the agonies of the cross, rose a
victor over death and the grave, made the way of
redemption sure—triumphed! Hence the four living
beings and the four and twenty elders sing, ‘Thou are
worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof: for Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us
to God by Thy blood.’
“John looks for the Lion of the tribe of Judah and
beholds a Lamb in the midst of the throne and of the
four living beings and the elders, as it had been slain.”
Smith, DR, 418.
“Now the guilt of Satan stood forth without excuse.
He had revealed his true character as a liar and a
murderer. It was seen that the very same spirit with
which he ruled the children of men, who were under his

power, he would have manifested had he been permitted
to control the inhabitants of heaven.
“Satan‟s lying charges against the divine character
and government appeared in their true light. He had
accused God of seeking merely the exaltation of Himself
in requiring submission and obedience from His
creatures, and had declared that, while the Creator
exacted self-denial from all others, He Himself practiced
no self-denial and made no sacrifice. Now it was seen
that for the salvation of a fallen and sinful race, the Ruler
of the universe had made the greatest sacrifice which
love could make; for ‘God was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto Himself.’ 2 Cor. 5:19. It was seen,
also, that while Lucifer had opened the door for the
entrance of sin by his desire for honor and supremacy,
Christ had, in order to destroy sin, humbled Himself
and become obedient unto death.” Great Controversy,
501,502.
“It was the merits of His incarnation, victorious
life, passion and death that qualified Christ to take the
book and break its seals. The power to create makes
Christ worthy ‘to receive glory and honour and
power’ from every created being, but it does not qualify
Him to open the sealed book. The secret of His power to
redeem and rule is the fact of His crucifixion. See Hab.
3:3,4. Calvary is the greatest event of human history.
It is the meeting place of the two eternities. There the
past and the future meet and climax. Without the cross,
human history is meaningless. For this reason it is made
the center in this vision of future events.” Bunch, TR,
18,19.
“Christ stood by every word of God, and He
prevailed. If we would always take such a position as
this when tempted, refusing to dally with temptation or
argue with the enemy, the same experience would be
ours.” Upward Look, 255.
“Christ labored for his vineyard. The Prince of
heaven, he was yet the intercessor for man, and he had
power with God, and prevailed for himself and for his
people. Morning by morning he communicated with his
Father in heaven, receiving from him daily a fresh
baptism of the Holy Spirit.” Signs, 11/21/1895.
To Open the Book.—
“The lamb was worthy to open the book because
he was slain and had purchased men from every tribe
on earth with his blood.
Therefore, there was
something about redemption in connection with the
opening of the book. Luke says, ‘The Son of man is
come to seek and to save that which was lost.’ Luke
19:10. What was lost? When Adam lost his innocency
and righteousness before God, he also lost possession of
the earth. So in saving mankind from sin was also
involved the restoration of the lost estate. These two
were inseparable. The whole discussion in regard to the
sealed book seems to involve the same thing. Thus it
seems that this book contains the terms, or the deed,

117

GEMS FROM REVELATION
of the lost estate, and in order to restore it, the terms
are that the one who does that must redeem man
from his fallen condition. In other words, the book is
the plan of salvation, or the book of the New Covenant;
for it says that as a result of redeeming man he is then
given permission to reign upon the earth. So we see that
Jesus became one of the family of the lost possession
and the closest heir so He could redeem that which was
lost. Notice how similar these expressions are to those
found in the first chapter of Revelation. ‘And from
Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first
begotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings of
the earth. Unto him that loved us and washed us
from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us
kings and princes.’” Straw, SR, 9,10.
“What speech is to thought, so is Christ to the
invisible Father. He is the manifestation of the Father,
and is called the Word of God. God sent His Son into
the world, His divinity clothed with human-ity, that man
might bear the image of the invisible God. He made
known in His words, His character, His power and
majesty, the nature and attributes of God. Divinity
flashed through humanity in softening, subduing light.
He was the embodiment of the law of God, which is the
transcript of His character.” (Manuscript 77, 1899).
5BC, 1131.
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.” John 1:1.
“And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in
blood: and his name is called The Word of God.” Rev.
19:13.

REVELATION 5:6
And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the
throne and of the four beasts, and in the
midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had
been slain, having seven horns and seven
eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent
forth into all the earth.
In the Midst of the Throne.—
“The Lamb of God is represented before us as ‘in
the midst of the throne’ of God. He is the great
ordinance by which man and God are united and
commune together. Thus men are represented as sitting
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. This is the appointed
place of meeting between God and humanity.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 124.
And in The Midst of the Four Beasts and of the Elders
Stood a Lamb As It Had Been Slain.—
“There is the throne, and around it the rainbow of
promise. There are cherubim and seraphim. The
commanders of the angel hosts, the sons of God, the
representatives of the unfallen worlds, are assembled.

The heavenly council before which Lucifer had accused
God and His Son, the representatives of those sinless
realms over which Satan had thought to establish his
dominion—all are there to welcome the Redeemer.
They are eager to celebrate His triumph and to glorify
their King.
“But He waves them back. Not yet; He cannot now
receive the coronet of glory and the royal robe. He
enters into the presence of His Father. He points to His
wounded head, the pierced side, the marred feet; He
lifts His hands, bearing the print of nails. He points to
the tokens of His triumph.” Desire of Ages, 834.
Jesus Enthroned as Priest-King at Pentecost.—
“At both the inauguration of the wilderness
tabernacle and of the temple that Solomon built, the
glory of God flooded the temple and spilled out into the
courtyard. Ex. 40:33,34; 2 Chron. 5:11-14. The same
would happen at the inauguration of Jesus Christ as
High Priest in the heaven sanctuary. By His life Jesus
had built a perfect character temple. At His ascension to
heaven, He anointed the heavenly sanctuary and He was
inaugurated as High Priest. Dan. 9:24. The Holy Spirit
then flooded the heavenly temple and spilled out into
the courtyard, the earth, to be received by those in the
upper room who were waiting by faith to receive the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on Pentecost, 31 AD. Acts
2:1-4.” PJ
A Vision of Christ’s Entry Into Heaven, and
Inauguration as Priest in the Heavenly Sanctuary.—
“When the disciples went back to Jerusalem [after
Christ’s ascension], the people looked upon them with
amazement. After the trial and crucifixion of Christ, it
had been thought that they would appear downcast and
ashamed. Their enemies expected to see upon their
faces an expression of sorrow and defeat. Instead of this
there was only gladness and triumph. Their faces were
aglow with a happiness not born of earth. They did not
mourn over disappointed hopes, but were full of praise
and thanksgiving to God. With rejoicing they told the
wonderful story of Christ’s resurrection and His
ascension to heaven, and their testimony was received by
many.
“The disciples no longer had any distrust of the
future. They knew that Jesus was in heaven, and that
His sympathies were with them still. They knew that
they had a friend at the throne of God, and they were
eager to present their requests to the Father in the name
of Jesus. In solemn awe they bowed in prayer, repeating
the assurance, ‘Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in
My name, He will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked
nothing in My name: ask, and ye shall receive, that
your joy may be full.’ John 16:23, 24. They extended
the hand of faith higher and higher, with the mighty
argument, ‘It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God,
who also maketh intercession for us.’ Rom. 8:34. And
Pentecost brought them fullness of joy in the presence of
the Comforter, even as Christ had promised.

118

REVELATION 5
“All heaven was waiting to welcome the Saviour
to the celestial courts. As He ascended, He led the
way, and the multitude of captives set free at His
resurrection followed. The heavenly host, with shouts
and acclamations of praise and celestial song, attended
the joyous train.
“As they drew near to the city of God, the
challenge is given by the escorting angels—‘Lift up
your heads, O ye gates;
And be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; And the
King of glory shall come in.’
“Joyfully the waiting sentinels respond— ‘Who is
this King of glory?"
“This they say, not because they know not who He
is, but because they would hear the answer of exalted
praise—
‘The Lord strong and mighty,
The Lord mighty in battle!
Lift up your heads, O ye gates;
Even lift them up, ye everlasting doors;
And the King of glory shall come in.’
“Again is heard the challenge, ‘Who is this King
of glory?’ for the angels never weary of hearing His
name exalted. The escorting angels make reply—
‘The Lord of hosts;
He is the King of glory.’ Ps. 24:7-10.
“Then the portals of the city of God are opened
wide, and the angelic throng sweep through the gates
amid a burst of rapturous music.
“There is the throne, and around it the rainbow of
promise. There are cherubim and seraphim. The
commanders of the angel hosts, the sons of God, the
representatives of the unfallen worlds, are assembled.
The heavenly council before which Lucifer had accused
God and His Son, the representatives of those sinless
realms over which Satan had thought to establish his
dominion—all are there to welcome the Redeemer.
They are eager to celebrate His triumph and to glorify
their King.
“But He waves them back. Not yet; He cannot now
receive the coronet of glory and the royal robe. He
enters into the presence of His Father. He points to
His wounded head, the pierced side, the marred feet; He
lifts His hands, bearing the print of nails. He points to
the tokens of His triumph; He presents to God the
wave sheaf, those raised with Him as representatives
of that great multitude who shall come forth from the
grave at His second coming. He approaches the Father,
with whom there is joy over one sinner that repents; who
rejoices over one with singing. Before the foundations
of the earth were laid, the Father and the Son had united
in a covenant to redeem man if he should be overcome
by Satan. They had clasped Their hands in a solemn
pledge that Christ should become the surety for the
human race. This pledge Christ has fulfilled. When
upon the cross He cried out, ‘It is finished,’ He
addressed the Father. The compact had been fully
carried out. Now He declares: Father, it is finished. I
have done Thy will, O My God. I have completed the
work of redemption. If Thy justice is satisfied, ‘I will

that they also, whom Thou hast given Me, be with Me
where I am.’ John 19:30; 17:24.
“The voice of God is heard proclaiming that justice
is satisfied. Satan is vanquished. Christ’s toiling,
struggling ones on earth are ‘accepted in the Beloved.’
Eph. 1:6.
Before the heavenly angels and the
representatives of unfallen worlds, they are declared
justified. Where He is, there His church shall be.
‘Mercy and truth are met together; righteous-ness
and peace have kissed each other.’ Ps. 85:10. The
Father’s arms encircle His Son, and the word is given,
‘Let all the angels of God worship Him.’ Heb. 1:6.
“With joy unutterable, rulers and principalities and
powers acknowledge the supremacy of the Prince of life.
The angel host prostrate themselves before Him,
while the glad shout fills all the courts of heaven,
‘Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power,
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing.’ Rev. 5:12.
“Songs of triumph mingle with the music from
angel harps, till heaven seems to overflow with joy and
praise. Love has conquered. The lost is found. Heaven
rings with voices in lofty strains proclaiming, ‘Blessing,
and honor, and glory, and power, be unto Him that
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb forever
and ever.’ Rev. 5:13.
“From that scene of heavenly joy, there comes
back to us on earth the echo of Christ’s own wonderful
words, ‘I ascend unto My Father, and your Father;
and to My God, and your God.’ John 20:17. The
family of heaven and the family of earth are one. For us
our Lord ascended, and for us He lives. ‘Wherefore He
is able also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make
intercession for them.’ Heb. 7:25.” Desire of Ages,
833-835.
“Our Saviour is not in a position of silence and
inactivity.
He is surrounded with heavenly
intelligences, cherubim, and seraphim, ten thousand
times ten thousand of angels.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 967,968.
A Lamb.—
“He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter….”
Isaiah 53:7.
“Behold, the Lamb of God which taketh away the
sin of the world.” Jn. 1:29.
“As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the
Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep.” John
10:15.
As It Had Been Slain.—
“This does not mean a dead lamb, for Christ is now
risen. It means one in whom are the marks of having
died, one in whom are the scars of suffering, one who
has had a deadly wound but the deadly wound has been
healed. Jesus is now in heaven in his glorified body. Is
that body then a scarred body? Yes! It is a body that
contains the scars of battle. …In fact, there were seven

119

GEMS FROM REVELATION
different places where he was wounded for us. [In his
hands, his feet, his wounded brow, his lacerated back,
his riven side, his marred face, and his broken heart].
Seven places, de-noting the fullness of agony, the
piercing pain, the extremity of his suffering on behalf
of guilty man.” Cooke, #8-UR, 5,6.
“In this picture the sacrifice had already been
made. The lamb’s throat had already been cut, and yet it
is not lying dead, but still standing. The symbol is that
of Christ as ‘the lamb of God’ after His crucifixion
and resurrection. In the previous vision Jesus said to
John: ‘I am He that liveth, and was dead; and,
behold, I am alive for evermore.’ (Rev. 1:18). As
Christ ministers before the throne of God He bears the
marks of His crucifixion. The scars give evidence of His
sacrifice and constitute an eloquent appeal in behalf of
those for whom He died. He is indeed ‘the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world.’ The scene
indicates that all succeeding generations of sinners are
fully provided for in the sacrificial Lamb before the
throne of God.
“Since the purpose of this vision is to reveal
‘things which must be hereafter,’ this scene of the
slain Lamb must also indicate that the crucifixion has an
important bearing on all future history so that its events
can be rightly understood only when studied in the light
of Calvary. One writer has truthfully said that ‘in the
sacrifice of Christ as an atonement for sin is the great
truth around which all other truths cluster. In order to
be rightly understood and appreciated, every truth in
the word of God, from Genesis to Revelation, must be
studied in the light that streams from the cross of
Calvary.’—Gospel Workers, 315. This is also true of
the events of history. How important therefore that
before the scroll of future events is unsealed and
unrolled, the Revelator be given a view of the Lamb who
had been offered in sacrifice.” Bunch, TR, 20.
“For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.”
1 Cor. 5:7
“The work of the minister is but commenced when
the truth is opened to the understanding of the people.
Christ is our Mediator and officiating High Priest in the
presence of the Father. He was shown to John as a
Lamb that had been slain, as in the very act of pouring
out His blood in the sinner’s behalf. When the law of
God is set before the sinner, showing him the depth of
his sins, he should then be pointed to the Lamb of
God, that taketh away the sin of the world. He should
be taught repentance toward God and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ. Thus will the labor of Christ’s
representative be in harmony with his work in the
heavenly sanctuary.” 4 Testimonies, 395.
“The form of the verb translated ‘had been slain’
implies that the act of slaughter had taken place in the
past, and that its results remained. Thus, though Christ’s
death is historically in the past, its results for mankind

are ever fresh
Commentary, 772.

and

availing.”

7SDA

Bible

Suffering Lamb.—
“Bodily pain was only a small part of the agony of
the beloved Son of God as he hung upon the cross. The
sins of the world were upon him, and also the sense of
his Father’s wrath against the sinner, as he suffered the
penalty of the law. It was these that crushed his divine
soul. It was the hiding of his Father’s face, a feeling
that his own dear Father had forsaken him as he
drank the cup which the sinner so richly merited,
that brought despair to his soul. The separation that
sin makes between God and man was fully realized and
keenly felt by the innocent, suffering Man of Calvary.
He was oppressed by the powers of darkness, and had
not one ray of light to brighten the future. His mental
agony on this account was so great that man can have
but a faint conception of it.” Bible Echo, 1/1/1887.
“But it was not the spear thrust, it was not the pain
of the cross, that caused the death of Jesus. That cry,
uttered ‘with a loud voice’ (Matt. 27:50; Luke 23:46), at
the moment of death, the stream of blood and water that
flowed from His side, declared that He died of a broken
heart. His heart was broken by mental anguish. He
was slain by the sin of the world.” Desire of Ages,
772.
“ ‘And they also which pierced Him.’ These
words apply not only to the men who pierced Christ
when He hung on the cross of Calvary, but to those who
by evil-speaking and wrong-doing are piercing Him
today. Daily He suffers the agonies of crucifixion.
Daily men and women are piercing Him by
dishonoring Him, by refusing to do His will.” Signs,
1/28/1903.
All Heaven Suffering.—
“Those who think of the result of hastening or
hindering the gospel think of it in relation to themselves
and to the world. Few think of its relation to God. Few
give thought to the suffering that sin has caused our
Creator. All heaven suffered in Christ's agony; but
that suffering did not begin or end with His
manifestation in humanity. The cross is a revelation
to our dull senses of the pain that, from its very
inception, sin has brought to the heart of God. Every
departure from the right, every deed of cruelty, every
failure of humanity to reach His ideal, brings grief to
Him. When there came upon Israel the calamities that
were the sure result of separation from God—
subjugation by their enemies, cruelty, and death—it is
said that ‘His soul was grieved for the misery of
Israel.’ ‘In all their affliction He was afflicted: ...and
He bare them, and carried them all the days of old.’
Judges 10:16; Isaiah 63:9.
“His Spirit ‘maketh intercession for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered.’ As the ‘whole
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together’

120

REVELATION 5
(Romans 8:26,22), the heart of the infinite Father is
pained in sympathy. Our world is a vast lazar house, a
scene of misery that we dare not allow even our thoughts
to dwell upon. Did we realize it as it is, the burden
would be too terrible. Yet God feels it all. In order to
destroy sin and its results He gave His best Beloved, and
He has put it in our power, through co-operation
with Him, to bring this scene of misery to an end.
‘This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the
end come.’ Matthew 24:14.” Education, 263,264.
Having Seven Horns.—
“Horns are symbols of power and eyes typify
wisdom. Seven is a number denoting completeness,
or perfection. We are thus taught that perfect power
and perfect wisdom inhere in the Lamb.” Smith, DR,
419.
“That all power was given to the Lamb, that all
heaven was poured out in this sacrifice, is shown by its
seven horns and its seven eyes.” Haskel, SSP, 105.
Having Seven Eyes.—
“Eyes denote intelligence and wisdom, and seven
would denote perfect and complete wisdom, in other
words the omniscience of Jesus, the all-knowing one. In
His earthly existence Jesus of Himself was not allknowing.” Cooke, #8-UR, 8.
“His head and his hairs were white like wool, as
white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire.”
Revelation 1:14.
“And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and
thunderings and voices: and there were seven lamps of
fire burning before the throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God.” Revelation 4:5.
Having Received Seven Horns and Seven Eyes.—
“And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many
angels round about the throne and the beasts and the
elders: …Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and
blessing.” Rev 5:11
“All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth.” Matthew 28:18.
“This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we are all
witnesses. Therefore being by the right hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the
promise of the Holy Spirit, he hath shed forth this,
which ye now see and hear.” Acts 2:32,33.
“Jesus had laid aside His divinity. The seven horns
(all-power) and seven eyes (all-wisdom) were received
by Jesus.
“Therefore let all the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom
ye have crucified [Lamb Slain], both Lord [Seven
horns] and Christ [Seven Eyes].” Acts 2:36.” PJ

The Seven Spirits of God Sent Into All the Earth.—
“On the day of Pentecost when Christ was
inaugurated as the Priest of the heavenly sanctuary,
the Holy Spirit was sent forth with His ministering
spirits to do a mighty work in and through the apostolic
church. Christians were illuminated with light and filled
with wisdom and power for spiritual ministry. The
gospel began in a blaze of glory under the early rain, and
will end in like manner under the latter rain. Once again
the Holy Spirit and ministering spirits will go forth into
all the earth and through the remnant of the church make
a final mighty appeal to all mankind. See Rev. 14:6-14;
18:1-5. It was the sacrifice of Christ as the Lamb that
makes possible the sending forth of the Holy Spirit.
Without Calvary there could have been no Pentecost.
It is the seven blazing lamps before the throne of God
that furnish the light and power that makes the church
‘the light of the world’ so that the whole earth is lighted
with the glory of the gospel.” Bunch, TR, 22.
“The fullness of the power and vision of the Lamb
of God is an important part of His mediatorial and
priestly ministration in the heavenly sanctuary. See Heb.
4:12-16. The salvation of man requires the plentitude of
both power and wisdom and these supreme
qualifications are found only in Christ.
“The seven horns and seven eyes of the Lamb are
divinely interpreted as symbols of ‘the seven Spirits of
God sent forth into all the earth.’ These had been
previously symbolized in the same vision by ‘seven
lamps of fire burning before the throne,’ (4:5), and in
the previous vision ‘the seven Spirits which are before
the throne’ are identified as the Holy Spirit, the third
Person of the Godhead (1:4). This must be true because
of His location before the throne. The seven lamps of
fire or the seven Spirits of God occupy a place in this
scene between the Lamb and the four living creatures. ...
As the Representative and Vice-gerent of the Son of
God, the Holy Spirit has the fullness of power and
wisdom for ministry in behalf of man.
“...Christ manifests His power and wisdom in the
earth through the Holy Spirit and the angelic host of
‘ministering spirits’ under the command of the third
Person of the Godhead. By this means He sees
everything. The prophet Zechariah was given a vision of
seven golden lamps whose oil was furnished by ‘the two
anointed ones,’ or ‘sons of oil’ (Margin), ‘that stand
by the Lord of the whole earth.’ He was told that
‘those seven; they are the eyes of the Lord, which run
to and fro through the whole earth.’ To encourage
Zerubbabel in his work, the message was given him;
‘Not by might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith
the Lord of hosts.’ See Zech. 4. In 2 Chron. 16:9 the
‘eyes of the Lord’ are said to ‘run to and fro
throughout the whole earth.’ Through the Holy Spirit,
Christ’s Representative in the earth, and the hosts of
angelic ‘ministering spirits,’ Christ not only sees
everything that happens everywhere in the earth, but
through these agencies He also carries on the earthly
phase of His ministry and furnishes the power for victory

121

GEMS FROM REVELATION
over sin, showing ‘Himself strong in behalf of them
whose hearts are perfect toward Him.’ (2 Chron.
16:9). In Zech. 1:10,11, angels are said to be ‘they
whom the Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through
the earth.’ See also Zech. 6.” Bunch, TR, 21.
“Do not for a moment pain the heart of the pitying
Saviour by your unbelief. He watches with the most
intense interest your progress in the heavenly way; He
sees your earnest efforts; He notes your declensions and
your recoveries, your hopes and your fears, your
conflicts and your victories.” 5 Testimonies, 316.

REVELATION 5:7
And he came and took the book out of
the right hand of him the sat on the throne.
He Came and Took the Book.—
“This is the focal point of chs. 4 and 5—that Christ,
by taking the book from the hand of God, does what no
other being in the universe can do.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 772.
“Not even Christ could do the work alone. The
power came from the Father. Father and Son unite in
the work of redemption.” Haskel, SSP, 105.
“They [all in heaven] are eager to celebrate His
triumph and to glorify their King. But He waves them
back. Not yet; He cannot now receive the coronet of
glory and the royal robe. He enters into the presence of
His Father. He points to His wounded head, the
pierced side, the marred feet; He lifts His hands,
bearing the print of nails. He points to the tokens of
His triumph.” Desire of Ages, 834.
“The request of Christ is granted; the church is
justified through Him, its representative and head. Here
the Father ratifies the contract with His Son, that He
will be reconciled to repentant and obedient men, and
take them into divine favor through the merits of
Christ. Christ guarantees that He will make a man
‘more precious than fine gold; even a man than the
golden wedge of Ophir.’ All power in heaven and on
earth is now given to the Prince of life; yet He does not
for a moment forget His poor disciples in a sinful world,
but prepares to return to them, that He may impart to
them His power and glory. Thus did the Redeemer of
mankind, by the sacrifice of Himself, connect earth with
heaven, and finite man with the infinite God.” (Spirit of
Prophecy, Vol. 3, 202, 203). 5BC, 1150.
“Before the assembled inhabitants of heaven the
King declared that none but Christ, the Only Begotten
of God, could fully enter into His purposes, and to
Him it was committed to execute the mighty counsels
of His will. The Son of God had wrought the Father’s
will in the creation of all the hosts of heaven; and to

Him, as well as to God, their homage and allegiance
were due.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 36.

REVELATION 5:8
And when he had taken the book, the
four beasts and the four and twenty elders
fell down before the Lamb, having every one
of them harps, and golden vials full of
odours, which are the prayers of the saints.
The Four Beasts.—
“All praise begins with the cherubim before the
throne who doubtless in a special sense compose the
celestial choir. The cherubim and elders fall down
before the Lamb who shares with the Father the
throne and also the praise and worship of all created
beings.” Bunch, TR, 23.
And the 24 Elders Fell Down Before the Lamb.—
“The voice of God is heard proclaiming that justice
is satisfied. Satan is vanquished. Christ’s toiling,
struggling ones on earth are ‘accepted in the Beloved.’
Eph. 1:6.
Before the heavenly angels and the
representatives of unfallen worlds, they are declared
justified. Where He is, there His church shall be.
‘Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness
and peace have kissed each other.’ Ps. 85:10. The
Father’s arms encircle His Son, and the word is given,
‘Let all the angels of God worship Him.’ Heb. 1:6.
“With joy unutterable, rulers and principalities and
powers acknowledge the supremacy of the Prince of life.
The angel host prostrate themselves before Him….”
Desire of Ages, 834.
“And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted
him, and given Him a name which is above every name:
That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth. And that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father.” Philippians 2:8-11.
“That the Maker of all worlds, the Arbiter of all
destinies, should lay aside His glory and humiliate
Himself from love to man will ever excite the wonder
and adoration of the universe.” Great Controversy,
651.
Having Every One of Them Harps.—
“The angels, touching their golden harps, will
welcome the King and His trophies of victory—those
who have been washed and made white in the blood of
the Lamb.” My Life Today, 348.

122

“The harp was a symbol of praise, and the incense

REVELATION 5
of prayer. Prayer should always be offered mingled
with praise. This is the only kind that is presented to
God by the assistant priests of the heavenly sanctuary.
The cherubim and elders both serve and praise, and
praise while they serve.
Their service is not a
monotonous round of formal ceremonies. Music and
praise have always been an important part of true
worship. The sincere prayers of God’s people ascend
to Him amid a cloud of sweet incense and the strains
of beautiful harp music, indicating that they are very
delightful to the Lord. ‘The sacrifice of the wicked is
an abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the
upright is His delight.’ Prov. 15:8. A knowledge of
this should inspire us to pray more fervently and
unceasingly.” Bunch, TR, 24.
“The melody of praise is the atmosphere of heaven;
and when heaven comes in touch with the earth, there is
music and song—‘thanksgiving, and the voice of
melody.’ Isaiah 51:3.” Education, 161.
Twenty-four Elders With the Prayers of Saints.—
“ ‘Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall
see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of man.’ …The angels of God
are ascending, bearing the prayers of the needy and
distressed to the Father above, and descending,
bringing blessing and hope, courage, help, and life, to
the children of men.
“The angels of God are ever passing from
earth to heaven, and from heaven to earth. The
miracles of Christ for the afflicted and suffering were
wrought by the power of God through the ministration of
the angels. And it is through Christ, by the ministration
of His heavenly messengers, that every blessing comes
from God to us. In taking upon Himself humanity, our
Saviour unites His interests with those of the fallen sons
and daughters of Adam, while through His divinity He
grasps the throne of God. And thus Christ is the medium
of communication of men with God, and of God with
men.” Desire of Ages, 143.
“Heavenly beings are appointed to answer the
prayers of those who are working unselfishly for the
interests of the cause of God. The very highest angels
in the heavenly courts are appointed to work out the
prayers which ascend to God for the advancement of
the cause of God.” 4BC, 1173.
“Those who look unto Jesus day by day and hour
by hour, who watch unto prayer, are drawing nigh to
Jesus. Angels with wings outspread wait to bear their
contrite prayers to God, and to register them in the
books of heaven.” (Letter 90, 1895). 4BC, 1184.
“As he (the father) bows with his family, at the
altar of prayer, to offer up his grateful thanks to God, for
his preserving care of himself and loved ones through
the day, angels of God hover in the room, and bear
the fervent prayers of God-fearing parents to

Heaven, as sweet incense, which are answered by
returning blessings.”
Selected Messages, Vol. 2,
439,440.
“Angels hear the offering of praise and the prayer
of faith, and they bear the petitions to Him who
ministers in the sanctuary for His people, and pleads His
merits in their behalf.” Review & Herald, 2/1/1912.
“It is interesting that of all the bones of the body,
the vertebrae look most like angels with wings. It is
interesting that there are 24 vertebrae around the spinal
cord, representing a type of Jacob’s ladder in the human
body. The spinal cord bears the messages up to the brain
and down again to the body. The vertebrae protect these
messages from harm. The angelic elders help to bear the
prayers and answers to prayers up and down the ladder
of Jesus Christ. The 24 vertebrae are a fit symbol of the
24 angelic elders and their work in God’s kingdom.” PJ
“That we must pray alone to God is evident from
Rev. 19:10; 22:8,9.” Bunch, TR, 24.
Vials.—
“Thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears
into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?” Ps. 56:8.
“Repentance is a sweet odor before our God; for it
tells of sorrow for sin, and the acceptance of the life of
Christ. Since the death of Christ, the lamb is no longer
slain; but the morning and evening prayers, when the
blood of Christ is presented by faith, touch the heart of
God, and from His throne angels speed their way on
rapid wings to fulfill the petition. If to prayer there does
not seem to come an immediate answer, there is still the
assurance that no earnest petition escapes the notice of
our Father. They are represented as preserved in
vials, in ‘bottles,’ as David says; and when the family
of the redeemed is at last gathered on that crystal sea
with the Lamb and the four and twenty elders, it will be
found that every prayer of faith is answered. The
lowliest believer, the most burdened sinner, who turns
his face heavenward, can see the rainbow of promise
above the throne.” Haskel, SSP, 106,107.
Golden Vials.—
“The prayers that reach the throne of God and are
acceptable to the Father, must ascend from hearts that
are as pure as gold and are filled with faith, love, and
truth. In other words, the prayers that please God
are impelled by love, regulated by truth, and carried
heavenward by faith.” Bunch, TR, 24.
“Why this reference to prayers here? Could it be
that the great prayer of all the saints of all ages is about
to be answered? Since Adam fell, the cry of centuries
has been, ‘Thy kingdom come.’ Persecuted prophets,
suffering saints, and martyrs without number have
prayed and longed for this day. Through all the long and
tragic night of sin, when men and women sealed their

123

GEMS FROM REVELATION
testimony in their blood, a great chorus of prayer has
come up before God. Not one prayer has been lost.
All have been carefully treasured, as it were, in these
golden bowls.” Anderson, UR, 58.
“That the prayers of the saints are contained in
golden receptacles may indicate the preciousness with
which heaven regards them.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 772.
Vials Full of Odours.—
Margin Reference: odours: or, incense.
“Let the members of every family bear in mind that
they are closely allied to heaven. The Lord has a special
interest in the families of His children here below.
Angels offer the smoke of the fragrant incense for the
praying saints. Then in every family let prayer ascend
to heaven both in the morning and at the cool sunset
hour, in our behalf presenting before God the Saviour’s
merits. Morning and evening the heavenly universe
take notice of every praying household.” Child
Guidance, 518-519.
“And another angel came and stood at the altar,
having a golden censer; and there was given unto him
much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of
all saints upon the golden altar which was before the
throne.” Rev. 8:3.
“Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense;
and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.”
Psalm 141:2.
“The incense, ascending with the prayers of Israel,
represents the merits and intercession of Christ, His
perfect righteousness, which, through faith is imputed to
His people, and which alone can make the worship of
sinful beings acceptable to God.”
Patriarchs &
Prophets, 353.

REVELATION 5:9,10
And they sung a new song, saying, Thou
art worthy to take the book, and to open the
seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us to God by thy blood out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation.
And hast made us unto our God kings
and priests: and we shall reign on the earth.
They Sung.—
“This song is obviously sung by those who are
redeemed, but according to verse 8, the singers also
include the 4 living creatures and the 24 elders—the
cherubim and seraphim, and the angel commanders of
the heavenly council.

“At this first scene Jesus is enthroned as our
great High-Priest in the Holy Place of the heavenly
sanctuary. The cherubim and seraphim, strong angels,
and all the angel host sing this song along with the
multitude of captives brought up with Jesus at His
ascension. Those who were resurrected with Jesus have
just been presented before the Father as the firstfruits in
this anti-typical Pentecost. ‘They’ join in the song at this
point.
“This song points forward to the scene pictured
in Rev. 7:9-17, when, after Christ’s second coming,
the rest of the harvest will have been gathered in, and
the song will then be sung by all the redeemed.” PJ
“As the nations of the saved look upon their
Redeemer and behold the eternal glory of the Father
shining in His countenance; as they behold His throne,
which is from everlasting to everlasting, and know that
His kingdom is to have no end, they break forth in
rapturous song: ‘Worthy, worthy is the Lamb that
was slain, and hath redeemed us to God by His own
most precious blood!’” Great Controversy, 651,652.
“Holy angels will join in the song of the
redeemed. Though they cannot sing from experimental
knowledge, ‘He hath washed us in His own blood, and
redeemed us unto God,’ yet they understand the great
peril from which the people of God have been saved.
Were they not sent to lift up for them a standard against
the enemy? They can fully sympathize with the
glowing ecstasy of those who have overcome by the
blood of the Lamb and the word of their testimony.”
(Letter 79, 1900). 7BC, 922.
A New Song.—
“The song was new in the sense that it was entirely
different from any sung before. This expression is
common in the OT (see Ps. 33:3; 40:3; Isa. 42:10). Here
it is particularly fitting, for it represents the song
growing out of a unique experience—salvation through
the victory of Jesus Christ (see on Rev. 5:5). It is the
‘new song’ of those who have a ‘new name’ (chs. 2:17;
3:12), who inhabit the ‘new Jerusalem’ (ch. 21:2),
when all things are made ‘new’ (ch. 21:5).” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 772,773.
“ ‘The song of the Lamb’ referred to in Rev. 15:3,
is doubtless the same song mentioned here. It is the
song that praises the Lamb for His atoning sacrifice.
...The oratorio of redemption is called ‘a new song.’
…It is the song of a new creation, in contrast to the
previous song of the old creation which is recorded in
Rev. 4:10,11. The first of the oratorios of this vision
celebrates the original creation, and the second the new
creation.” Bunch, TR, 25.
“It is a new song, for it was never before sung in
heaven.” Testimonies to Ministers, 433.
Thou Hast Redeemed Us.—

124

REVELATION 5
“Textual evidence attests the reading ‘them,’ with
reference to the redeemed of v. 9. The reading ‘us’ was
probably taken by the KJV translators from the Latin
Vulgate. It is thus evident that in v. 10 the ones
speaking do not specifically include themselves as ‘kings
and priests.’ It is not impossible, however, that they may
be speaking of themselves in the third person, but this is
not the natural conclusion to which the reading of the
ancient manuscripts points. According to the preferred
reading vs. 9,10 may be translated as follows: ‘Thou
art worthy to take the book and to open its seals,
because thou wast slain and didst purchase to God by
thy blood out of every tribe and tongue and people
and nation, and didst make them to our God a
kingdom of priests, and they shall reign upon the
earth’….” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 773.
“Both the redeemed and the unfallen beings will
find in the cross of Christ their science and their song.”
Desire of Ages, 19,20.
“The main theme of the book is redemption. When
one is finally found to open it, the resounding
proclamation is made, [Rev. 5:9,12 quoted]. The
Lamb’s death was the price of redemption.” Cooke, #8UR, 11.
“Those who win souls to Christ glorify their
Redeemer. He has not died in vain for them, for they are
in harmony with Christ. They look upon those who have
turned to God through their efforts, with glad rejoicing;
for they also see of the travail of their souls, and are
satisfied. They see that the anxious hours they have
spent, the perplexing circumstances they have had to
meet, the sorrows they have to endure, have worked for
them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
As they look upon the souls they have won to Christ,
and know that they are eternally saved, are
monuments of God’s mercy and of a Redeemer’s
love, they touch the golden harp and fill the arches of
heaven with praise and thanksgiving. They sing,
‘(Rev. 5:8,9,12 quoted.)’” Southern Work, 62.
Redemption and Leviticus.—
“Is there any Old Testament book that deals in any
way with the question of redemption? In the Book of
Leviticus is laid down the law for the redeeming or
buying back of inheritances in the land of Israel. At
least 5 times in 6 verses the word ‘redeem’ is used.
[Leviticus 25:23-28 quoted, including: ‘if any of his kin
come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which
his brother sold.’]” Cooke, #8-UR, 11.
Boaz, A Type of Christ.—
“The story in the Book of Ruth is a fitting
representation of the history of the human race. Adam
and Eve were established in Eden by the Creator.
(Micah 4:8 calls it ‘the first dominion.’) Through
disobedience they sold out their inheritance to Satan and
went out to the land of enemy, the land of death. But a

remnant of Adam’s family have sought to return to Eden
and regain the lost inheritance. They have found a near
kinsman—one of their own race—through whom the
inheritance can be redeemed and restored.
This
kinsman/redeemer like Boaz has come from
Bethlehem. Jesus Christ, has paid the debt of
Adam’s race upon Calvary’s cross. By the sacrifice of
his life, he has redeemed the lost inheritance. Like Boaz,
he also has married the childless widow—the Christian
church—it is his bride. He is her spiritual husband and
through this union Christ is raising up children, ‘the
seed of the woman’, who one day, will repossess the
lost
inheritance—Eden
restored.
As
kinsman/redeemer Jesus Christ will not only restore the
inheritance, but he will also be responsible for avenging
the blood of his brethren. That will be accomplished at
the second and third Advents, when he destroys Satan
and all who support him.” Cooke, #8-UR, 14,15.
By Thy Blood.—
“Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the
flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you
overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath
purchased with his own blood.” Acts 20:28.
“Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your
vain conversation received by tradition from your
fathers; But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
lamb without blemish and without spot.” 1 Peter
1:18,19.
“What? Know ye not that your body is the temple
of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of
God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought
with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in
our spirit, which are God’s.” 1 Corinthians 6:19,20.
“Shall we not consecrate ourselves to God without
reserve? Christ, the King of glory, gave Himself a
ransom for us. Can we withhold any-thing from
Him? Shall we think our poor, unworthy selves too
precious, our time or property too valuable, to give to
Jesus?—No, no; the deepest homage of our hearts, the
most skillful service of our hands, our talents of ability
and of means—all are but too poor an offering to bring
to Him who was slain and has ‘redeemed us to God by
his blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation.’” Son & Daughters, 236.
Made Us Kings and Priests.—
“Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father.” Rev. 1:5,6.
“This is not a promise of the future, but is said to
be an accomplished fact. See also Rev. 1:6. All genuine
Christians are ‘ambassadors for Christ,’ they plead
with men to be ‘reconciled to God,’ (2 Cor. 5:19,20).
To them has been given ‘the ministry of

125

GEMS FROM REVELATION
reconciliation.’ Of them the prophet said: ‘But ye
shall be named the Priests of the Lord: man shall call
you the Ministers of our God.’ (Isa. 61:6). In Ex.
19:6, God’s people are called ‘a kingdom of priests,
and an holy nation,’ and in 2 Peter 2:9, they are
declared to be, ‘a royal priesthood, an holy nation.’
Not only are all earthly citizens of the heavenly kingdom
now serving in a priestly capacity as they give the gospel
of reconciliation to the world, but when the conflict is
over they will ‘reign on the earth.’
“...Even now during the reign of sin the saints are
rulers over their own spirits, which is declared to be the
evidence of true greatness: ‘He that is slow to anger is
better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his own
spirit than he that taketh a city.’ (Prov. 16:32). To
the overcomer Paul said: ‘For sin shall not have
dominion over you,’ (Rom. 6:14). The conquerors of
sin are kings in the true sense of the word.” Bunch, TR,
26.
We Shall Reign.—
“Textual evidence attests the reading ‘they shall
reign’.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 773
“It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him,
we shall also live with him: If we suffer, we shall also
reign with him.” 2 Tim. 2:11,12.
“While the reign is now spiritual, the state-ment is
doubtless prophetic of the time when the promise of
Rev. 3:21 is fulfilled and the overcomers sit with
Christ ‘in His throne.’ Christians are now princes or
kings in the making and therefore ‘heirs of the
kingdom.’ ...The new song is a song of redemption
through the blood of the Lamb, of a priesthood of
Christian service, and of power to reign as king—now
over sin and all evil, and eventually as joint-rulers with
Christ in the kingdom of glory.” Bunch, TR, 27.

REVELATION 5:11
And I beheld and I heard the voice of
many angels round about the throne and the
beasts and the elders: and the number of
them was ten thousand time ten thousand,
and thousands of thousands;
I Heard the Voice.—
“ ‘Voice’ instead of ‘voices’ indicates the perfect
unison with which the angelic chorus sings. There is not
a discordant note as they proclaim the worthiness of the
Lamb, their beloved Commander.” Bunch, TR, 27,28.
“With the voice of the angels, ‘the voice’ includes
that of the beasts and the four and twenty elders.
Thus, the elders are classed among the angelic beings,
rather than with the redeemed.” PJ

Round About the Throne.—
“Oh, that all could behold our precious Saviour as
He is, a Saviour. Let His hand draw aside the veil which
conceals His glory from our eyes. It shows Him in His
high and holy place. What do we see? Our Saviour, not
in a position of silence and inactivity. He is surrounded
with heavenly intelligences [Ed. note: elders],
cherubim, and seraphim, ten thousand times ten
thousand of angels.” Letter 89c, 1897.
Many Angels Round About the Throne.—
“The divine arrangement of the occupants of the
throne room as described by the Revelator is in
harmony with the other Scriptures. In the center is
the throne of the Father.... Next to Him is Christ, the
Lamb, the second Person of the Godhead. Then come
the seven blazing lamps, symbolic of the Holy Spirit, the
third Person of the Godhead. Next ...are the cherubim
...surrounded by the twenty-four elders..., and last are
the innumerable company of angelic ministering
spirits.” Bunch, TR, 27.
“Do not let your thoughts dwell upon your-selves.
Think of Jesus. He is in His holy place, not in a state of
solitude and grandeur, but surrounded by ten thousand
times ten thousand of heavenly beings who wait to do
their Master’s bidding. And He bids them go and
work for the weakest saint who puts his trust in God.
High and low, rich and poor, have the same help
provided.” (Letter 134, 1899). 7BC, 933.
“Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of
his, that do His pleasure.” Ps. 103:21.
“All heaven is interested in our salvation. The
angels of God, thousands upon thousands, and ten
thousand times ten thousand, are commissioned to
minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation.
They guard us against evil and press back the powers of
darkness that are seeking our destruction. Have we not
reason to be thankful every moment, thankful even when
there are apparent difficulties in our pathway?” Ministry
of Healing, 253,254.
“God has placed everything in the universe at our
service. ...‘He who did not spare his own Son but
gave him up for us all, will he not also give us all
things?’ Romans 8:32. And He has placed the angels
at our service. ‘Are they not all ministering spirits
sent forth to serve, for the sake of those who are to
obtain salvation?’ Hebrews 1:14.
“The beings around God’s throne find their greatest
delight in observing God’s love for us—and in observing
our willing response to His love. ‘There is joy before
the angels of God over one sinner who repents,’ said
Jesus in Lk. 15:10. The thought that caused the
heavenly rapture in Rev. 5:9,10 was that Christ was
‘slain’ for ‘men,’ for human beings, that He had
‘ransomed’ them, so that they—you and I—can one day
‘reign on earth.’” Maxwell, God Cares, 155.

126

REVELATION 5
“They [the angels] confederate together to uphold
the honor and glory of God. They are united in a holy
alliance, in a grand and sublime unity of purpose, to
show forth the power and compassion and love and glory
of the crucified and risen Saviour.” (Letter 89c, 1897).
7BC, 968.
And the Beasts and the Elders.—
“Notice again that the 24 elders are classed with
angels, and more closely with the four living
creatures, just as in verses 5, 8, and 14.” PJ.
The Number of Them.—
“How little conception we have of the magnitude
and glory of the heavenly temple! Into that temple
John was introduced at the opening of Revelation 4, by
the door which was open in heaven. Into the same
temple, he is still looking in Revelation 5:11,12. Now he
beholds the heavenly hosts. About the throne are those
represented by the four living creatures. Next come the
four and twenty elders. Then John views a multitude of
the heavenly angels surrounding the whole. How many?
How many would we suppose could convene within the
heavenly temple? ‘Ten thousand times ten thousand!’
ex-claims the seer. In this expression alone we have one
Saying With a Loud Voice.—
“The participants in this song include those
listed in vs.11: the four living creatures, the twenty-four
elders, and the angelic hosts.” PJ
Worthy Is the Lamb That Was Slain (Sung At Christ’s
Ascension).—
“The voice of God is heard proclaiming that justice
is satisfied. Satan is vanquished. Christ’s toiling,
struggling ones on earth are ‘accepted in the Beloved.’
Eph. 1:6.
Before the heavenly angels and the
representatives of unfallen worlds, they are declared
justified. Where He is, there His church shall be.
‘Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness
and peace have kissed each other.’ Ps. 85:10. The
Father’s arms encircle His Son, and the word is given,
‘Let all the angels of God worship Him.’ Heb. 1:6.
“With joy unutterable, rulers and principalities and
powers acknowledge the supremacy of the Prince of life.
The angel host prostrate themselves before Him,
while the glad shout fills all the courts of heaven,
‘Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power,
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing.’ Rev. 5:12.” Desire of Ages,
834.
Song Also Sung at Christ’s Second Coming.—
“Every time there is a new disclosure of divine
love and grace, there is a new outburst of praise from all
creatures in heaven.” Thiele, OSIR, 95.
“The gates of the city of God swing back upon
their hinges, and the nations that have kept the truth
enter in. There are the columns of angels on either

hundred million! Then, as if no numerical expression is
adequate to embrace the countless throng, he further
adds, ‘And thousands of thousands!’ Well might the
writer of Hebrews call this ‘an innumerable company
of angels.’ Hebrews 12:22. These were in the
sanctuary above.” Smith, DR, 421.
“ ‘The number of them’ includes the four and
twenty elders, which proves that they classed among the
angelic beings, rather than with the redeemed.” PJ
“A fiery stream issued and came forth from before
him. Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and
ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him.”
Daniel 7:10.

REVELATION 5:12
Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honour, and glory, and blessing.

side, and the ransomed of God walk in through the
cherubims and seraphims. Christ bids them welcome
and puts upon them His benediction. ‘Well done, thou
good and faithful servant: ...enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord.’ What is that joy? He sees of the travail of
His soul, and is satisfied.
“That is what we labor for. Here is one, who in the
night season we pleaded with God on his behalf. There
is one that we talked with on his dying bed, and he hung
his helpless soul upon Jesus. Here is one who was a
poor drunkard. We tried to get his eyes fixed upon Him
who is mighty to save and we told him that Christ could
give him the victory. There are the crowns of immortal
glory upon their heads, and then the redeemed cast their
glittering crowns at the feet of Jesus; and then the
angelic choir strikes the note of victory, and the angels
in the two columns take up the song, and the
redeemed host join as though they had been singing
the song on the earth, and they have been.
“Oh, what music! There is not an inharmonious
note. Every voice proclaims, ‘Worthy is the Lamb that
was slain.’ He sees of the travail of His soul, and is
satisfied. Do you think anyone there will take time to
tell of his trials and terrible difficulties? ‘The former
shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.’ ‘God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.’” (MS 18,
1894). 6BC, 1093.
“The central figure in this innumerable and holy
throng was the Lamb of God, and the central act of His
life, which claimed their admiration was the shedding of
His blood for the salvation of fallen man. Every voice in
all that heavenly host joined in the ascription which was
raised, ‘Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive

127

GEMS FROM REVELATION
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing.’ Fitting assemblage for
such a place! Fitting song of adoration to be raised to
sacrifice in our behalf.” Smith, DR, 421,422.
Sevenfold Praise.—
“It is a complete and perfect song of praise because
it ascribes to Christ the seven species of praise. See also
Rev. 7:12.
The ‘power’ is indicative of His
omnipotence; ‘riches’ of His beneficence; ‘wisdom’ of
His omniscience; ‘strength’ of His power in exercise;
‘honor’ of the highest reputation for what is done;
‘glory’ is the praise due Him for such actions; and
‘blessing’ is the thankful acknowledgment of the whole
creation.
“Because of His atoning sacrifice, the Lamb is
worthy to receive all praise because He has all power,
riches, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and blessing.
Because He is ‘all and in all’ to us, He should receive
all from us—all our power, riches, wisdom, strength,
honor, glory, and blessing. All should be devoted to
Him and expended in His service and to His glory.”
Bunch, TR, 28.
“Their sevenfold ascription of praise enumerates
the attributes of the exalted Christ. Jesus manifested
each one during His earthly ministry on behalf of others,
but never was He self-serving.” Battistone, God’s
Church, 78.
“Looking unto Jesus we see that it is the glory of
our God to give. ...All things Christ received from God,
but He took to give. So in the heavenly courts, in His
ministry for all created beings: through the beloved
Son, the Father’s life flows out to all; through the Son
it returns, in praise and joyous service, a tide of love,
to the great Source of all. And thus through Christ
the circuit of beneficence is complete, representing
the character of the great Giver, the law of life.”
Desire of Ages, 21.

REVELATION 5:13
And every creature which is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and
such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour,
and glory, and power, be unto him that
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever.
A Fourfold Anthem From Four Locations.—
“Verse 13 and 14 contain a fourfold anthem from
creatures in four locations: heaven, earth, under the
earth, and in the sea, in praise of the Father and the
Lamb. It would seem that the second anthem could
only be rendered when this earth is restored to
harmony with the rest of the universe, for only then

Him who by the shedding of His blood became a ransom
for many, and who as our great High Priest in the
sanctuary above still pleads the merits of His
would ‘every creature …on the earth’, render
spontaneous praise to the Deity.
“However, in the setting of Rev. 5 this mighty
anthem of praise bursts forth in response to the Lamb
taking the book of redemption. The Spirit of Prophecy
reveals that the anthem was sung by the heavenly
hosts at the inauguration of Jesus as mediator and
High Priest. (Desire of Ages, 832-835). This probably
refers to that part of the anthem in Vs.11-12. The Spirit
of Prophecy applies the whole anthem to the coronation
of Jesus at the second Advent. (Great Controversy, 648;
8 Testimonies, 44; Desire of Ages, 131.)
“The third application by the Spirit of Prophecy is
at Jesus’ coronation at the third Advent, after the
millennium. (Great Controversy, 662-674.)
“A fourth application is made to the days of
eternity (Great Controversy, 651-652; 687) when the
redeemed render praise to the Father and the Son.”
Cooke, #8-UR, 18,19.
Every Creature.—
“Thus will be made an end of sin, with all the woe
and ruin which have resulted from it. Says the psalmist:
‘Thou hast destroyed the wicked, Thou hast put out
their name forever and ever. O thou enemy,
destructions are come to a perpetual end.’ Psalm
9:5,6. John, in the Revelation, looking forward to the
eternal state, hears a universal anthem of praise
undisturbed by one note of discord. Every creature in
heaven and earth was heard ascribing glory to God.
Rev. 5:13. There will then be no lost souls to
blaspheme God as they writhe in never-ending
torment; no wretched beings in hell will mingle their
shrieks with the songs of the saved.”
Great
Controversy, 545.
“The great controversy is ended. Sin and sinners
are no more. The entire universe is clean. One pulse of
harmony and gladness beats through the vast
creation. From Him who created all, flow life and light
and gladness, throughout the realms of illimitable space.
From the minutest atom to the greatest world, all things,
animate and inanimate, in their unshadowed beauty and
perfect joy, declare that God is love.”
Great
Controversy, 678.
Under the Earth.—
“It may be that the expression ‘under the earth’
refers to the resurrected righteous dead who had been in
graves waiting for this glad day. In Rev. 6:9 the martyrs
are said to be ‘under the altar’ waiting for the day of
vengeance. The earth is the altar on which their
blood was offered in sacrifice.” Bunch, TR, 28.
Every Creature’s Song.—
“Songs of triumph mingle with the music from
angel harps, till heaven seems to overflow with joy and

128

REVELATION 5
praise. Love has conquered. The lost is found. Heaven
rings with voices in lofty strains proclaiming, (Rev. 5:13
quoted).” Desire of Ages, 835.
“Beginning with the cherubim and elders before the
throne, and joined in by the angelic host whose untiring
ministry has helped bring about the fruition of the gospel
purpose, the threefold doxology of Calvary finally
bursts out beyond the circles of the celestial temple to
all creation.” Bunch, TR, 28.
“We should not allow anything to come in between
us and Jesus. We must learn here to sing the song of
heaven, so that when our warfare is over we can join
in the song of the heavenly angels in the city of God.
What is that song? It is praise, and honor, and glory
unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever.” Historical Sketches, 145.
“The glorious chorus at the end of chapter 5 of the
Revelation, given by the literary figure of prolepsis
(anticipation), is a splendid picture of the final complete
victory of the Lamb of God over all opposition and all
the deceptions of the enemy.” Price, Time of the End,
49.
Unto Him That Sitteth Upon the Throne, and Unto the
Lamb.—
“He ‘shall sit and rule upon His throne; and He
shall be a priest upon His throne.’ Not now "upon the
throne of His glory;’ the kingdom of glory has not yet
been ushered in. Not until His work as a mediator shall
be ended will God ‘give unto Him the throne of His
father David,’ a kingdom of which ‘there shall be no
end.’ Luke 1:32, 33. As a priest, Christ is now set
down with the Father in His throne. Revelation 3:21.”
Great Controversy, 416.
“To the Lamb, equally with the Father who sits
upon the throne, praise is ascribed in this song of
adoration.” Smith, DR, 423.

REVELATION 5:14
And the four beasts said, Amen. And
the four and twenty elders fell down and
worshipped him that liveth for ever and
ever.
Four Beasts Said.—
“Let us all bear in mind that in every assembly of
the saints below are angels of God, listening to the
testimonies, songs, and prayers. Let us remember that
our praises are supplemented by the choirs of the
angelic host above.” 6 Testimonies, 367.
Amen.—
“‘Amen’ indicates the end. ...After the curtain falls
on this matchless scene of restored unity and glory, the
cherubim host cry out, “Amen,” or “So Be it”.... So the
ever widening circle of adoration and praise has swept
back to the center where it first broke forth, and the last
cadence is uttered by the same lips which opened and
led that great Service of Praise.’ (The Devotional
Commentary).” Bunch, TR, 29.
“If man but caught a glimpse of the joy of
salvation, his lips would repeat the songs of heaven.
Angelic beings are looking forward to the completion
of the plan. So may we.” Haskel, SSP, 108.
“Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and
ever. And all the people said, Amen, and praised the
Lord.” 1 Chronicles 16:36.
Him That Liveth For Ever and Ever.—
“This is the Father, who is described in the same
terms in Rev. 4:9 and 10:6.

TIMELINE OF EVENTS IN REVELATION 4 AND 5
REV. 4

REV. 5:1-4

VIEW
INTO
HOLY
PLACE;
FATHER
WAITING

BOOK
WITH 7
SEALS
NOT
OPENED

PENTECOST
31 AD
REV. 5:5,6
REV. 5:7
CHRIST
CHRIST
ASCENDS,
TAKES
APPEARS
BOOK,
AS LAMB
PRIESTLY
SLAIN
MINISTRY
BEGINS

REV. 5:8-10
SONG OF
(SUNG
BEASTS,
AGAIN
ELDERS,
AT 2ND
AND FEW
COMING)
REDEEMED
AT CHRIST’S
INAUGURATION

129

REV. 5:11,12
SONG OF
ANGELS,
BEASTS,
ELDERS
REPEATED
FOREVER.

REV. 5:13,14
SONG OF
EVERY
CREATURE
AFTER
1000
YEARS

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 6
REVELATION 6:1-17
1 And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I
heard, as it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts
saying, Come and see.
2 And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him
had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth
conquering, and to conquer.
3 And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second
beast say, Come and see.
4 And there went out another horse that was red: and power
was given him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and
that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a
great sword.
5 And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast
say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that
sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand. 6 And I heard a
voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a
penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see that thou
hurt not the oil and the wine.
7 And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth
beast say, Come and see.
8 And I looked and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat
on him is death, and Hell followed with him. And power was given
unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and
with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.
9 And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the alter
the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held:
10 And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord,
holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth?
11 And white robes were given unto every one of them; and it
was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season,
until their fellow-servants also and their brethren, that should be
killed as they were, should be fulfilled.
12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo,
there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as
sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood;
13 And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree
casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.
14 And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled
together; and every mountain and island were moved out of there
places.
15 And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich
men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bond
man, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the
rocks of the mountains;
16 And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb.
17 For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able
to stand?

THE FOUR HORSEMEN

THE FIRST SEAL
REVELATION 6:1
And I saw when the Lamb opened one
of the seals, and I heard, as it were the noise
of thunder, one of the four beasts saying,
Come and see.

I Saw When the Lamb Opened One of the Seals.—
“As the book was unrolled, all who looked upon it
were filled with awe. There were no blanks in the book.
There was space for no more writing. [Rev. 5:8-14; 6:8,
quoted.]” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 20, 197.
The Seven Seals.—
“The number seven has already been noticed as
denoting completeness and perfection in the Scriptures.
The seven seals represent events of a religious character,
and contain the history of the church from the opening of
the Christian Era to the second coming of Christ.”
Smith, DR, 425.
“The seven seals seem to be seven pictures of the
church through the centuries, showing the growth of
apostasy in the church. The first period, the age of the
apostles, was one of purity and apostolic zeal. ...Then
with each succeeding period the messengers become
more corrupt until these supposed messengers turn
upon God’s true people and destroy them.” Straw,
SR, 11.
“The introductory scene (Rev. 4-5) depicts
symbolically the enthronement of Christ in the
heavenly sanctuary at His ascension. Chapter 7 ends
with God’s people in the throne-room. Therefore, the
seals of chapter 6 portray events on earth from the
cross to the Second Coming....” Biblical Research
Inst., 1SOR, 226.
“If the seals of Revelation 6 repeat and expand the
signs for the church age contained in Matthew 24 and
Luke 21, then, like those signs, the seals also span the
centuries of the entire church age that ends with the
return of Jesus.” LaRondelle, LFTLD, 44.
One of the Four Beasts.—
“See Rev. 1:1. In the giving of the Apocalypse,
Christ, the Lamb, ‘sent and signified it by His angel
unto His servant John.’ Signify means to communicate
by signs and symbols. In the breaking of the seals this
work of dramatizing or symbolizing future events is
done by the four living creatures. This is further
evidence that they are the cherubim and not redeemed
beings.” Bunch, TR, 31.
“It has been presumed that this first living creature
was the first of the four which ‘was like a lion,’ (4:7),
‘the noise of thunder’ being akin to a lion’s roar.”
Bunch, TR, 31.
“The ‘beast’ in this passage, is the first, which was
like a lion, representing the church in its first state, in

130

REVELATION 6
the days of the apostles, when the church went
everywhere, preaching the word, bold as a lion.”
Miller, Evidence, 180.
Come and See.—
“The first question John asked Jesus was ‘Where
dwellest thou?’ Jesus answer him, ‘Come and see.’
John followed Jesus that day, and the next, and the next,
but Jesus had no permanent dwelling place on earth. At
the beginning of this vision, Jesus calls John to come up
here and see. Now, in these four seals, God continues to
gives us, His people, the invitation to ‘Come and See.’
It is a continual invitation from Jesus to continue to
follow Him one day, one step, at a time through every
kind of trial and situation, until the end of the world,
until we dwell with Him in heaven.” PJ.
“When the seals were broken, and the record was
brought to light, the scenes were presented before John,
not by the reading of the description, but by a
representation of what was described in the book
being made to pass before his view in living
characters, and in the place where the reality was to
occur, namely, on the earth.” Smith, DR, 425.

REVELATION 6:2
And I saw, and behold a white horse:
and he that sat on him had a bow; and a
crown was given unto him: and he went
forth conquering, and to conquer.
The First Seal.—
“The first symbol is a white horse, bearing a rider
who carries a bow. A crown is given to him, and he
goes forth conquering and to conquer, a fit emblem of
the triumphs of the gospel in the first century of the
Christian Era.” Smith, DR, 425.
A Horse and its Rider.—
“The Lord of hosts hath visited his flock the house
of Judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in
the battle.” Zechariah 10:3.
“The horse is symbolic of the church, its color
represents her spiritual condition, and the rider her
responsible leadership. As a rider guides and controls
his horse, so the movements of the church are
determined by the leading officials.
...The horse
[represents] the swiftness with which Christianity went
forth to the conquest of the world.” Bunch, TR, 30.
“The four horses and horsemen of Revelation
represent four stages of men in the positions they
take toward God and the principles of His kingdom.
First comes the white horse, representing the righteous
who have taken their position on the side of God. The
next three horses represent the wicked in increasing
degrees of iniquity and perversity.” Thiele, ODIR, 122a.

Jesus directs the True (White Horse) Church
White Horse: Symbol of the true church.—.—
“Many shall be purified, and made white.” Dan.
12:10.
“And to her was granted that she should be arrayed
in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the
righteousness of saints.” Rev. 19:8.
He That Sat on Him.—
“And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white
horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and
True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war.
His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on His head were
many crowns; and He had a name written, that no man
knew, but He Himself. And he was clothed with a
vesture dipped in blood: and His name is called The
Word of God.” Rev. 19:11-13.
“The white horse, and him that sat upon him,
represent Jesus Christ going forth in the power of the
gospel. This is proved by the passage, Rev. 19:11-13
(quoted). This is the same personage as the other, and
both places represent the same thing, only the first
description is representing the spread of the gospel in
the beginning of the gospel day, the other at the end of
the gospel period, under which we are now living.”
Miller, Evidence, 180.
“The hour came for the lifting up of the Son of God
on the cross, and the hour has now come for him to be
lifted up from the earth. Impelled and stimulated by the
love of Christ, as God’s people advance in the work
marked out for them, they will conquer through faith.
By faith they may behold even more than angels in their
ranks; for the abundant aid of the General of armies is
ready for them in every emergency. He leads them on
from victory to victory, proclaiming at every step, ‘I
have overcome the world.’ Your leader goeth forth,
conquering and to conquer. Never forget that you are
fighting the battle of the Lord of hosts, in full view of the
invisible world.” Review & Herald, 3/15/1898.
“The issue of the battle does not rest upon the
strength of mortal man. ‘The Lord shall go forth as a
mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of

131

GEMS FROM REVELATION
war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against
his enemies.’ In the power of Him who rides forth
conquering and to conquer, weak, finite man may gain
the victory. (Manuscript 151, 1899). 4BC, 1146.

my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore
the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto
the end of the earth.” Isaiah 49:2,3,6.

“All of God’s people upon the earth are one body,
from the beginning to the end of time. They have one
Head that directs and governs the body. The same
injunctions that rested upon ancient Israel, rest upon
God's people now, to be separate from the world. The
great Head of the church has not changed.” 1
Testimonies, 283.

“Let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that
God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified,
both Lord and Christ.
“Now when they heard this, they were pricked in
their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the
apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?” Acts
2:36,37.

“Work as seeing Him who is at your right hand,
ready to give you His efficiency and omnipotent power
in every emergency. The Lord is your Counselor, your
Guide, the Captain of your salvation. He goes before
your face, conquering and to conquer.”
6
Testimonies, 76.

“When they heard that, they were cut to the
heart, and took counsel to slay them.” Acts 5:33.

A White Horse: Symbol of the Church Militant.—
“ ‘I saw heaven opened and beheld a white
horse, and …he doth judge and make war.’ Rev.
19:11. This refers to Jesus Christ at the Second Advent.
It is a military picture, symbolic of Armageddon. Jesus
is pictured riding a white horse. For what reason? ‘In
righteousness he doth judge [or punish] and make war’.
This is a war picture. A horse denotes war. …In
contrast with the many texts that speak of the use of the
horse for war, there is only one that mentions the horse
in connection with agriculture.” Cooke, #9-UR, 3.
A Bow.—
“Thy bow was made quite naked..., even thy
word.” Hab. 3:9
“My heart is indicting a good matter: I speak of the
things which I have made touching the king: my tongue
is the pen of a ready writer. Thou art fairer than the
children of men: grace is poured into thy lips:
therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.
“Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty,
with thy glory and thy majesty. And in thy majesty
ride prosperously because of truth and meekness and
righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the
king’s enemies; whereby the people fall under thee.”
Psalm 45:1-5:
“The bow, like the two-edged sword, represents
the word of God by which the arrows of conviction are
sent forth by the Holy Spirit to pierce the guilty
conscience of the sinner.” Bunch, TR, 32.
The Arrows.—
“He hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in
the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a
polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me; And said
unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will
be glorified. ...It is a light thing that thou shouldest be

“The arguments of the apostles alone, though clear
and convincing, would not have removed the prejudice
that had withstood so much evidence. But the Holy
Spirit sent the arguments home to hearts with divine
power. The words of the apostles were as sharp
arrows of the Almighty, convicting men of their terrible
guilt in rejecting and crucifying the Lord of glory.” Acts
of the Apostles, 45.
“From this time forth the language of the disciples
was pure, simple, and accurate, whether they spoke in
their native tongue or in a foreign language.” Acts of the
Apostles, 40.
“Jesus watched with deep earnestness the changing
countenances of His hearers. The faces that expressed
interest and pleasure gave Him great satisfaction. As the
arrows of truth pierced to the soul, breaking through
the barriers of selfishness, and working contrition, and
finally gratitude, the Saviour was made glad. ...When
the truth, plainly spoken, touched some cherished
idol, He marked the change of countenance, the cold,
forbidding look, which told that the light was
unwelcome. When He saw men refuse the message of
peace, His heart was pierced to the very depths.”
Desire of Ages, 255.
“The words of Christ were as sharp arrows,
which went to the mark and wounded the hearts of
His hearers. Every time He addressed the people,
whether His audience was large or small, His words took
saving effect upon the soul of some one. No message
that fell from His lips was lost. Every word He spoke
placed a new responsibility upon those who heard. And
today the ministers, who in sincerity are giving the last
message of mercy to the world, relying on God for
strength, need not fear that their efforts will be in vain.
Although no human eye can see the path of the arrow
of truth, who can say that the arrow has not sped to
the mark, and pierced the souls of those who
listened? Although no human ear has heard the cry of
the wounded soul, yet the truth has silently cut its way
to the heart. God has spoken to the soul; and in the day
of final account, His faithful ministers will stand with

132

REVELATION 6
the trophies of redeeming grace, to give honor to Christ.”
Gospel Workers, 150.
“This instruction is given to us all. Ministers are to
take heed, and with pen and voice echo the words of
God. When we are called upon to violate the law of
God, we shall be given wisdom from above, to answer as
did Christ, ‘It is written.’ Speak as few words of your
own arrangement as possible, but have your heart
supplied with the sharp arrows of God’s furnishing.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 2, 194.
“The sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God, pierces the heart of the sinner and cuts it in
pieces. When the theory of the truth is repeated without
its sacred influence being felt upon the soul of the
speaker, it has no force upon the hearers, but is rejected
as error, the speaker making himself responsible for the
loss of souls.” 4 Testimonies, 441.
“The name Seventh-day Adventist carries the true
features of our faith in front, and will convict the
inquiring mind. Like an arrow from the Lord’s
quiver, it will wound the transgressors of God’s law,
and will lead to repentance toward God and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ.” 1 Testimonies, 224 (1858—
Five years before Gen. Conf. was formed).
A Crown Was Given Unto Him.—
“In the kingdom of God, position is not gained
through favoritism. It is not earned, nor is it received
through an arbitrary bestowal. It is the result of
character. The crown and the throne are the tokens of
a condition attained; they are the tokens of selfconquest through our Lord Jesus Christ.
“Long afterward, when the disciple had been
brought into sympathy with Christ through the fellowship of His sufferings, the Lord revealed to John what is
the condition of nearness in His kingdom. ‘To him that
overcometh,’ Christ said, ‘will I grant to sit with Me
in My throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with My Father in His throne.’ ‘Him that
overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of My
God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write
upon him the name of My God, ...and I will write
upon him My new name.’ Rev. 3:21, 12. So Paul the
apostle wrote, ‘I am now ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge,
shall give me at that day.’ 2 Tim. 4:6-8.
“The one who stands nearest to Christ will be he
who on earth has drunk most deeply of the spirit of His
self-sacrificing love—love that ‘vaunteth not itself, is
not puffed up, ...seeketh not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinketh no evil’ (1 Cor. 13:4, 5)—love that
moves the disciple, as it moved our Lord, to give all, to
live and labor and sacrifice, even unto death, for the
saving of humanity.” Desire of Ages, 549.

“But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower
than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with
glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should
taste death for every man.” Heb. 2:9.
“And when they had platted a crown of thorns,
they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand:
and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him,
saying, Hail, King of the Jews!” Matthew 27:29.
“And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above
every name: That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth.” Phi 2:9,10.
“Their [the disciples’] long-cherished hopes, based
on a popular delusion, were to be disappointed in a most
painful and humiliating manner. In the place of His
exaltation to the throne of David they were to witness
His crucifixion. This was to be indeed His true
coronation.” Desire of Ages, 397.
“Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.” Rev. 2:10.
“In all ages Satan has persecuted the people of
God. He has tortured them and put them to death, but in
dying they became conquerors.” Mount of Blessing,
30.
“Calvary and martyrdom are coronation services.”
PJ
And He Went Forth Conquering.—
“A crown denotes victory. A crown was given to
him that sat on the horse, and he went forth
‘conquering, and to conquer.’ During the first century,
it mattered not whether there was an appearance of
defeat, or whether triumph was seen in the healing of the
sick, and the deliverance of the tried and tempted. The
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth was health to the
afflicted and life to the dead. Victory was written upon
every move of the disciples. In prison, with their
backs lacerated, their songs of praise and
thanksgiving brought victory and resulted in the
conversion of souls. Peter was sentenced to death, shut
up in the inner prison; but that last night in prison was a
victory; for the angel of the Lord brought deliverance.
Truly wonderful was the story of the Gospel during the
first century, as it went forth ‘conquering, and to
conquer.’” Haskel, SSP, 111.
“By what symbols could the work of Christianity
better be represented when it went forth as an aggressive
principle against the huge systems of error with which it
had at first to contend? The rider upon this horse went

133

GEMS FROM REVELATION
forth—where? His commission was unlimited. The
gospel was to all the world.” Smith, DR, 425,426.
“With what burning language they [the apostles]
clothed their ideas as they bore witness for Him! Their
hearts were surcharged with a benevolence so full, so
deep, so far-reaching, that it impelled them to go to the
ends of the earth, testifying to the power of Christ. They
were filled with an intense longing to carry forward the
work He had begun. They realized the greatness of their
debt to heaven and the responsibility of their work.
Strengthened by the endowment of the Holy Spirit, they
went forth filled with zeal to extend the triumphs of
the cross. The Spirit animated them and spoke through
them. The peace of Christ shone from their faces. They
had consecrated their lives to Him for service, and their
very features bore evidence to the surrender they had
made.” Acts of the Apostles, 46.

forth to proclaim the gospel, there was such a
revelation of the glory of God as had never before
been witnessed by mortal man. By the co-operation
of the divine Spirit, the apostles did a work that
shook the world. To every nation was the gospel
carried in a single generation.” Acts of the Apostles, 593.
“To the Roman church Paul wrote: ‘I thank my
God ...that your faith is spoken of throughout the
whole world;’ and again, ‘Your obedience is come
abroad unto all men.’ [Romans 1:8; 16:19.]
“When the apostle had been preaching but little
more than thirty years, he said to the Colossians that the
Gospel had been ‘preached to every creature which is
under heaven.’ [Col. 1:23.] What stronger expression
could be used than ‘it went forth conquering, and to
conquer.’” Haskel, SSP,111,112.
“Many hold faith as an opinion. Saving faith is a
transaction, by which those who receive Christ join
themselves in covenant relation with God. A living
faith means an increase of vigor, a confiding trust, by
which, through the grace of Christ, the soul becomes
a conquering power.
“Faith is a mightier conqueror than death. If the
sick can be led to fix their eyes in faith upon the Mighty
Healer, we shall see wonderful results. It will bring life
to the body and to the soul.” Ministry of Healing, 62.

Paul Preaching on Mars Hill in Athens
“What was the result of the outpouring of the Spirit
on the Day of Pentecost? The glad tidings of a risen
Saviour were carried to the uttermost parts of the
inhabited world. As the disciples proclaimed the
message of redeeming grace, hearts yielded to the power
of this message. ...‘With great power gave the
apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus:
and great grace was upon them all.’ Acts 4:33.” Acts
of the Apostles, 48.
“In the days of the apostles the Christian believers
were filled with earnestness and enthusiasm.
So
untiringly did they labor for their Master that in a
comparatively short time, notwithstanding fierce
opposition, the gospel of the kingdom was sounded to
all the inhabited parts of the earth. The zeal
manifested at this time by the followers of Jesus has
been recorded by the pen of inspiration for the
encouragement of believers in every age.” Acts of the
Apostles, 578.
“The commission that Christ gave to the disciples,
they fulfilled. As these messengers of the cross went

Five Parallels Between Psalm 45 and Rev. 6:2.—
PSALM 45
REV. 6:2
Vs. 4: ‘In thy majesty
He rides ‘a white horse.’
ride prosperously.’
Vs. 1: ‘I speak of things
The rider has a ‘crown
touching the king.’
upon his head’ denoting
kingship.
Vs. 4: ‘Ride
Rides a white horse
prosperously because of
denoting purity and
truth, meekness &
righteousness.
rightsousness.’
Vs. 5: ‘Grace is poured
‘He that sat on him had
into thy lips.’
a bow in his hand.’
‘Thine arrows are sharp in The purpose of a bow is
the heart of the king’s
to shoot arrows. Arrows
enemies.’
represent Word of God.
Vs. 5: ‘Whereby the
He ‘went forth
people fall under thee’
conquering and to
indicating the triumph of
conquer.’
the Messiah.
[From Cooke, #9-UR, 4].
And to Conquer.—
“The going ‘forth conquering’ represents the
success of the apostolic period, and the ‘and to
conquer’ indicates the future and final triumph after the
great apostasy pictured by the succeeding symbolic
horses and horsemen. The Reformation, though long
delayed, will finally end in complete triumph; in
permanent victory.” Bunch, TR, 33.

134

REVELATION 6

“God’s workers must gain a far deeper experience.
If they will surrender all to him, he will work mightily
for them. They will plant the standard of truth upon
fortresses till then held by Satan, and with shouts of
victory take possession of them. They bear the scars of
battle, but there comes to them the comforting message
that the Lord will lead them on, conquering and to
conquer.” Review & Herald, 9/17/1903.
“Since the phrase ‘conquering and to conquer’
expresses a progressive increase of victory, the white
horse does not end with the first century. Rather, the
symbol portrays in a general way the progress of the
gospel during the entire Christian Era.” Biblical
Research Inst., 1SOR, 230.
“In vision I saw two armies in terrible conflict.
One army was led by banners bearing the world’s
insignia; the other was led by the blood-stained banner
of Prince Emmanuel. Standard after standard was left to
trail in the dust as company after company from the
Lord’s army joined the foe; and tribe after tribe from the
ranks of the enemy united with the commandmentkeeping people of God. An angel flying in the midst of
heaven put the standards of Emmanuel into many hands,
while a mighty general cried with a loud voice, ‘Come
into line. Let those who loyal to the commandments of
God and the testimony of Christ, now take their position.
‘Come out from among them, and be ye separate,
...and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive
you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters.’ Let all who will, come up to
the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the
mighty.’
“The battle raged. Victory alternated from side to
side. Now the soldiers of the cross gave way, ‘as when
a standard-bearer fainteth.’ But their apparent retreat
was but an effort to gain a more advantageous position.
Shouts of joy were heard. A song of praise to God went
up, and angel voices united in the song, as Christ’s
soldiers planted his banner on the walls of fortresses till
then held by the enemy. The Captain of our salvation
was ordering the battle, and sending support to his
soldiers.
His power was mightily displayed,
encouraging them to press the battle to the gates. He
taught them terrible things in righteousness as he led
them on step by step, conquering and to conquer.

for resting, no time for ease, not time for selfish
indulgence. After gaining one advantage, you must
do battle again; you must go on conquering and to
conquer, gathering fresh strength for fresh struggles.
Every victory gained gives an increase of courage, faith,
and determination. Through divine strength you will
prove more than a match for your enemies.” Signs,
9/7/1891.
“By believing and acting upon the Word, they
may go on conquering and to conquer.” Manuscript
Releases, Vol. 8, 161.
“Obedience to God is liberty from the thralldom of
sin, deliverance from human passion and impulse. Man
may stand conqueror of himself, conqueror of his
own inclinations, conqueror of principalities and
powers, and of ‘the rulers of the darkness of this
world,’ and of ‘spiritual wickedness in high places.’
Ephesians 6:12.” Ministry of Healing, 131.
“The work of conquering evil is to be done through
faith. Those who go into the battlefield will find that
they must put on the whole armor of God. The shield of
faith will be their defense and will enable them to be
more than conquerors. Nothing else will avail but
this—faith in the Lord of hosts, and obedience to His
orders. Vast armies furnished with every other facility
will avail nothing in the last great conflict. Without
faith, an angel host could not help. Living faith alone
will make them invincible and enable them to stand in
the evil day, steadfast, unmovable, holding the beginning
of their confidence firm unto the end.” Counsels to
Parents, Teachers, and Students, 182,183.
“This is the victory that overcometh the world,
even our faith.” 1 John 5:4.
“Everyone who enters the pearly gates of the city
of God will enter there as a conqueror, and his greatest
conquest will have been the conquest of self.” 9
Testimonies, 183.

“At last the victory was gained. The army
following the banner with the inscription, ‘The
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus,’ were
gloriously triumphant. The soldiers of Christ were close
beside the gates of the city of God, and with joy the city
received her King. The kingdom of peace and joy and
everlasting righteousness was established. God’s will
was done on earth, as it is done in heaven.” Review &
Herald, 11/26/1903.

“The tendencies of the physical nature, unless
under the dominion of a higher power, will surely work
ruin and death. The body is to be brought into
subjection to the higher powers of the being. The
passions are to be controlled by the will, which is
itself to be under the control of God. The kingly power
of reason, sanctified by divine grace, is to bear sway in
the life. Intellectual power, physical stamina, and the
length of life depend upon immutable laws. Through
obedience to these laws, man may stand conqueror of
himself, conqueror of his own inclinations, conqueror
of principalities and powers, of ‘the rulers of the
darkness of this world,’ and of ‘spiritual wickedness
in high places.’ Ephesians 6:12. Prophets & Kings,
488.

“We are now on the battle field. There is no time

“If the church will put on the robe of Christ's

135

GEMS FROM REVELATION
righteousness, withdrawing from all allegiance with the
world, there is before her the dawn of a bright and
glorious day. God's promise to her will stand fast
forever. He will make her an eternal excellency, a joy of
many generations. Truth, passing by those who despise
and reject it, will triumph.
Although at times
apparently retarded, its progress has never been checked.
When the message of God meets with opposition, He
gives it additional force, that it may exert greater
influence. Endowed with divine energy, it will cut its
way through the strongest barriers, and triumph
over every obstacle.” My Life Today, 266.

“Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson they
shall be as wool.” Isaiah 1:18.

“Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy
sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are
more than conquerors through him that loved us.
“For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life,
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
Romans 8:35-39.

“The righteousness of Christ [white horse
experience] will not cover one cherished sin [red horse
experience]. A man may be a law-breaker in heart;
yet if he commits no outward act of transgression, he
may be regarded by the world as possessing great
integrity. But God’s law looks into the secrets of the
heart. Every act is judged by the motives that prompt it.
Only that which is in accord with the principles of God’s
law will stand in the judgment.” Christ’s Object
Lessons, 316.

“If white represents purity of faith, then red may
be regarded as a corruption of faith through the
introduction of various heresies.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 776.
“The original word here translated ‘red’ is used
only here and in Rev. [12:3] where it is applied to [‘a
great red dragon.’]” Bunch, TR, 137.

“I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire:
and them that had gotten the victory over the beast,
and over his image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having
the harps of God.” Rev. 15:2.

THE SECOND SEAL
REVELATION 6:3,4
And when he had opened the second
seal, I heard the second beast say, Come and
see.
And there went out another horse that
was red: and power was given him that sat
thereon to take peace from the earth, and
that they should kill one another: and there
was given unto him a great sword.
The Second Living Creature.—
“The second beast spoken of in this passage is the
representation of the church, which was like a calf,
showing that the church would be given to the
slaughter, like a calf fatted for the market, during the
period of the opening of this seal, which period lasted
until ...Constantine put a period to the persecutions of
the Christians.” Miller, Evidence, 180,181.
Red.—

The Red Horse & Rider of the 2nd Seal.
Another Horse That Was Red.—
“Members of the white horse are those who have
no known sin in their lives. The red horse experience
is marked by the entrance of one cherished sin. When
that occurs we have another spirit, another rider, in
control of our lives. And if that experience is not
quickly repented of, we devise false reasonings to quiet
the conscience. This principle is true also for a corporate
church, or a church system. A church should not allow
one open corporate sin in its midst.” PJ
“The fiery color of the second horse (the symbol
of the body of the visible church) when joined to the
description of the office of his rider (denoting the
rulers of the church) and of the dreadful weapon with
which he was armed, indicate to us that, after the first
and purest age of Christianity, the spirit of love should
recede from the visible church, and be succeeded by a
spirit of discord, of dissension and controversy, a

136

REVELATION 6
fierce and fiery zeal, instigating Christians to destroy
one another.’ A Dissertation of the Seals and Trumpets
of the Apocalypse, William Cunningham, p. 5, 4th ed.,
London; Thos. Cadell, 1843, Source Book, pp. 495,496.
“...This is the time when we see the development of
apostasy in the church. There were those who were
trying to pass for God’s people—they claimed to be
Jews (Rom. 2:28,29)—but were not.
The seal,
representative of this time, shows it to be a time of
pollution. The horse is red—representing sin. Isa.
1:18. This is a time when the church is torn asunder by
sects and internal conflicts.
Now we see the
development of the mystery of iniquity mentioned by
the Apostle Paul, 2 Thess. 2:7,9. There are also wolves
at work for their own personal gain. Acts 20:29,30.
“...We should bear in mind that the message to the
churches is to God’s true people; while the horses of
the seals trace the apostasy as it developed in the
church. However, the prophetic picture of this period
does not portray a separation, but rather a close mingling
of the true and false. Even through the next period, a
full separation is not portrayed. It is during the
Thyatiran period that this separation is complete.”
Straw, SR, 14,15,17.
“The counsel of Christ in His first letter said that
there was a falling away from her first love; and this is
signified in the second seal, under which ‘there went
out another horse that was red.’” Jones, GNOT, 5.
From White to Red.—

The color of the four horses denotes the spiritual
condition of the church, symbolized by the horse.
(A warning to the first church of Ephesus,
depicting the first step of apostasy:)
“Nevertheless I
have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy
first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will
come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent.” Rev. 2:5.
History of Change From White to Red.—

“For I know this, that after my departing, shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them.” Acts 20:29,30.
“The apostle Paul, in his second letter to the
Thessalonians, foretold the great apostasy which would
result in the establishment of the papal power. He
declared that the day of Christ should not come, ‘except
there come a falling away first, and that man of sin
be revealed, the son of perdition; who opposeth and
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshiped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of
God, showing himself that he is God.’
And
furthermore, the apostle warns his brethren that ‘the
mystery of iniquity doth already work.’
2
Thessalonians 2:3, 4, 7. Even at that early date he saw,
creeping into the church, errors that would prepare the
way for the development of the papacy.
“Little by little, at first in stealth and silence, and
then more openly as it increased in strength and gained
control of the minds of men, ‘the mystery of iniquity’
carried forward its deceptive and blasphemous work.
Almost imperceptibly the customs of heathenism found
their way into the Christian church.” Great Controversy,
49.
“…Gradually a change came. The believers began
to look for defects in others. Dwelling upon mistakes,
giving place to unkind criticism, they lost sight of the
Saviour and His love. They became more strict in
regard to outward ceremonies, more particular about the
theory than the practice of the faith. In their zeal to
condemn others, they overlooked their own errors. They
lost the brotherly love that Christ had enjoined, and,
saddest of all, they were unconscious of their loss. They
did not realize that happiness and joy were going out of
their lives and that, having shut the love of God out of
their hearts, they would soon walk in darkness.
“John, realizing that brotherly love was waning in
the church, urged upon believers the constant need of
this love. His letters to the church are full of this
thought.
“…It is not the opposition of the world that most
endangers the church of Christ. It is the evil cherished
in the hearts of believers that works their most
grievous disaster and most surely retards the
progress of God’s cause. There is no surer way of
weakening spirituality than by cherishing envy,
suspicion, faultfinding, and evil surmising.” Acts of the
Apostles, 548,549.
“As the years went by and the number of believers
grew, John labored with increasing fidelity and
earnestness for his brethren. The times were full of peril
for the church. Satanic delusions existed everywhere.
By misrepresentation and falsehood the emissaries of
Satan sought to arouse opposition against the doctrines
of Christ, and in consequence dissensions and heresies

137

GEMS FROM REVELATION
were imperiling the church. Some who professed
Christ claimed that His love released them from
obedience to the law of God. On the other hand,
many taught that it was necessary to observe the
Jewish customs and ceremonies; that a mere
observance of the law, without faith in the blood of
Christ, was sufficient for salvation. Some held that
Christ was a good man, but denied His divinity. Some
who pretended to be true to the cause of God were
deceivers, and in practice they denied Christ and His
gospel. Living themselves in transgression, they were
bringing heresies into the church. Thus many were
being led into the mazes of skepticism and delusion.
“John was filled with sadness as he saw these
poisonous errors creeping into the church. He saw
the dangers to which the church was exposed, and he
met the emergency with promptness and decision. The
epistles of John breathe the spirit of love. It seems as if
he wrote with a pen dipped in love. But when he came
in contact with those who were breaking the law of God,
yet claiming that they were living without sin, he did not
hesitate to warn them of their fearful deception.
“Writing to a helper in the gospel work, a woman
of good repute and wide influence, he said: ‘Many
deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a
deceiver and an antichrist. Look to yourselves, that we
lose not those things which we have wrought, but that
we receive a full reward. Whosoever transgresseth,
and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not
God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he
hath both the Father and the Son. If there come any
unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him Godspeed: for he
that biddeth him Godspeed is partaker of his evil
deeds.’ [2 John 7-11.]” Acts of the Apostles, 553,554.
Him That Sat Thereon.—
“To the rider of this horse, which represented the
responsible leadership of the church, was given power
to do two things—power to take away peace and power
to kill.” Metcalf, GPDR, 83.
“Unless we do yield ourselves to the control of
Christ, we shall be dominated by the wicked one. We
must inevitably be under the control of the one or the
other of the two great powers that are contending for
the supremacy of the world. It is not necessary for us
deliberately to choose the service of the kingdom of
darkness in order to come under its dominion. We have
only to neglect to ally ourselves with the kingdom of
light. If we do not cooperate with the heavenly agencies,
Satan will take possession of the heart, and will make it
his abiding place.” Desire of Ages, 324.
“One cherished sin will, little by little, debase the
character, bringing all its nobler powers into subjection
to the evil desire. The removal of one safeguard from
the conscience, the indulgence of one evil habit, one
neglect of the high claims of duty, breaks down the

defenses of the soul and opens the way for Satan to
come in and lead us astray.” Patriarchs & Prophets,
452.
Take Peace From the Earth.—
“Think not that I am come to send peace on earth:
I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come
to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law
against her mother in law. And a man’s foes shall be
they of his own household.” Matt. 10:34-36.
“Wherever the gospel is preached victories take
place, but even more often comes division and
persecution as a result of its rejection. The peace that
comes from union with Christ must not be con-fused
with the peace that comes from the favor of others.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 231.
“The world loves sin and hates righteousness,
and this was the cause of its hostility to Jesus. All
who refuse His infinite love will find Christianity a
disturbing element. The light of Christ sweeps away the
darkness that covers their sins, and the need of reform is
made manifest. While those who yield to the influence
of the Holy Spirit begin war with themselves, those who
cling to sin war against the truth and its
representatives. Thus strife is created, and Christ’s
followers are accused as troublers of the people.”
Desire of Ages, 306.
“The second seal introduces a red horse; and under
this seal peace is taken from the earth and events of
strife and confusion are introduced, represented by a
great sword in the hands of him who sat on this
horse. This seal is supposed to cover the time from the
days of the apostles, at about the close of the first
century, to the days of Constantine the Great. In his day
the church had so far apostatized that peace was taken
from the earth and religious strife became so intense,
that, as Mosheim says, there was continual war.” White,
James, et. al., The Biblical Institute, Lesson 21, “The
Seven Seals,” 1877.
“There is no peace, saith My God, to the wicked.”
Isa. 57:21.
The Great Sword.—
“The weapon of the previous horseman was ‘a
bow’ which represented ‘the sword of the Spirit.’ These
are the ‘mighty’ ‘weapons of warfare’ de-scribed in 2
Cor. 10:3-5. The purpose of this mighty sword is to save
and not destroy. But the ‘great sword’ given to the
rider of the red horse was to be used to ‘take peace
from the earth’ and to ‘kill one another.’ It is evident
that this is not the sword of the Spirit, but rather the
sword of the state.” Bunch, TR, 36.
“The brother shall deliver up the brother to
death, and the father the child: and the children shall

138

REVELATION 6
rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put
to death.” Matt. 10:21.
“And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and
brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and some of you
shall they cause to be put to death.” Lk. 21:16.
“Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer:
behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that
ye may be tried: and ye shall have tribulation ten
days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee
a crown of life.” Rev. 2:10.

THE THIRD SEAL

of darkness work for the destruction of humanity. It is
Satan’s purpose to counteract the work of Christ, and in
his counsels he lays plans by which to convert every soul
into a channel of darkness. The earth is the field of battle
in which the powers of light and darkness are in
controversy over the human souls for whom Christ
died.” Review & Herald, May 8, 1894.
“The black horse denotes error and dark-ness;
and when the church became connected with worldly
power and wisdom, she lost her purity of doctrine and
practice, and adopted, in her creed, maxims and
principles congenial with the natural heart, and forms
and ceremonies for show and parade, rather than the
humbling and cross-bearing life of the followers of
Jesus.” Miller, Evidence, 181.

“[They are] wandering stars, to whom is re-served
the blackness of darkness for ever.” Jude 13.

“How rapidly the work of corruption progresses!
What a contrast in color between this symbol and the
first one: A black horse—the very opposite of white!
A period of great darkness and moral corruption in
the church must be denoted by this symbol. By the
events of the second seal the way was fully opened for
that state of things to be brought about which is here
presented. The time that intervened between the reign of
Constantine and the establishment of the papacy in AD
538 may be justly noted as the time when the darkest
errors and grossest superstitions sprang up in the
church. Of a period immediately succeeding the days of
Constantine, Mosheim says:
“‘Those vain fictions, which an attachment to the
Platonic philosophy and to popular opinions had
engaged the greatest part of the Christian doctors to
adopt before the time of Constantine, were now confirmed, enlarged, and embellished in various ways.
From hence arose that extravagant veneration for
departed saints, and those absurd notions of a certain
fire destined to purify separate souls, that now prevailed,
and of which the public marks were every-where to be
seen. Hence also the celibacy of priests, the worship of
images and relics, which in process of time almost
utterly destroyed the Christian religion, or at least
eclipsed its luster, and corrupted its very essence in the
most deplorable manner. An enormous train of
different superstitions was gradually substituted in
the place of true religion and genuine piety. This
odious revolution was owing to a variety of causes. A
ridiculous precipitation in receiving new opinions, a
preposterous desire of imitating the pagan rites, and of
blending them with the Christian worship, and that idle
propensity which the generality of mankind have toward
a gaudy and ostentatious religion, all contributed to
establish the reign of superstition upon the ruins of
Christianity.” Smith, DR, 428,429.

A Black Horse.—
“Men have failed to co-operate with Jesus in his
divine mission, and have placed themselves under the
black banner of the prince of darkness, giving
themselves up to be the agents through whom the powers

He That Sat on Him.—
“The Pharisees had not entered by the door. They
had climbed into the fold by another way than Christ,
and they were not fulfilling the work of the true
shepherd. The priests and rulers, the scribes and

REVELATION 6:5,6
And when he had opened the third seal,
I heard the third beast say, Come and see.
And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he
that sat on him had a pair of balances in his
hand.
And I heard a voice in the midst of the
four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a
penny, and three measures of barley for a
penny; and see that thou hurt not the oil and
the wine.
The Third Beast.—
“The third beast which represents the church, under
the seal, had a face as a man, and shows that the
church would be like a natural man, proud, haughty,
independent, selfish, ambitious, covetous, and
worldly.
This seal was opened in the days of
Constantine, when religion became popular, and was a
stepping-stone to power; and this seal agrees with the
Pergamos church, as to time and place.” Miller,
Evidence, 181.
Black.—
“What communion hath light [white horse] with
darkness [black horse]?” 2 Cor. 6:14.
“We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places.” Ephesians 6:12.

139

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Pharisees, destroyed the living pastures, and defiled
the wellsprings of the water of life. Faith-fully do the
words of inspiration describe those false shepherds:
‘The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye
healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up
that which was broken, neither have ye brought again
that which was driven away; ...but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them.’ Ezek. 34:4.
“…It is the gospel of the grace of God alone that
can uplift the soul. The contemplation of the love of
God manifested in His Son will stir the heart and arouse
the powers of the soul as nothing else can. Christ came
that He might recreate the image of God in man; and
whoever turns men away from Christ is turning them
away from the source of true develop-ment; he is
defrauding them of the hope and purpose and glory of
life. He is a thief and a robber.” Desire of Ages, 478.

new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the
sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah
small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances
by deceit? That we may buy the poor for silver, and the
needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the
wheat?” Amos 8:4-6.
“To the law and to the testimony [just weights]:
if they speak not according to this word [false
weights], it is because there is no light [darkness of 3rd
horse] in them.” Is. 8:20.
“What did the pair of balances in the hands of the
rider of the black horse represent? This is a symbol of
judgment. When the message of the destruction was
written in letters of fire on the wall before Belshazzar
and his banqueting friends it was interpreted to say,
‘Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found
wanting.’ Daniel 5:27. During this period church
leaders became civil judges. As a result these religiopolitical leaders became the supreme authority for faith
and practice.” Metcalf, GPDR, 83.
“It is strange that, when men lose the Spirit of God,
they at once become self-appointed judges of other men.
“…The balances held by man are false balances;
and while man is passing judgment, God, from the
throne, is watching those who are being weighed, and in
His infinite kindness, limits the power of the self-made
judge.” Haskel, SSP, 114,115.

“Each son and daughter of Adam chooses either
Christ or Barabbas as his general. And all who place
themselves on the side of the disloyal are standing
under Satan’s black banner, and are charged with
rejecting and despitefully using Christ.” Review &
Herald, 6/30/1900.
“He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in
his hand: he loveth to oppress. And Ephraim said, Yet
I am become rich, I have found me out substance: in all
my labors they shall find none iniquity in me that were
sin.” Hosea 12:7,8.
A Pair of Balances.—
“Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the
house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is
abominable? Shall I count them pure with the wicked
balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? For
the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the
inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is
deceitful in their mouth.” Micah 6:10-12.
“Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to
make the poor of the land to fail, Saying, When will the

“The reference to the balances, the wheat and the
barley, sets forth the worldly spirit which had taken
full possession of the professed church.” White,
James, et. al., The Biblical Institute, Lesson 21, “The
Seven Seals,” 1877.
“Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a
great and a small. Thou
shalt not have in thine
house divers measures, a
great and a small. But
thou shalt have a perfect
and just weight, a perfect
and just measure shalt
thou have: that thy days
may be lengthened in the
land which the LORD
thy God giveth thee. For all that do such things, and all
that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto the
LORD thy God.” Deut. 25: 13-16
“Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in
meteyard, in weight, or in measure. Just balances, just
weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I
am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the
land of Egypt.” Lev. 19:34-36.
A Voice.—
“It will be observed that the voice limiting the

140

REVELATION 6
amount of wheat for a penny, and saying, ‘Hurt not the
oil and the wine,’ is not spoken by anyone on earth, but
comes from the midst of the four living creatures,
signifying that although the undershepherds, the
professed ministers of Christ, had no care for the flock,
yet the Lord was not unmindful of them in this
period of darkness. A voice comes from heaven. He
takes care that the spirit of worldliness does not prevail
to such a degree that Christianity should be entirely lost,
or that the oil and the wine—graces of genuine piety—
should perish from the earth.” Smith, DR, 431.

spiritual service is acceptable to God except the purposes
and works that are for the good of the universe. To do
good to others will redound to the glory of God.
“The principles of Satan’s working in heaven are
the same principles by which he works through human
agents in this world. It is through these corrupting
principles that every earthly empire and the churches
have been increasingly corrupted. It is by the working
out of these principles that Satan deceives and corrupts
the whole world from the beginning to the ending.”
4BC, 1163,1164.

Wheat.—
“Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.”
Matthew 4:4.
“Thy words were found and I did eat them; and
thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine
heart.” Jer. 15:16.
“I [the Word] am the bread of life.” John 6:48.

“[Eze. 28:16-18 quoted.] God is sending warnings
to His people that they may be kept from strange and
forbidden things. Commercial plans are often laid and
presented that will, if accepted, lead to the deception and
confusion of the church.
They are presented as
something which will prove a great blessing to the work.
This effort to press commercialism into the work, as
something that will be of great service, an instrument
of divine provision for the rapid advancement of the
work, is a deception which threatens to ensnare many
souls. Even now many are in danger. There are few
who realize the evil that is working; yet these plans are
surely the temptations of the enemy, and will prove
ruinous to the spiritual experience of those who accept
and follow them. Their purpose is to divert the minds of
men and women from present and essential duties.”
Pamphlet SpTB17a, 33.

A Measure of Wheat For a Penny.—
“The measures of wheat and barley for a penny
denote that the members of the church would be eagerly
engaged after worldly goods, and the love of money
would be the prevailing spirit of the times, for they
would dispose of anything for money.” Miller,
Evidence, 181.
“God’s Son was sold for money. Filled with
covetousness, Judas betrayed him to the priests for thirty
pieces of silver. Thus is illustrated the power of
covetousness over the human heart. Today men sell
truth and righteousness for worldly gain.” Youth
Instructor, 4/17/1902.
“The use of the terms ‘a measure of wheat for a
penny, and three measures of barley for a penny’ is
an appropriate representation of the spirit of
commercialism which entered the church. Just about
everything in connection with the church had its
price and was sold. For instance, at birth, baptism,
confirmation, confession, marriage, death and even after
death, to get a person out of purgatory, the priest was
paid. There were times when if a priest wanted to
become a bishop all he had to do was pay the price.”
Metcalf, GPDR, 83.

“How many professed Christians are enfeebling
their powers in the pursuit of gain or the worship of
fashion; how many are debasing their godlike manhood
by gluttony, by wine drinking, by forbidden pleasure.
The church, instead of rebuking, too often encourages
the evil by appealing to appetite, to desire for gain or
love of pleasure, to replenish her treasury, which love for
Christ is too feeble to supply. Were Jesus to enter the
churches of today and behold the feasting and unholy
traffic there conducted in the name of religion, would
He not drive out those desecrators, as He banished the
money-changers from the temple?” Great Controversy,
474.

“Feed the flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.” 1
Peter 5:2.

The Bible Sabbath and Other Truths Sold Off.—
“In was in this period that Sunday observance
was established in the church. Mithraism celebrated as
its chief day of the week, the day of the sun, i.e. Sunday.
Authorities are very clear that it was in this period that
the observance of Sunday was established in the
orthodox church, in place of the true seventh day
Sabbath.” Cooke, #9-UR, 15.

“ ‘By the multitude of thy merchandise they
have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou
hast sinned: . . . thou has defiled thy sanctuaries by
the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy
traffick.’ [Ezek. 28:16,18.] In this place ‘traffick’ is
the emblem of corrupt administration. It denotes the
bringing of self-seeking into spiritual offices. Nothing in

Not a Time of Physical Famine.—
“...And now [in the destruction of Jerusalem,
70AD] all the horrors of starvation were experienced. A
measure of wheat was sold for a talent.” Great
Controversy, 31.
[In a time of famine a measure of wheat is sold for
a talent, not a penny. PJ]

141

GEMS FROM REVELATION

The Oil and the Wine.—
“The golden oil represents the Holy Spirit. With
this oil God's ministers are to be constantly supplied, that
they, in turn, may impart it to the church. "Not by
might, nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord
of hosts." Testimony to Ministers, 188.
“That oil is the righteousness of Christ. It
represents character, and character is not transfer-able.
No man can secure it for another. Each must obtain for
himself a character purified from every stain of sin.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 234.
“And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and
oil to make his face to shine, and bread which
strengtheneth man’s heart.” Psalm 104:15.
“The redemption of Jesus is represented by the
[unfermented] wine, and the gracious gift of His
overcoming power in the Holy Spirit is symbolized by
the oil.” PJ
“Oil was used for anointing and represents the
Holy Spirit and His gifts. Wine is also symbolic of
spiritual blessings. See Isa. 25:6; 55:1. It was used by
Christ to represent His blood, and in the communion
service it symbolized the blood of the new covenant.
It therefore represents the doctrine of the atonement.
The Good Samaritan bound up the wounds of the victim
of robbers, ‘pouring in oil and wine’ which represents
the consoling and healing influence of the gospel.”
Bunch, TR, 41.
“Wine represents doctrine.
Intoxicating wine
represents false doctrine.
Unfermented wine
represents the true doctrines of the Word of God.”
Cooke, #9-UR, 19.
Hurt Not the Oil and the Wine.—
“In order to preserve the oil and the wine—the
overcoming power of the Holy Spirit and the redemptive
gift of Jesus Christ, and to preserve the truth from being
adulterated, it would be necessary to take heed to the
counsel found in 2 Cor. 6:14-18:
“Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteous-ness
with unrighteousness? And what communion hath
light (the white church of the first seal) with darkness
(the apostate worldly church of the third seal)? And
what concord hath Christ with Belial? Or what part
hath he that believeth with an infidel? And what
agreement hath the temple of God with idols? For ye
are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will
dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.
“Wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing; and I will receive you, And will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the
Lord Almighty.” 2 Cor. 6:14-18.

“When the truths of the law and gospel are in
danger of extinction, then it is time for the white horse
members to protect the truth as it is in Jesus by
separating from corporate sin and apostasy. Those who
separate early from apostasy experience the most
persecution.” PJ
“In the period of the black horse, did the Holy
Spirit and true doctrine disappear?
Was the
righteousness of Christ still available? God decreed
‘Hurt not the oil and the wine.’ In other words, let
them not disappear—let them be preserved. When the
apostate church began to dominate the world, God
preserved small remnants of people who had in their
possession the precious Word of God in its purity.
The Waldenses of Northern Italy were one such group.
They possessed the Word of God in their native tongue.
In this way the Holy Spirit, the righteousness of
Christ and true doctrine were preserved. The gospel
of salvation was still available to men and women if they
should see it.” Cooke, #9-UR, 19.
“There was great danger of hurting these under
the influence of so much of a worldly spirit. And it is
well attested by all historians that the prosperity of the
church in this age produced the corruptions which finally
terminated in the falling away, and setting up the
antichristian abominations.” Miller, Evidence, 181,182.
“It required a desperate struggle for those who
would be faithful to stand firm against the deceptions
and abominations which were disguised in sacerdotal
garments and introduced into the church. The Bible was
not accepted as the standard of faith. The doctrine of
religious freedom was termed heresy, and its upholders
were hated and proscribed.
“After a long and severe conflict, the faithful few
decided to dissolve all union with the apostate church
if she still refused to free herself from falsehood and
idolatry. They saw that separation was an absolute
necessity if they would obey the word of God. They
dared not tolerate errors fatal to their own souls, and set
an example which would imperil the faith of their
children and children’s children. To secure peace and
unity they were ready to make any concession consistent
with fidelity to God; but they felt that even peace would
be too dearly purchased at the sacrifice of principle. If
unity could be secured only by the compromise of
truth and righteousness, then let there be difference,
and even war.” Great Controversy, 45.
“There were some, however, who refused to yield
to the authority of pope or prelate. They were
determined to maintain their allegiance to God and
to preserve the purity and simplicity of their faith. A
separation took place.” Great Controversy, 64.
“In view of the infinite price paid for man’s
redemption, how dare any professing the name of Christ
treat with indifference one of His little ones. How

142

REVELATION 6
carefully should brethren and sisters in the church guard
every word and action lest they hurt the oil and the
wine! How patiently, kindly, and affectionately should
they deal with the purchase of the blood of Christ!
How faithfully and earnestly should they labor to lift up
the desponding and the discouraged! How tenderly
should they treat those who are trying to obey the
truth and have no encouragement at home, who have
constantly to breathe the atmosphere of unbelief and
darkness.” 5 Testimonies, 614-615.

THE FOURTH SEAL
REVELATION 6:7,8
And when he had opened the fourth
seal, I heard the fourth beast say, Come and
see.
And I looked and behold a pale horse:
and his name that sat on him is death, and
Hell followed with him. And power was
given unto them over the fourth part of the
earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger,
and with death, and with the beasts of the
earth.
The Fourth Beast.—
“The fourth seal opened in the year AD 538, when
anti-Christ first arose, for the fourth beast was like a
flying eagle. ‘And to the woman was given two wings
of an eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness,
into her place, where she is nourished for a time,
times, and a half, from the face of the serpent.’ [Rev.
12:14.]” Miller, Evidence, 182.
The Pale Horse.—

Death on a Pale Horse, painted by A. Ryder.
This was the symbol used for the Bubonic Plague
that killed a third of Europe in the 1300’s.

“All faces are turned into paleness? Alas! for
that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time
of Jacob‟s trouble….” Jeremiah 30:6,7.
“The color of this horse is remarkable. The
original word denotes the ‘pale or yellowish color’ that
is seen in blighted or sickly plants. A strange state of
things in the professed church must be denoted by this
symbol. The rider on this horse is named Death, and
Hell (hades, ‘the grave’) followed with him.” Smith,
DR, 431.
“The pale horse was an indication of still greater
departure from the spirit of truth than the black one.”
Haskel, SSP, 116.
“The effect of this apostasy, which developed the
Papacy in the Roman Empire, was the complete ruin
of the Roman Empire. And this consequence of the
apostasy traced in these first three steps in the two lines
of prophecy of the Seven Churches and the Seven Seals,
is portrayed in the line of prophecy of the Seven
Trumpets.” Jones, GNOT, 6.
His Name That Sat On Him is Death.—
“To secure worldly gains and honors, the church
was led to seek the favor and support of the great men of
earth; and having thus rejected Christ, she was
induced to yield allegiance to the representative of
Satan—the bishop of Rome.” Great Controversy, 50.
“The language indicates that the leaders of the
paganized church had so far departed from the gospel
that made men the ministers of life, that they became
the ministers of death under the control and
leadership of Satan.” Bunch, TR, 42.
“Satan …stirred up the fallen church to force
those who would preserve the purity of their religion
either to yield to their ceremonies and image worship
or be put to death. The fires of persecution were again
kindled against the true church of Christ, and millions
were slain without mercy.” Early Writings, 211.
“In the thirteenth century was established that most
terrible of all the engines of the papacy—the Inquisition.
The prince of darkness wrought with the leaders of the
papal hierarchy. In their secret councils Satan and his
angels controlled the minds of evil men, while unseen in
the midst stood an angel of God, taking the fearful
record of their iniquitous decrees and writing the history
of deeds too horrible to appear to human eyes. ‘Babylon
the great’ was ‘drunken with the blood of the saints.’
The mangled forms of millions of martyrs cried to
God for vengeance upon that apostate power.” Great
Controversy, 59.
Death and Hell.—
“The rider is ‘Death,’ and his mission is to ‘kill’;
and ‘Hades’ is pictured as following with him, to gather
in, as it were, the victims. (Mauro, p.227). . . . Death

143

GEMS FROM REVELATION
cuts men down and the grave gathers them in.”
Bunch, TR, 42.

But God, even in the midst of the severest persecution,
watches over every afflicted soul.” Haskel, SSP, 116.

Power Over the Fourth Part of the Earth.—
“It is the same power mentioned in Rev. 13:2-5,
‘And the dragon gave him his power, and his seat,
and great authority.’ ‘And there was given him a
mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and
power was given unto him to continue forty and two
months.’ Again, 7th verse, ‘And it was given unto him
to make war with the saints, and to overcome them; and
power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues,
and nations.’” Miller, Evidence, 182.

“ ‘Beasts of the earth’ represent ‘wolves in
sheep’s clothing’, referring of course to the priests and
friars of the day.” Cooke, #9-UR, 23

“ ‘Power was given unto them’—‘him,’ says the
margin, that is, the power personified by Death on the
pale horse, namely, the papacy. By the fourth part of
the earth is doubtless meant the territory over which this
power had jurisdiction.” Smith, DR, 432.
“The church’s influence at that time extended over
approximately one quarter of the then known world.”
Cooke, #9-UR, 23.
Kill With the Sword, Hunger, Death, and Beasts.—
“They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the
time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think
that he doeth God service.” John 16:2.
“In our text, he says, ‘Power was given them to
kill with the sword,’ that is, to make war which was
fulfilled in Europe, when the papal power sent out
large armies to exterminate the heretics, as they were
called,…. ‘And with hunger;’ this was fulfilled by the
same power imprisoning and starving to death many
thousands of persons who were suspected of opposition
to her ungodly pretensions.
‘And with death;’
inventing the most cruel and bloody means of torture
that were ever imposed upon our world; to inflict, death,
in every possible shape that men or devils could invent;
thousands and tens of thousands suffered death under the
most excruciating torments that the Inquisition could
devise. ‘And with the beasts of the earth;’ after they
had glutted their thirst for blood in every possible shape
that man could inflict, thousands were thrown to
ferocious beasts, to be destroyed by them. The time and
place of the opening of this seal we cannot be mistaken
in.
It must have been during the bloody and
persecuting reign of the papal church.” Miller,
Evidence, 182,183.
“Thousands have been put to death by the sword,
by starvation, and by wild beasts; and what is worse
than killing the body, many more have suffered
spiritual death because of the hiding of the Word of
Life. Whenever the church is clothed with civil power,
it weighs out to mankind Christian experience. If that
experience is not according to the prescribed religion,
the thumbscrew and other instruments of torture are
brought forth to extort confessions from the penitent.

“And it was given unto him to make war with the
saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him
over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.” Revelation
13:7.
“The period during which this seal applies can
hardly be mistaken. It must refer to the time in which
the papacy bore its unrebuked, unrestrained, and
persecuting rule, beginning about AD 538, and
extending to the time when the Reformers began
their work of exposing the corruption of the papal
system.” Smith, DR, 431.
“That this is the same period of persecution
described in other prophecies is evident. See Dan.
7:21,25; 8:24; 11:33; Matt. 24:21,22; Rev. 13:7; 17:6.
...During this terrible persecution between 50 and 150
millions of martyrs died for their faith so that the religiopolitical church of the Middle Ages was ‘drunken with
the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the
martyrs of Jesus.’” Bunch, TR, 43.
The First Four Seals Symbolize the Progression of
APOSTASY.—
“The seven seals seem to be seven pictures of the
church through the centuries, showing the growth of
apostasy in the church. The first period, the age of the
apostles, was one of purity and apostolic zeal. ...Then
with each succeeding period the messengers become
more corrupt until these supposed messengers turn
upon God’s true people and destroy them. …The
seals, on the whole, cover the same periods as the
churches, but give the gradual decline of the church
as it departs from its Lord and His teaching. The
seals represent the apostate element in the professed
Christian Church. It is this latter phase that is usually
studied in church history, because after the first century,
the true are not so apparent as the false; and as time goes
on and the church becomes more powerful, God’s true
ones are killed, or driven into secluded places of the
earth and their writings destroyed.” Straw, SR, 11.
“The first four seals can depict the spiritual
condition of not only the general church organization,
and not only the local church body, but also of every
individual Christian. This is because the church is
composed of individuals. Which of the first four seals
represents my spiritual condition? is the question to
first ask ourselves. Then we can and must ask, Which of
the first four seals represents the spiritual condition of
the local church of which I am a member? And finally,
What color horse represents the church system, the
whole organization, that I am part of?” PJ

144

REVELATION 6

“What was the origin of the great apostasy? How
did the church first depart from the simplicity of the
gospel? By conforming to the practices of paganism,
to facilitate the acceptance of Christianity by the
heathen. The apostle Paul declared, even in his day,
‘The mystery of iniquity doth already work.’ 2
Thessalonians 2:7. During the lives of the apostles the
church remained comparatively pure. But ‘toward the
latter end of the second century most of the churches
assumed a new form; the first simplicity disappeared,
and insensibly, as the old disciples retired to their graves,
their children, along with new converts,... came
forward and new-modeled the cause.’—(Robert
Robinson, Ecclesiastical Researches, ch. 6, par. 17, p.
51). To secure converts, the exalted standard of the
Christian faith was lowered, and as the result ‘a pagan
flood, flowing into the church, carried with it its
customs, practices, and idols.’—(Gavazzi, Lectures, page
278). As the Christian religion secured the favor and
support of secular rulers, it was nominally accepted by
multitudes; but while in appearance Christians, many
‘remained in substance pagans, especially worshiping in
secret their idols.’—(Ibid., page 278).
“Has not the same process been repeated in
nearly every church calling itself Protestant? As the
founders, those who possessed the true spirit of reform,
pass away, their descendants come forward and ‘newmodel the cause.’ While blindly clinging to the creed of
their fathers and refusing to accept any truth in advance
of what they saw, the children of the reformers depart
widely from their example of humility, self-denial,
and renunciation of the world. Thus ‘the first
simplicity disappears.’ A worldly flood, flowing into the
church, carries ‘with it its customs, practices, and
idols.’” Great Controversy, 384,385.
“The Lord Jesus will always have a chosen
people to serve Him. When the Jewish people rejected
Christ, the Prince of life, He took from them the
kingdom of God and gave it unto the Gentiles. God will
continue to work on this principle with every branch
of His work. When a church proves unfaithful to the
word of the Lord, whatever their position may be,
however high and sacred their calling, the Lord can
no longer work with them. Others are then chosen to
bear important responsibilities. But if these in turn do
not purify their lives from every wrong action; if they do
not establish pure and holy principles in all their borders,
then the Lord will grievously afflict and humble them,
and, unless they repent, will remove them from their
place and make them a reproach. Upward Look, 131.
Why Was This Apostasy Permitted?—
“Why was it that God permitted this reign of
Antichrist?
Why did Heaven permit such awful
tribulation upon His people?
This deserves
consideration. We suggest at least two reasons. The
first reason was to reveal to the onlooking universe
the true character of Satan’s kingdom. Originally

God permitted Satan to set up his kingdom on earth in
order to reveal to the universe whether Satan’s claims
were right or not. There they beheld the fearful
outworking of Satan’s principles in the cruel and bloody
history of the false church.
“ ‘That gigantic system of religion is a
masterpiece of Satan’s power, a monument of his
efforts to seat himself upon the throne to rule the
earth according to his will.’ Great Controversy, 50.
“The second reason is a sad one, but it seems that it
was essential. The reason God permitted Babylon to
prevail over His people was in order to preserve the
Christian faith, to preserve the purity of the gospel—
to preserve His church. History affirms the sad fact
that affluence corrupts the church and begets apostasy.
On the other hand, adversity purifies the church and
preserves the faith.” Cooke, #9-UR, 24.
First Four Seals Show That Rome Is an Offshoot.—
“The church of Rome often says ‘We go back to
the apostles’. Yes, they may trace their lineage back,
but it is via the black and the red horse. They go back
through the line of apostasy. The church of Rome is a
breakaway.” Cooke, #9-UR, 14.
Spirit of Seals Seen Today.—
“The same spirit is seen today that is
represented in Revelation 6:6-8. History is to be
repeated. That which has been will be again. This
spirit works to confuse and to perplex. Dissension will
be seen in every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, and
those who have not had a spirit to follow the light that
God has given through His living oracles, through His
appointed agencies, will become confused.
Their
judgment will reveal weakness. Disorder and strife
and confusion will be seen in the church.
“The prayer of Christ for His people, just before
His humiliation and death, is as much unheeded as if it
had never been made. The same spirit that controls the
nations of the earth is working upon the minds of those
who have had light. As the children of disobedience,
irrespective of consequences, they act like the blind.
They are drunken, but not with strong drink. They
reveal [that] that which has allured and deceived
them was an unholy ambition.” Manuscript Releases,
Vol. 4, 152.

THE FIFTH SEAL
REVELATION 6:9,10
And when he had opened the fifth seal, I
saw under the altar the souls of them that
were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held:
And they cried with a loud voice, saying,
How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou

145

GEMS FROM REVELATION

not judge and avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth?
The Fifth Seal.—
“[Revelation 6:9-11 quoted.] Here were scenes
presented to John that were not in reality but that which
would be in a period of time in the future.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 20, 197.
“It seems consistent that this seal, like all the
others, should cover a period of time, and that the date of
its application cannot be mistaken if the preceding seals
have been rightly located. Following the period of the
papal persecution, the time covered by this seal would
begin when the Reformation began to undermine the
papal fabrication, and restrain the persecuting power
of the Roman Catholic Church.” Smith, DR, 432.
The Altar.—
“This cannot denote any altar in heaven, as it is
evidently the place where these victims had been
slain—the altar of sacrifice. On this point, Adam Clark
says: ‘A symbolical vision was exhibited, in which he
saw an altar; and under it the souls of these who had
been slain for the word of God—martyred for their
attachment to Christianity—are represented as being
newly slain as victims to idolatry and superstition. The
altar is upon earth, not in heaven.’ [Adam Clarke,
Commentary on the N.T., Vol. 1, p.994]. A confirmation
of this view is found in the fact that John is beholding
scenes upon the earth. The souls are represented under
the altar, just as victims slain upon it would pour out
their blood beneath it, and fall by its side.” Smith,
DR, 432,433.

The Altar of Burnt Offering
It is the type [or shadow] of Calvary where the
Jesus, the Lamb of God was sacrificed on earth.
“It is evident that the altar of the fifth seal must
represent the earth on which the victims were slain
and under which they are buried. In the typical
temple there were two altars: the altar of incense in the
holy place, and the altar of burnt offerings in the court
where the victims were slain and the sacrifices offered.

The blood of the sacrificial victims was poured out at
the foot of the altar on which they were offered. See
Lev. 4:7. ...Christ was offered in sacrifice on the altar of
Calvary. He was slain ‘without the gate’ in the court of
the heavenly sanctuary which is in this earth (Rev.
11:1,2), and for three days He remained in the tomb
‘under the altar,’ where His blood constituted a cry for
vengeance upon His enemies. Likewise the millions of
martyrs of the Middle Ages were slain on the altar of
sacrifice and martyrdom, and John sees them ‘at the foot
of the altar’ (Weymouth), or ‘under the altar’ in their
graves where their shed blood constitutes a continual cry
for vengeance upon their persecutors.” Bunch, TR, 44.
Souls Under the Altar.—
“As the blood of the victims was poured out at the
base of that altar (see Lev. 4:7), and the life [LXX,
psuche, ‘soul’] of the flesh is in the blood, (ch. 17:11),
so the souls of those who have given themselves in
martyrdom may be thought of as being beneath the
altar.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 778.
“And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock,
and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and
pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.”
Ex. 29:12.
“This representation is popularly regarded as a
strong proof of the doctrine of disembodied spirits and
the conscious state of the dead. Here, it is claimed, are
souls seen by John is a disembodied state, and yet they
were conscious and had knowledge of passing events,
for they cried for vengeance on the persecutors. This
view of the passages is inadmissible, for several reasons.
“The popular view places these souls in heaven, but
the altar of sacrifice on which they were slain, and
beneath which they were seen, cannot be there. The
only altar we read of in heaven is the altar of incense, but
it would not be correct to represent victims just slain as
under the altar of incense, as that altar was never devoted
to such a use. It would be repugnant to all our ideas of
the heavenly state to represent souls in heaven shut up
under the an altar.
“Can we suppose that the idea of vengeance would
so dominate the minds of souls in heaven as to make
them, despite the joy and glory of that ineffable state,
dissatisfied and uneasy until vengeance was inflicted
upon their enemies? Would they not rather rejoice that
persecution raised its hand against them, and thus
hastened them into the presence of their Redeemer, at
whose right hand there is fullness of joy and pleasures
forevermore?
“But, further, the popular view which puts these
souls in heaven, puts the wicked at the same time in the
lake of fire, writhing in unutterable torment, and in full
view of the heavenly host. Now the souls brought to
view under the fifth seal were those who had been
slain under the preceding seal, scores of years, and
most of them centuries, before. Beyond any question,
their persecutors had all passed off the stage of action,

146

REVELATION 6
and according to the view under consideration were
suffering all the torments of hell right before their eyes.
“Yet, as if not satisfied with this, they cry to God as
though He were delaying vengeance on their murderers.
What greater vengeance could they want? Or, if their
persecutors were still on the earth, they must know that
they would, in a few years at most, join the vast
multitude daily pouring through the gate of death into
the world of woe. Their amiability is put in no better
light even by this supposition. One thing at least is
evident: The popular theory concerning the condition of
the dead, righteous and wicked, cannot be correct, or the
interpretation usually given to this passage is not correct,
for they are mutually exclusive.
“But it is urged that these souls must be conscious,
for they cry to God. This argument would be of weight
were there no such figure of speech as personification.
But while there is, it will be proper on certain conditions
to attribute life, action, and intelligence to inanimate
objects. Thus the blood of Abel is said to have cried
to God from the ground. (Genesis 4:9,10.) The stone
cried out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
answered it. (Habakkuk 2:11.) The hire of the laborers
kept back by fraud cried, and the cry entered into the
ears of the Lord of sabaoth. (James 5:4.) So the souls
mentioned in our text could cry, and not thereby be
proved to be conscious.
“The incongruity of the popular view on this verse
is apparent, for Albert Barnes makes the following
concession: ‘We are not to suppose that this literally
occurred, and that John actually saw the souls of the
martyrs beneath the altar—for the whole representation
is symbolical; nor are we to suppose that the injured and
the wronged in heaven actually pray for vengeance on
those who wronged them, or that the redeemed in heaven
will continue to pray with reference to things on earth;
but it may be fairly inferred from this that there will be
as real a remembrance of the wrongs of the
persecuted, the injured, and the oppressed, as if such
prayer were offered there; and that the oppressor has
as much to dread from the divine vengeance as if those
whom he has injured should cry in heaven to the God
who hears prayer, and who takes vengeance.’ (Albert
Barnes, Notes on Revelation, pp. 190,191, comment on
Rev. 6:9-11.)’” Smith, DR, 433-435.
“When he maketh inquisition for blood, he
remembereth them: he forgetteth not the cry of the
humble.” Psalm 9:12.
Souls.—
“On such passages as this, the reader is misled by
the popular definition of the word ‘soul.’ From that
definition, he is led to suppose that this text speaks of an
immaterial, invisible, immortal essence in man, which
soars into its coveted freedom on the death of the mortal
body. No instance of the occurrence of the word in
the original Hebrew or Greek will sustain such a
definition. It most often means ‘life,’ and is not
infrequently rendered ‘person.’ It applies to the dead as

well as to the living, as may be seen by reference to
Genesis 2:7, where the word ‘living’ need not have been
expressed were life an inseparable attribute of the soul;
and to Numbers 19:13, where the Hebrew concordance
reads ‘dead soul.’ Moreover, these souls pray that their
blood may be avenged—an article which the immaterial
soul, as popularly understood, is not supposed to
possess. The word ‘souls’ may be regarded as here
meaning simply the martyrs, those who had been
slain, the words ‘souls of them’ being a periphrasis
for the whole person. They were represented to John as
having been slain upon the altar of papal sacrifice, on
this earth, and lying dead beneath it. They certainly
were not alive when John saw them under the fifth seal,
for he again brings to view the same company, in almost
the same language, and assures us that the first time
they live after their martyrdom is at the resurrection
of the just. (Rev. 20:4-6.) Lying there victims of papal
bloodthirstiness and oppression, they cried to god for
vengeance in the same manner that Abel’s blood cried to
Him from the ground.” Smith, DR, 435.

Burning of Hendrik Eemkens, Anabaptist, 1562,
Slain For the Word of God.—
“This refers to the millions of martyrs slain under
the pale horse of the fourth seal.” Cooke, #10-UR, 1
“He shall speak great words against the most High,
and shall wear out the saints of the most High... until a
time and times and the dividing of time.” Daniel 7:25
“And it was given unto him to make war with the
saints, and to overcome them.” Rev. 13:7.
“And they that understand among the people shall
instruct many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by
flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days.” Daniel
11:33.
“The very existence of this people [the Waldenses],
holding the faith of the ancient church, was a constant
testimony to Rome’s apostasy, and therefore excited the
most bitter hatred and persecution. Their refusal to
surrender the Scriptures was also an offense that
Rome could not tolerate. She determined to blot them
from the earth. Now began the most terrible crusades

147

GEMS FROM REVELATION
against God’s people in their mountain homes.
Inquisitors were put upon their track, and the scene
of innocent Abel falling before the murderous Cain
was often repeated.” Great Controversy, 76.
And for the Word of Their Testimony.—
“Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king
then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To
this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every
one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” John
18:36,37.
“The meaning of ‘martyr’ in the Greek is
‘witness.’”
“Century after century the blood of the saints had
been shed. While the Waldenses laid down their lives
upon the mountains of Piedmont ‘for the word of God,
and for the testimony of Jesus Christ,’ similar witness
to the truth had been borne by their brethren, the
Albigenses of France. In the days of the Reformation its
disciples had been put to death with horrible tortures.
King and nobles, highborn women and delicate maidens,
the pride and chivalry of the nation, had feasted their
eyes upon the agonies of the martyrs of Jesus. The brave
Huguenots, battling for those rights which the human
heart holds most sacred, had poured out their blood on
many a hard-fought field. The Protestants were
counted as outlaws, a price was set upon their heads,
and they were hunted down like wild beasts.” Great
Controversy, 271.
They Cried With a Loud Voice.—
“And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy
brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother’s
keeper.
And He said, What hast thou done? The
voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto Me from the
ground.” Genesis 4:9,10.
“And as the blood of Abel cried from the ground,
there are voices also crying to God from martyrs’
graves, from the sepulchers of the sea, from mountain
caverns, from convent vaults: ‘How long, O Lord, holy
and true, dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood
on them that dwell on the earth?’” 5 Testimonies,
451.
“In the thirteenth century was established that most
terrible of all the engines of the papacy—the
Inquisition. The prince of darkness wrought with the
leaders of the papal hierarchy. In their secret councils
Satan and his angels controlled the minds of evil men,
while unseen in the midst stood an angel of God, taking
the fearful record of their iniquitous decrees and writing
the history of deeds too horrible to appear to human
eyes. ‘Babylon the great’ was ‘drunken with the
blood of the saints.’ The mangled forms of millions
of martyrs cried to God for vengeance upon that
apostate power.” Great Controversy, 59,60.

“The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and
his ears are open unto their cry.” Psalm 34:15.
How Long?—
“How long shall be the vision concerning the daily
sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give
both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under
foot?” Daniel 8:13.
“How long shall it be to the end of these
wonders?” Dan. 12:6.
“Since the phrase ‘How long?’ is applied in Daniel
7:21,25; 12:6-7 to the great tribulation of the Middle
Ages, Revelation 6:10 appropriately represents a
‘cry’ of protest from the martyrs of that same era.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 236.
“Leonary Schoener, beheaded in Rottenberg,
Bavaria, Jan. 14, 1528, wrote the following prayer and it
was found among his papers in the prison. This has been
the cry of thousands who have suffered for the truth.
“ ‘We are scattered like sheep having no
shepherd. We have been compelled to forsake house
and home. We are as night ravens, which abide in the
rooks. Our chambers are in holes and crags.... Not only
men but likewise women and maidens have borne
witness to the truth that Jesus Christ is the truth, the only
way to eternal life. The world still rolls and rests not: it
revels as if mad. They invent lies against us. They
cease not their fires and murders. O Lord, how long
wilt thou be silent? How long wilt thou not judge the
blood of thy saints? Let it come up before thy throne,
how precious in thine eyes is the blood of thy holy ones.
Therefore have we comfort in all our need, a refuge in
thee alone, and in none besides; but neither comfort, nor
rest, nor peace on this earth. But he who hopeth in thee
shall never be confounded. O Lord, there is no sorrow
so great that can separate us from thee.’ From the
Review and Herald, Feb. 4, 1909, Art. ‘Cry of Souls
under the Altar,’ by W. A. Spicer.” Straw, SR, 29.

Burning of 80 Waldenses, Strousburg, AD 1215
Judge and Avenge.—

148

REVELATION 6
“It is evident that the cry of the martyrs occurs
prior to the actual time of judgment and the final
crisis. The terms ‘judge’ and ‘avenge’ indicate a twopart request. The martyrs wish to be vindicated and
avenged. From the perspective of the ‘How long?’ cry
both judgment and vengeance are future. The giving of
white robes (vs.11) symbolizes the vindication of the
martyrs in the investigative judgment (cf. 3:5).
Nevertheless, the execution of that judgment is still
future.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 236
“[Since 1844] The hour of God’s judgment is
come.” Rev. 14:7.
“O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O
God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thyself. Lift
up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to
the proud. Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long
shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they utter
and speak hard things? And all the workers of iniquity
boast themselves? They break in pieces thy people, O
Lord, and afflict thine heritage. They slay the widow
and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. Yet they
say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob
regard it.” Ps. 94:1-7.
“And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy
master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the
prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the
LORD, at the hand of Jezebel.” 2 Kings 9:7
“For he hath judged the great whore, which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged
the blood of his servants at her hand.” Rev. 19:2.
Our Blood.—
“When He maketh inquisition for blood, He
remembereth them: He forgetteth not the cry of the
humble.” Psalm 9:12.
“And I saw the woman drunken with the blood
of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of
Jesus.” Rev. 17:6.
“And in her was found the blood of prophets, and
of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.”
Rev. 18:24.
Milton, Fox, and Others Give Voice to the Martyrs in
the Period of the Fifth Seal.—
“ About the middle of the [1600’s], the barbarity
and wholesale slaughter of the poor oppressed
Waldenses, in the valleys of Piedmont, by their popish
persecutors, was such as to excite a general feeling of
indignation and remonstrance in all the protestant states
of Europe. The bigoted and cruel soldiery, attended by
the still more bigoted monks, had been let loose upon the
inoffensive inhabitants of the valleys. Thousands of
families had been compelled to abandon their homes in
the very depths of winter, and to wander over mountains
covered with ice and snow, destitute and starving, to
seek a refuge from their relentless persecutors; and

multitudes of them perished on the way, overwhelmed
by tempests of drifted snow. Children had been torn
from their agonized parents to be brought up as Roman
Catholics, and carried off where those parents, even if
they should linger out a miserable existence themselves,
might never more expect to behold these objects of their
tenderness and affection. Many were hurled from
precipitous rocks, and dashed to pieces by the fall.
Sir Samuel Morland, who was appointed ambassador by
Oliver Cromwell to bear the remonstrances of protestant
England against these popish cruelties, published, on his
return, a minute account of the sufferings of the
Waldenses, in which he relates that in one instance ‘a
mother was hurled down a mighty rock, with a little
infant in her arms; and three days after was found
dead, with the little child alive, but fast clasped
between the arms of the dead mother, which were
cold and stiff insomuch that those who found them had
much ado to get the young child out.’ [Sir Samuel
Morland’s History of the Valleys of Piedmont, p. 363.
Folio, London, 1658.]” Dowling, History of Romanism,
New York, 1853.
“When Europe was awakened to the real nature of
the papacy as the result of the Reformation, a cry for
vengeance was the logical result of the change of
attitude toward those who died as ‘heretics’ but were
now being venerated as ‘saints’ and ‘martyrs.’
Milton, the blind poet, while prime minister to Cromwell
[in 1655], expressed in verse the cry for justice from
both the blood of martyrs and the lips of the living
who were at last free from the spiritual bondage that had
enslaved the souls of millions during the Middle Ages.”
Bunch, TR, 45.

Avenge, O Lord, Thy slaughtered saints, whose
bones
Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold;
Even them who kept thy truth so pure of old,
When all our fathers worshiped stocks and stones,
Forget not: in thy book record their groans
Who were Thy sheep, and in their ancient fold
Slain by the bloody Piedmontese that rolled
Mothers with infants down the rocks, their moans
The vales redoubled to the hills, and they to
Heaven.
Their martyred blood and ashes sow
O’er all the Italian fields, where still doth sway,
The triple tyrant; that from these may grow
A hundred fold, who, having learned Thy way,
Early may fly the Babylonian woe. J. Milton
“Providentially, it was at this time in the sixth seal
period that John Fox, and others, began to collect
stories of the martyrs that died for their faith and put
them into books. God wanted their bravery and faith of
their godly lives and glorious deaths recorded and not
forgotten. These stories shine a light on ordinary people

149

GEMS FROM REVELATION
who experienced a spiritual reality that few today can
even imagine. We can read the stories today (Fox’s
Book of Martyrs, 1554, 1570, and Martyrs Mirror,
1660) and be encouraged that the same Jesus who gave
them strength and courage to be faithful to Him, will do
the same for us.” PJ
On Them That Dwell on the Earth.—
“The book of Revelation makes a distinction
between those that dwell in heaven and those that dwell
on the earth. One who is born again is accounted as
sitting with Christ in heavenly places. Those that dwell
on the earth are those who live for earthly things. They
are counted as enemies of God. See comments under
Rev.11:10.” PJ
“‘Upon all who dwell on the face of the whole
earth, upon all who make this world their home, the
day of God will come as a snare. It comes to them as a
prowling thief.’ Desire of Ages, 635.
“‘By profession you say to the world: My
citizenship is not here but above; while your works
decidedly say that you are a dweller on the earth.’ 4
Testimonies, 51.

REVELATION 6:11
And white robes were given unto every
one of them; and it was said unto them, that
they should rest yet for a little season, until
their fellow-servants also and their
brethren, that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled.
White Robes.—
“These were given as a partial answer to their cry,
‘How long, O Lord, ...dost Thou not judge and
avenge our blood?’ They had gone down to the grave
in the most ignominious manner. Their lives had been
misrepresented, their reputations tarnished, their
names defamed, their motives maligned, and their
graves covered with shame and reproach, as
containing the dishonored dust of the most vile and
despicable of characters. Thus the Church of Rome,
which then molded the sentiment of the principal nations
of the earth, spared no pains to make her victims an
abhorrence to all people.
“But the Protestant Reformation began its work. It
began to be seen that the church was corrupt and
disreputable, and those against whom it vented its
rage were the good, the pure, and the true. The work
went on among the most enlightened nations, the
reputation of the church going down, and that of the
martyrs coming up, until the corruptions of the papal
abominations were fully exposed. Then that huge
system of iniquity stood forth before the world in all its
naked deformity, while the martyrs were vindicated from

all the aspersions under which that persecuting church
had sought to bury them. Then it was seen that they
had suffered, not for being vile and criminal, but ‘for
the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held.’ Then their praises were sung, their virtues
admired, their fortitude applauded, their names
honored, and their memories cherished. White robes
were thus given to every one of them.” Smith, DR,
436.
“From garrets, from hovels, from dungeons, from
scaffolds, from mountains and deserts, from the caves of
the earth and the caverns of the sea, Christ will gather
His children to Himself. On earth they have been
destitute, afflicted, and tormented. Millions have gone
down to the grave loaded with infamy because they
refused to yield to the deceptive claims of Satan. By
human tribunals the children of God have been
adjudged the vilest of criminals. But the day is near
when ‘God is judge Himself.’ (Ps. 50:6). Then the
decisions of earth shall be reversed. ‘The rebuke of His
people shall He take away.’ Isaiah 25:8. White robes
will be given to every one of them. (Rev. 6:11.) And
‘they shall call them the holy people, the redeemed of
the Lord.’ Isa. 62:12.
“Whatever crosses they have been called to bear,
whatever losses they have sustained, whatever
persecution they have suffered, even to the loss of
temporal life, the children of God are amply
recompensed.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 179,180.
“This announcement means that each persevering
believer receives divine vindication. Each of them is
judged as being an overcomer and worthy of the ‘white
robe.’ This symbol was also part of the promise to the
church in Sardis.” LaRondelle, LFTLD, 46.
“He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in
white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of
the book of life, but I will confess his name before my
Father, and before his angels.” Revelation 3:5.
White-Robed Martyrs of 5th seal Belong to White
Horse Church that Conquers.—
“In all ages Satan has persecuted the people of
God. He has tortured them and put them to death,
but in dying they became conquerors. They revealed
in their steadfast faith a mightier One than Satan. Satan
could torture and kill the body, but he could not touch
the life that was hid with Christ in God. He could
incarcerate in prison walls, but he could not bind the
spirit. They could look beyond the gloom to the glory,
saying, ‘I reckon that the sufferings of this present
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us.’ ‘Our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.’ Romans 8:18;
2 Cor. 4:17.
“Through trials and persecution, the glory—
character—of God is revealed in His chosen ones. The

150

REVELATION 6
church of God, hated and persecuted by the world, are
educated and disciplined in the school of Christ. They
walk in narrow paths on earth; they are purified in the
furnace of affliction. They follow Christ through sore
conflicts; they endure self-denial and experience bitter
disappointments; but their painful experience teaches
them the guilt and woe of sin, and they look upon it with
abhorrence. Being partakers of Christ’s sufferings,
they are destined to be partakers of His glory.”
Mount of Blessing, 30,31.
“Those who were martyred for their faith were
secured to Christ and accounted of Him as conquerors.
They had fought the good fight, and they were to
receive the crown of glory when Christ should come.”
Great Controversy, 42.
Rest Yet For a Little Season.—
“The cruel work of Roman Catholicism did not
altogether cease, even after the work of the Protestant
Reformation had become widespread and well
established. Not a few terrible outbursts of hate and
persecution were yet to be felt by the true church.
Multitudes more were to be punished as heretics, and to
join the great army of martyrs. The full vindication of
their cause was to be delayed a little season. During this
time Rome added hundreds of thousands to the vast
throng of whose blood she had already become guilty.
But the spirit of persecution was finally restrained, the
cause of the martyrs was vindicated, and the ‘little
season’ of the fifth seal came to a close.” Smith, DR,
436,437.
“It appears that the symbolization of the fifth seal
was presented to encourage those who faced martyrdom
and death, with the assurance that despite the seeming
triumph of the enemy, vindication would ultimately
come. Such an encouragement would be particularly
heartening for those living in the time of the terrible
persecutions of the later Middle Ages, but more
especially during the time of the Reformation and
after. To them, it must have seemed that the long period
of oppression would never end.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 778.
“These martyrs of the Dark Ages were told they
were to ‘rest for a little season’ because there would
come another time of persecution and martyrdom just
before the return of Christ.” Metcalf, GPDR, 85.
“Why are thy to wait? Because there is a time
appointed when all the martyrs of Christ are to be
avenged.” Cooke, #10-UR, 7.
Fellow-Servants Also and Their Brethren, That Should
Be Killed as They Were.—
“[Many who shall be convinced of the truth, will
come on the side of God’s commandment keeping
people. When this grand work is to take place in the
battle, prior to the last closing conflict, many will be

imprisoned, many will flee for their lives from cities and
towns, and many will be martyrs for Christ’s sake in
standing in defense of the truth.” Selected Messages,
Vol. 3, 397.
“There is a prospect before us of a continued
struggle, at the risk of imprisonment, loss of property
and even of life itself, to defend the law of God.” 5
Testimonies, 712.
“Men will be required to render obedience to
human edicts in violation of the divine law. Those who
are true to God will be menaced, denounced, proscribed.
They will be ‘betrayed both by parents, and brethren,
and kinsfolk, and friends,’ even unto death.” Prophets
& Kings, 588.
“We are not to have the courage and fortitude of
martyrs of old until brought into the position they were
in.... Should there be a return of persecution there would
be grace given to arouse every energy of the soul to
show a true heroism.” Our High Calling, 125.] Last
Day Events, 150.

THE SIXTH SEAL
REVELATION 6:12
And I beheld when he had opened the
sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great
earthquake; and the sun became black as
sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as
blood;
The Sixth Seal.—
“A thought well calculated to awaken in every
heart an intense interest in divine things is the
consideration that we are now living amid the
momentous events of this seal, as will presently be
proved.
“Between the fifth and sixth seals there seems to
be a sudden and complete change from highly
figurative to strictly literal language. Whatever may
be the cause, the change cannot well be denied. By no
principle of interpretation can the language of the
preceding seals be made to be literal, nor can the
language of this any more easily be made figurative. We
must therefore accept the change, even though we may
be unable to explain it. There is a significant fact,
however, to which we would here call attention. It
was in the period covered by this seal that the prophetic
parts of God’s word were to be unsealed, and many run
to and fro, or give their attention to the understanding of
these things, and thereby knowledge on this part of
God’s word was to be greatly increased.
“We suggest that it may be for this reason that the
change in the language here occurs, and that the events
of this seal, taking place at a time when these things
were to be fully understood, are not couched in
figures, but are laid before us in plain and

151

GEMS FROM REVELATION
unmistakable language.” Smith, DR, 437.
“That figurative and symbolic language is not
employed in describing the sixth and seventh seals is
evident. In the first place they picture events that cannot
be symbolized. In the second place the same events are
foretold in several other literal prophecies of the Bible,
including Christ’s great prophecy referred to above. In
the third place symbols are used to explain these
predicted events, and symbols are never used to explain
symbols. The sun was as dark ‘as sackcloth of hair,’ and
the moon ‘became as blood’ and the stars fell to the
earth ‘even as a fig tree casteth her unripe figs, when she
is shaken of a mighty wind.’ The ‘sackcloth of hair’ and
‘blood’ and the ‘fig tree’ are illustrations to describe the
appearance of these literal heavenly bodies during these
phenomenal events.” Bunch, TR, 47.
“The sixth seal covers history until the end of time;
therefore the generation now living will witness at least
some events shown to the prophet when this seal was
opened. It differs from the first four seals, by showing
events which mark prophetic time, rather than by
showing the condition of the church. Those who
recognize the signs therein given, as omens of the
second coming of the Son of man, will welcome Him
under the seventh seal. Those who do not thus read the
language of God, as given in signs and wonders, will
have the experience recorded in Rev. 6: 15-17.” Haskel,
SSP, 119,120.
A Great Earthquake.—
“In fulfillment of this prophecy there occurred,
in the year 1755, the most terrible earthquake that
has ever been recorded. Though commonly known as
the earthquake of Lisbon, it extended to the greater
part of Europe, Africa, and America. It was felt in
Greenland, in the West Indies, in the island of
Madeira, in Norway and Sweden, Great Britain and
Ireland. It pervaded an extent of not less than four
million square miles. In Africa the shock was almost as
severe as in Europe. A great part of Algiers was
destroyed; and a short distance from Morocco, a village
containing eight or ten thousand inhabitants was
swallowed up. A vast wave swept over the coast of
Spain and Africa engulfing cities and causing great
destruction.
“It was in Spain and Portugal that the shock
manifested its extreme violence.
At Cadiz the
inflowing wave was said to be sixty feet high.
Mountains, ‘some of the largest in Portugal, were
impetuously shaken, as it were, from their very
foundations, and some of them opened at their summits,
which were split and rent in a wonderful manner, huge
masses of them being thrown down into the adjacent
valleys. Flames are related to have issued from these
mountains.’—Lyell, Prin. of Geology, p. 495.
“At Lisbon ‘a sound of thunder was heard
underground, and immediately afterwards a violent
shock threw down the greater part of that city. In the

course of about six minutes sixty thousand persons
perished. The sea first retired, and laid the bar dry; it
then rolled in, rising fifty feet or more above its ordinary
level.’ ‘Among other extraordinary events related to
have occurred at Lisbon during the catastrophe, was the
subsidence of a new quay, built entirely of marble, at an
immense expense. A great concourse of people had
collected there for safety, as a spot where they might be
beyond the reach of falling ruins; but suddenly the quay
sank down with all the people on it, and not one of the
dead bodies ever floated to the surface.’—Ibid., page
495.
“ ‘The shock’ of the earthquake ‘was instantly
followed by the fall of every church and convent,
almost all the large public buildings, and more than one
fourth of the houses. In about two hours after the shock,
fires broke out in different quarters, and raged with
such violence for the space of nearly three days, that
the city was completely desolated. The earthquake
happened on a holyday, when the churches and convents
were full of people, very few of whom escaped.’—
Encyclopedia Americana, art. ‘Lisbon,’ note (ed. 1831).
‘The terror of the people was beyond description.
Nobody wept; it was beyond tears. They ran hither and
thither, delirious with horror and astonishment, beating
their faces and breasts, crying, “Misericordia! The
world’s at an end!” Mothers forgot their children, and
ran about loaded with crucifixed images. Unfortunately,
many ran to the churches for protection; but in vain was
the sacrament exposed; in vain did the poor creatures
embrace the altars; images, priests, and people were
buried in one common ruin.’ It has been estimated that
ninety thousand persons lost their lives on that fatal
day.” Great Controversy, 304,305.

Lisbon Earthquake, November 1, 1755
“‘At twenty minutes to ten that morning, Lisbon
was firm and magnificent, on one of the most
picturesque and commanding sites in the world. ...In six
minutes the city was in ruins.... Half the world felt the
convulsion.... For many weeks, as we see in the
memoirs of that time, people in distant parts of
Europe went to bed in alarm, relieved in the morning
to find that they had escaped the fate of Lisbon one night

152

REVELATION 6
more.’ –Parton’s Life of Voltaire, pp. 208, 209.” Bunch,
TR, 48.
Historical Fact.—
The science of seismology (study of earth-quakes)
began with the Lisbon Earthquake.
The Lisbon Earthquake helped to stop the
persecution of heretics. The last martyr—1776.
Lisbon, for many years, was the slave-trading
capital of the world.
The Sun Became Black As Sackcloth.—
“Immediately after the tribulation of those days
shall the sun be darkened and the moon shall not give
her light.” Matthew 24:29.
“But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun
shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light.” Mark 13:24.
“The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the
moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of
the Lord come.” Joel 2:31.
“Maketh the day dark with night.” Amos 5:8.
“The sun shall be darkened in his going forth.”
Isaiah 13:10.
“I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I
will darken the earth in the clear day.” Amos 8:9.
“I will cover the earth with a cloud.” Eze. 32:7.
“The sun became black as sackcloth of hair.”
Rev. 6:12.
“Eight writers of the Bible give the signs in the
sun, moon, and stars, as heralds of the last day. Four
of these, Joel, Amos, Isaiah, and Ezekiel, wrote before
the time of Christ; the other four are Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John, three of whom repeat the words given
by the Saviour Himself. The description of the signs in
the heavenly bodies, given by these eight writers, points
out at least thirteen peculiarities, which unmistakably
indicate the time and nature of their occurrence.
“The time when men might look for signs in the
heavens is given by Matthew. He says, ‘Immediately
after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be
darkened, and the moon shall not given her light,’
etc. The ‘tribulation of those days’ is the period of
darkness and persecution, known as the ‘abomination of
desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet.’ It began
with the establishment of the papacy in 538 AD, and
continued twelve hundred and sixty years, or until 1798.
But God in mercy shortened the time of persecution; for
‘except those days be shortened there should no flesh
be saved.’ The persecuting power of the papacy was
broken about 1776 AD. ‘Immediately after the
tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened
and the moon shall not give her light.’ The prophesied
dark day must then be looked for soon after 1776. Mark
adds another item which helps in the location of the
time. He says, ‘In those days, after that tribulation,’
etc. That is, within the period of the twelve hundred and

sixty years, or before 1798 and after 1776, ‘the sun shall
be darkened and the moon shall not give her light.’
History records the extraordinarily dark day of May 19,
1780; and the student of prophecy finds that in point of
time, this meets the requirements of Matthew and
Mark.” Haskel, SSP, 120,121.
“The last public execution for conscience sake
was in Seville, Spain, in 1776.” Haskel, SSP, 232.
“The 1260 days, or years, terminated in 1798. A
quarter of a century earlier, persecution had almost
wholly ceased.” Great Controversy, 306.
“Catholic persecution virtually ceased in Europe in
the middle of the eighteenth century. ...So the timing of
the May 19, 1780, event was right. And people reflected
on it [the Dark Day], for the place was right. New
England was a center of Bible study....” Maxwell, God
Cares, 198.
“Luke, the Gospel writer, who appeals especially to
the lover of logic, so states facts that the reader is at once
convinced that the signs in the sun, moon, and stars, are
consecutive events. In Luke 21:25-33, the signs are
mentioned. The 28th verse says, ‘When these things
begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your
heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.’ It is not
yet nigh, but it draweth nigh. The 31 st verse continues,
‘When ye see these things [Matthew says, ‘all these
things,’] come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of
God is nigh at hand.’ There is a lapse of time between
the first and the last signs. When they begin to appear,
redemption draweth nigh; when all have appeared,
redemption is nigh, ‘even at the door.’ Those who
endured the afflictions of the Dark Ages, who had seen
friends tortured on the rack, or burned at the stake; or
had themselves endured imprisonment or persecution,
when the light of the Reformation scattered the darkness,
were bidden to look forward; for the morning star was to
be seen. A little later came the darkening of the sun.
Then they were encouraged to lift up the head, for
‘redemption draweth nigh.’ Those living since the
fulfillment of all the signs, should rejoice; for ‘He is
even at the door.’
“One characteristic of the darkening of the sun,
which is given as a sign of His coming, is found in Joel
3:15. That prophet states that the sun, the moon, and the
stars, should all be darkened. ‘The sun and the moon
shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining.’ The accounts of the dark day of 1780 agree
with this. It appeared to those who witnessed the
phenomenon, that the darkness at its height could not
have been more dense, had every luminary been blotted
out of existence. One writer says, ‘The darkness of the
following evening was probably as deep and dense as
ever had been observed since the Almighty first gave
birth to light. ...A sheet of white paper, held within a
few inches of the eyes, was equally invisible with the
blackest velvet. ...The denseness of this evening

153

GEMS FROM REVELATION
darkness was a fact universally observed and recorded.’
(Devens, in ‘Our First Century.’)
“Amos witnesses to the fact that the night
following the darkening of the sun, would be dark
also. That is to say, that the darkening of the sun and
moon, to which the sixth seal has reference, would be
within the same twenty-four hours; one day would be
dark, and the night following, the moon would be dark
also. The paragraph quoted above shows that the
darkening of the sun and moon on May 19, 1780, met
these specifications.
“The prophet Isaiah gives one point to which none
of the other writers refer. He says, ‘The sun shall be
darkened in his going forth,’ that is, in the morning.
Amos 8:9 states that the darkest portion of the day
would be at noon, and that this would take place on a
clear day. Ezekiel states that a cloud would cover the
face of the sun. Here are four peculiarities worthy of
notice. The sign which the Lord placed in the heavens,
could be easily read. Of all the dark days which history
records, none, but the one in 1780, meets all these
specifications. The morning would be clear, but during
the morning a cloud would obscure the face of the sun.
The darkness would increase until it reached its greatest
density about noon. On these points ‘Our First Century,’
the work before referred to, states: ‘The time of the
commencement of this extraordinary darkness, was
between the hours of ten and eleven in the forenoon on
Friday, of the date already named [May 19, 1780]. As to
the manner of its approach, the darkness seemed to
appear first of all in the southwest. The wind came from
that quarter, and the darkness appeared to come on with
the clouds. ...The sun, rising towards the zenith, gave no
increase of light, as usual; but, on the contrary, the
darkness continued to increase until between eleven and
twelve o’clock, at which time there was the greatest
obscurity in that place.’ Speaking of another locality the
same writer says, ‘At twelve the darkness was greatest.
Lights were seen burning in all the houses; ...the birds in
the midst of their blithesome forenoon engagements,
stopped suddenly, and singing their evening songs,
disappeared and became silent; the fowls retired to their
roosts, the cocks were crowing in their accustomed
manner at the break of day.’ The day was not intensely
black as if there were no sun, but as stated in Rev. 6:12,
‘the sun became black as sackcloth of hair.’
Sackcloth of hair is made of goat hair, and is black
mingled with gray. John is the only one who mentions
this feature.” Haskel, SSP, 120-124.
Description of The Dark Day of May 19, 1780.—
“An eyewitness living in Massachusetts describes
the event as follows: ‘In the morning the sun rose clear,
but was soon overcast. The clouds became lowery, and
from them, black and ominous, as they soon appeared,
lightning flashed, thunder rolled, and a little rain fell.
Toward nine o’clock, the clouds became thinner, and
assumed a brassy or coppery appearance, and earth,
rocks, trees, buildings, water, and persons were changed
by this strange, unearthly light. A few minutes later, a

heavy black cloud spread over the entire sky except a
narrow rim at the horizon, and it was as dark as it usually
is at nine o’clock on a summer evening....
“ ‘Fear, anxiety, and awe gradually filled the minds
of the people. Women stood at the door, looking out
upon the dark landscape; men returned from their labor
in the fields; the carpenter left his tools, the blacksmith
his forge, the tradesman his counter. Schools were
dismissed, and tremblingly the children fled homeward.
Travelers put up at the nearest farmhouse. “What is
coming?” queried every lip and heart. It seemed as if a
hurricane was about to dash across the land, or as if
it was the day of the consummation of all things.
“ ‘Candles were used; and hearth fires shone as
brightly as on a moonless evening in autumn.... Fowls
retired to their roosts and went to sleep, cattle gathered at
the pasture bars and lowed, frogs peeped, birds sang
their evening songs, and bats flew about. But the human
knew that night had not come....
“ ‘Dr. Nathaniel Whittaker, pastor of the
Tabernacle church in Salem, held religious services in
the meeting-house, and preached a sermon in which he
maintained that the darkness was supernatural.
Congregations came together in many other places. The
texts for the extemporaneous sermons were
invariable those that seemed to indicate that the
darkness was consonant with Scriptural prophecy....
The darkness was most dense shortly after eleven
o’clock’—The Essex Antiquarian, April, 1899….”
Great Controversy, 306,307.

The Dark Day of May 19, 1780
“May 19, 1780, stands in history as ‘The Dark
Day.’ Since the time of Moses no period of darkness
of equal density, extent, and duration, has ever been
recorded. The description of this event, as given by
eyewitnesses, is but an echo of the words of the Lord,
recorded by the prophet Joel, twenty-five hundred years
previous to their fulfillment: ‘The sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great and terrible day of the Lord come.’ Joel 2:31.”
Great Controversy, 308.
“‘The degree to which the darkness arose was
different in different places. In most parts of the country
it was so great that people were unable to read
common print, determine the time of day by their
clocks or watches, dine, or manage their domestic

154

REVELATION 6
business, without the light of candles. In some place
the darkness was so great that persons could not see to
read common print in the open air, for several hours
together; but I believe this was not generally the case.
“ ‘The extent of this darkness was very remarkable.
Our intelligence in this respect is not so particular as I
could wish; but from the accounts that have been
received, it seems to have extended all over the New
England States....
“ ‘With regard to its duration, it continued in this
place at least fourteen hours; but it is probable this was
not exactly the same indifferent parts of the country.’
“ ‘The appearance and effects were such as tended
to make the prospect extremely dull and gloomy.
Candles were lighted up in the houses; the birds, having
sung their evening songs, disappeared, and became
silent; the fowls retired to roost; the cocks were crowing
all around, as at break of day; objects could not be
distinguished but at a very little distance; and everything
bore the appearance and gloom of night.’ (Samuel
Williams, in Memoirs of the American Academy of
Arts& Sciences, Vol.1, pp.234,235.)” Smith, DR, 444.
“The 19th of May, 1780, was a remarkable day.
...A very general opinion prevailed that the day of
judgment was at hand. Whittier, in a well-known
poem pictures it thus:

“ ‘Twas on a May-day of the far old year
Seventeen hundred eighty, that there fell
Over the fresh earth and the heaven of noon,
A horror of great darkness, like the night
In day of which the Norland sagas tell—
The twilight of the Gods. The low-hung sky
Was black with ominous clouds, save where its rim
Was fringed with a dull glow, like that which
climbs
The crater’s sides from the red hell below.
Birds ceased to sing, and all the barnyard fowls
Roosted; the cattle at the pasture bars
Lowed, and looked homeward; bats on leathern
wings
Flitted abroad; the sounds of labor died;
Men prayed, and women wept; all ears grew
sharp
To hear the doom-blast of the trumpet shatter
The black sky, that the dreadful face of Christ
Might look from the rent clouds, not as he looked
A loving guest at Bethany, but stern
As Justice and inexorable Law.
[Meanwhile in the old State House, dim as ghosts,
Sat the lawgivers of Connecticut,
Trembling beneath their legislative robes.
"It is the Lord's Great Day! Let us adjourn,”…]’
(John Greenleaf Whittier, Complete Poetical
Works, p. 260.)” Smith, DR, 444.
“The Connecticut legislature adjourned at eleven

o’clock because the members couldn’t see one another’s
faces.” Maxwell, God Cares, 196.
“It has gone down in history as the Great Dark
Day. No one really knows what caused the darkness
experienced then, throughout the states in the northeast.
“The basic information is clear enough. At about
10 in the morning on May 19 the sky started to dim and
by 11 there was darkness all around. It seems that the
whole of New England was affected, an area ‘at least
650 miles in extent’ according to contemporary reports.
The Sun was blanked to such an extent that it was
impossible to read a newspaper. In the context of this
book, it is worthwhile to note that the responses of plants
and animals were the same as during a solar eclipse.
Cows ambled back to their sheds, fowl went to their
roosts, bees returned to their hives, other insects went
quiet, and flowers closed their petals….
“This is what the Boston Independent Chronicle
related: ‘During the whole time a sickly, melancholy
gloom overcast the face of Nature. Nor was the darkness
of the night less uncommon and terrifying than that of
the day; notwithstanding there was almost a full moon,
no object was discernible…. This un-usual phenomenon
excited the fears and apprehensions of many people.
Some considered it as a portentous omen of the wrath of
Heaven in vengeance denounced against the land, others
as the immediate harbinger of the last day, when “the
sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give
her light”.’ The closing quote there, from the Bible,
shows the way many people regarded the dark day in
1780. Indeed the event is still cited by some with
strong religious beliefs as having been a sign of the
Second Coming.” Steel, Eclipse, 183,184.
“ ‘The dark day of Northern America was one to
those wonderful phenomena of nature which will always
be read of with interest, but which philosophy is at a loss
to explain.’ –Herschel.” Haskel, SSP, 124.
The Moon Became as Blood.—
“Joel and John prophesied that the moon would be
turned into blood. Those who witnessed the dark night,
say that when the moon appeared, near the morning, it
was a blood-red ball in the heavens.” Haskel, SSP,
124.
“The darkness of the following night, May 19,
1780, was as unnatural as that of the day had been:
“ ‘The darkness of the following evening was
probably as gross as ever has been observed since the
Almighty fiat gave birth to light. ...I could not help
conceiving at the time that if every luminous body in the
universe had been shrouded in impenetrable shades, or
struck out of existence, the darkness could not have been
more complete. A sheet of white paper held within a
few inches of the eyes, was equally invisible with the
blackest velvet.’ (Samuel Tenny, in Collections of
Massachusetts Historical Society for the Year 1792, Vol.
I, pp. 97,98.)

155

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“‘In the evening ...perhaps it never was darker
since the children of Israel left the house of bondage.
This gross darkness held till about one o’clock, although
the moon had fulled but the day before.’ (Boston
Gazette, May 29, 1780.)
“This statement respecting the phase of the moon
proves the impossibility of an eclipse of the sun at that
time. Whenever on this memorable night the moon did
appear, as at certain times it did, it had, according to this
prophecy, the appearance of blood.” Smith, DR, 445.
“The intense darkness of the day was succeeded, an
hour or two before evening, by a partially clear sky, and
the sun appeared, though it was still obscured by the
black, heavy mist. ‘After sundown, the clouds came
again overhead, and it grew dark very fast.’ ‘Nor was
the darkness of the night less uncommon and terrifying
than that of the day; not withstanding there was almost
a full moon, no object was discernible but by the help
of some artificial light, which, when seen from the
neighboring houses and other places at a distance,
appeared through a kind of Egyptian darkness which
seemed almost impervious to the rays.’—Isaiah Thomas,
Massachusetts Spy; or, American Oracle of Liberty, vol.
10, No. 472 (May 25, 1780). Said an eyewitness of the
scene: ‘I could not help conceiving at the time, that if
every luminous body in the universe had been shrouded
in impenetrable shades, or struck out of existence, the
darkness could not have been more complete.’—Letter
by Dr. Samuel Tenney, of Exeter, New Hampshire,
December, 1785 (in Massachusetts Historical Society
Collections, 1792, 1st series, vol. 1, p.97). Though at
nine o’clock that night the moon rose to the full, ‘it had
not the least effect to dispel the deathlike shadows.’
After midnight the darkness disappeared, and the moon,
when first visible, had the appearance of blood.”
Great Controversy, 307,308.
Why Seen Mainly in New England.—
“This event took place in North America, centering
in the New England states. It doubtless occurred there
because that was to be the chief starting place of the
second advent message which would herald the return
of Christ.” Bunch, TR, 49.
“It was observed in an area where a remarkable
revival of interest in the prophecies of Daniel and the
Revelation was about to take place, and was recognized
by students of these prophecies as fulfilling the
present passage.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 779.

REVELATION 6:13
And the stars of heaven fell unto the
earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely
figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.
The Stars of Heaven Fell.—
“The voice of history still cries, Fulfilled! We refer

to the great meteoric shower of November 13, 1833.
…A few testimonies will suffice.
“ ‘At the cry, “Look out of the window,” I sprang
from a deep sleep, and with wonder saw the east lighted
up with the dawn and meteors. ...I called to my wife to
behold; and while robing, she ex-claimed, “See how the
stars fall!” I replied, “That is the wonder:” and we felt in
our hearts that it was a sign of the last days. For truly
“the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig
tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a
mighty wind.” Revelation 6:13....
“ ‘...Here is the exactness of the prophet. The
falling stars did not come, as if from several trees
shaken, but from one: those which appeared in the east
fell toward the east; those which appeared in the north
fell toward the north; those which appeared in the west
fell toward the west; and those which appeared in the
south ...fell toward the south; and they fell, not as ripe
fruit falls. Far from it. But they flew, they were cast,
like unripe fruit, which at first refuses to leave the
branch; and, when it does break its hold, flies swiftly,
straight off, descending; and in the multitude falling,
some cross the track of others, as they are thrown with
more or less force.’ (New York Journal of Commerce,
Nov. 14, 1833, Vol. VIII, No.534, p.2.)
“ ‘The most sublime phenomenon of shooting stars,
of which the world has furnished any record, was
witnessed throughout the United States on the morning
of the 13th of November, 1833. The entire extent of this
astonishing exhibition has not been precisely
ascertained, but it covered no inconsiderable portion of
the earth’s surface. ...The first appearance was that of
fireworks of the most imposing grandeur, covering the
entire vault of heaven with myriads of fireballs,
resembling skyrockets. Their coruscations were bright,
gleaming, and incessant, and they fell thick as the flakes
in the early snows of December. To the splendors of this
celestial exhibition the most brilliant sky-rockets and
fireworks of art bear less relation than the twinkling of
the most tiny star to the broad glare of the sun. The
whole heavens seemed in motion, and suggested to
some the awful grandeur of the image employed in
the Apocalypse, upon the opening of the sixth seal,
when “the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as
a fig-tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is
shaken of a mighty wind.”’ (Elijah H. Burritt, The
Geography of the Heavens, p. 163.)’
“‘After collecting and collating the accounts given
in all the periodicals of the country, and also in
numerous letters addressed either to my scientific friends
or to myself, the following appeared to be the leading
facts attending the phenomenon. The shower pervaded
nearly the whole of North America, having appeared in
nearly equal splendor from the British possessions on the
north, to the West India Islands and Mexico on the
south, and from sixty-one degrees of longitude east of
the American coast, quite to the Pacific Ocean on the
west. Throughout this immense region, the duration was
nearly the same. The meteors began to attract attention
by their unusual frequency and brilliancy, from nine to

156

REVELATION 6
twelve o’clock in the evening; were most striking in
their appearance from two to five; arrived at their
maximum, in many places, about four o’clock; and
continued until rendered invisible by the light of day.’
(Denison Olmsted, The Mechanism of the Heavens, p.
328.)” Smith, DR, 445-448.
“‘Probably the most remarkable of all the
meteoric showers that have ever occurred was that of
the Leonids on [the night following] Nov. 12, 1833. The
number at some stations was estimated as high as
200,000 an hour for five or six hours.’—C.A. Young,
Manual of Astronomy, p.469.” Anderson, UR, 72.

Falling of the Stars, November 13, 1833
“Prof. W. E. Aiken of Saint Mary’s College,
Maryland, wrote: ‘It would be difficult for one who had
not witnessed the grand exhibition to conceive the effect
of the uninterrupted succession of innumerable
meteors, proceeding from a point so nearly vertical
toward the whole circumference of the horizon, and this
too during the stillness of the night, and with an
atmosphere perfectly transparent. It could only be
compared to one grand and continued discharge of
fireworks, occupying the whole visible heavens.’—
Reported in the American Journal of Science, Vol.
25, p. 372.” Bunch, TR, 51.
“The night of November 12-13, 1833 is regarded
as the date of birth of meteor astronomy because the

Earth plowed through a dense cloud containing
billions of particles, and nineteenth century scientists
saw a storm of meteors. The sky was alive with
meteors. At least a hundred of them could be seen all
the time, some brighter than the brightest stars and
others faint on the limit of visibility. Many left glowing
trains of light which twisted into contorted shapes as
they faded from view and no part of the sky was free
from the invasion of the shooting stars.
“Astronomers around the world were startled by
the phenomenon and very few of them recovered
sufficiently from their amazement to make any scientific
observations. For example, we have today no reliable
estimates on the number of meteors that could be seen
per hour. Estimates range from ten thousand to two
hundred thousand meteors per hour visible to one
observer. With numbers such as these even the most
alert observer would lose count unless special
precautions were taken to divide up the sky into small
manageable sections. The statement that the ‘stars
were falling as thick as snowflakes’ is perhaps the
most accurate description we will ever have of the
Leonid shower of 1833.” Hawkins, Splendor in the Sky,
219,220.
“In 1833, two years after Miller began to present
in public the evidences of Christ’s soon coming, the last
of the signs appeared which were promised by the
Saviour as tokens of the second advent. Said Jesus:
‘The stars shall fall from heaven.’ Matthew 24:29.
And John in the Revelation declared, as he beheld in
vision the scenes that should herald the day of God:
‘The stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig
tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a
mighty wind.’ Rev. 6:13. This prophecy received a
striking and impressive fulfillment in the great
meteoric shower of November 13, 1833. That was the
most extensive and wonderful display of falling stars
which has ever been recorded; ‘the whole firmament,
over all the United States being then, for hours, in fiery
commotion! No celestial phenomenon has ever occurred
in this country, since its first settlement, which was
viewed with such intense admiration by one class in the
community, or with so much dread and alarm by
another.’ ‘Its sublimity and awful beauty still linger in
many minds.... Never did rain fall much thicker than the
meteors fell toward the earth; east, west, north, and
south, it was the same. In a word, the whole heavens
seemed in motion.... The display, as described in
Professor Silliman’s Journal, was seen all over North
America.... From two o’clock until broad daylight, the
sky being perfectly serene and cloudless, an incessant
play of dazzlingly brilliant luminosities was kept up in
the whole heavens.’—R. M. Devens, American
Progress; or, The Great Events of the Greatest Century,
ch. 28, pars. 1-5.
“ ‘No language, indeed, can come up to the
splendor of that magnificent display; ...no one who did
not witness it can form an adequate conception of its
glory. It seemed as if the whole starry heavens had

157

GEMS FROM REVELATION
congregated at one point near the zenith, and were
simultaneously shooting forth, with the velocity of
lightning, to every part of the horizon; and yet they were
not exhausted—thousands swiftly followed in the tracks
of thousands, as if created for the occasion.’—F. Reed,
in the Christian Advocate and Journal, Dec. 13, 1833.
‘A more correct picture of a fig tree casting its figs
when blown by a mighty wind, it was not possible to
behold.’—‘The Old Countryman,’ in Portland Evening
Advertiser, Nov. 26, 1833.
“...Thus was displayed the last of those signs of His
coming, concerning which Jesus bade His disciples:
‘When ye shall see all these things, know that it is
near, even at the doors.’ Matthew 24:33. After these
signs, John beheld, as the great event next impending,
the heavens departing as a scroll, while the earth quaked,
mountains and islands removed out of their places, and
the wicked in terror sought to flee from the presence
of the Son of man. Revelation 6:12-17.
“Many who witnessed the falling of the stars,
looked upon it as a herald of the coming judgment, ‘an
awful type, a sure forerunner, a merciful sign, of that
great and dreadful day.’—“The Old Countryman,’ in
Portland Evening Advertiser, Nov. 16, 1833. Thus the
attention of the people was directed to the fulfillment
of prophecy, and many were led to give heed to the
warning of the second advent.” Great Controversy,
333,334.
“If astronomers were edified on November 13,
1833, not a few ordinary people were terrified. Some
lay on the earth imploring the Lord to have mercy.
Many others, alarmed that judgment day might find
them thieves, returned what they had stolen, giving
rise to the appropriate appellation, ‘The Night of
Restitution.’
“But many other people, filled with awe, were also
inspired with joy in the hope of the second coming.
Frederick Douglaus, the future journalist and diplomat,
was still a slave in 1833. To him the star shower was a
‘sublime scene,’ a ‘gorgeous spectacle,’ a ‘harbinger of
the coming of the Son of Man.’ He had read in the
Bible that the stars would fall, and here they were now
falling. ‘I was suffering very much in my mind,’ he
wrote in his autobiography. ‘I was looking away to
heaven for the rest denied me on earth.’ ‘I was prepared
to hail Him as my friend and deliverer.’ Frederick
Douglaus, Life and Times of Frederick Douglaus (New
York: Pathfinder Press, 1941).” Maxwell, God Cares,
200.
“In the Columbus, Georgia, Inquirer there
appeared an article in which a man living at McDonough
in Henry County tells what he saw on the night of
November 13, 1833, relative to the falling of the stars.
“ ‘The meteoric display of November 13, 1833,
was by very far the most remarkable natural
phenomenon I have ever witnessed. I was residing at
the time in McDonough, Henry Co.. As I was unable to
sleep, I rose about one o’clock on the night in question

and went out to my kitchen of the purpose of lighting a
lamp…. In passing into the kitchen, I did not happen to
look up. But as soon as our cook (old Aunt Mary)
opened the door, she drew back in alarm, exclaiming,
“Lord, master, the world is coming to an end! Just look
at the stars; they are all falling!”
“…‘From one o’clock until daylight I witnessed the
grand display. Looking upward, it seemed as if the
meteors all started from a common center and fell in
curving lines to the very earth; and there were
thousands, if not millions, of them in sight at the
same moment, and every moment, until daylight put
an end to the scene.
“‘It literally rained fire. Sometimes the shower
would slacken for a moment or so, and then it would be
renewed until the very heavens seems to be ablaze.
Some were brighter, some of paler hue, but they were all
fire (or seemed so) and were all pouring down toward
the earth….
“ ‘For two or three days after the occurrence, the
atmosphere was so smoky as to prevent the stars from
being seen at night, and to cause the sun to look like a
ball of fire in the daytime, upon which one might gaze
with the naked eye without pain…’” Clark, 1844, 29,30.
Historical Note.—
The November, 1833 Leonid shower marked the
birth of the modern study of meteors.

REVELATION 6:14
And the heaven departed as a scroll
when it is rolled together; and every
mountain and island were moved out of
there places.
The Heaven Departed As a Scroll.—
“Immediately after the tribulation of those days
shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give
her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the
powers of the heavens shall be shaken.” Mt. 24:29.
“There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon,
and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations,
with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; Men’s
hearts failing them for fear and for looking after those
things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of
heaven shall be shaken.” Luke 21:25,26.
“What heaven is this that departs as a scroll? It is
not the third heaven—for that is where God’s throne is.
Undoubtedly, it is the first heaven, or atmospheric
heaven. However at the second advent other areas of
space will be affected. Jesus said, ‘the powers of
heaven shall be shaken.’ (Mt. 24:29). This refers to the
powers of the second heaven, the sun, moon, and stars.
Both the first and second heavens will be disturbed
when Christ in power and glory streams through space to

158

REVELATION 6
this planet. The apostle Paul confirms this fact: ‘I
shake not the earth only, but also heaven.’ Heb.
12:25-27. At the second advent, not only will our
planetary system be greatly disturbed, but our planet, it
appears, could be affected in its rotation upon its axis.”
Cooke, #10-UR, 20.
“The powers of heaven are the sun, moon, and
stars. They rule in the heavens. The powers of earth are
those that rule on the earth. The powers of heaven will
be shaken at the voice of God. Then the sun, moon,
and stars will be moved out of their places. They will
not pass away, but be shaken by the voice of God.”
Early Writings, 41.
The Heaven Departed As a Scroll.
Every
Mountain and Island Were Moved Out of Their
Places.—
“In this event our minds are turned to the future.
From looking at the past, and beholding the word of God
fulfilled, we are now called to look at events in the
future, which are no less sure to come. Our position is
unmistakable defined. We stand between the 13th and
14th verses of this chapter. We wait for the heavens to
depart as a scroll when it is rolled together. These are
times of unparalleled solemnity and importance, for we
do not know how near we may be to the fulfillment of
these things.
“The departing of the heavens is included in what
the writers of the Gospels call, in the same series of
events, the shaking of the powers of the heavens. Other
scriptures give us further particulars concerning this
prediction.
From Hebrews 12:25-27; Joel 3:16;
Jeremiah 25:30-33; Revelation 16:17, we learn that it is
the voice of God, as He speaks in terrible majesty
from His throne in heaven, that causes this fearful
commotion in earth and sky. Once the Lord spoke
with an audible voice, when He gave His eternal law
from Sinai. At that time the earth shook. He is to speak
again, and not only the earth will shake, but the heavens
also. Then will the earth ‘reel to and fro like a
drunkard.’ It will be ‘dissolved’ and ‘utterly broken
down.’ Isaiah 24. Mountains will move from their firm
bases. Islands will suddenly change their location in the
midst of the sea. From the level plain will arise the
precipitous mountain. Rocks will thrust up their ragged
forms from earth’s broken surface. While the voice of
God is reverberating through the earth, the direst
confusion will reign over the face of nature.
“To show that this is no mere conception of the
imagination, the reader is requested to mark the exact
phraseology which some to the prophets have used in
reference to this time. Isaiah says: ‘The earth is
utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the
earth is moved exceedingly. The earth shall reel to
and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a
cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy
upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.’ Isaiah
24:19,20. Jeremiah in thrilling language describes the
scene as follows: ‘I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was

without form and void; and the heavens, and they
had no light. I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they
trembled, and all the hills moved lightly. I beheld, and
lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the heavens
were fled. ...For thus hath the Lord said, The whole land
shall be desolate.’ Jeremiah 4:23-27.” Smith, DR,
449,450.
“The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter
his voice from Jerusalem: and the heavens and the
earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his
people, and the strength of the children of Israel.” Joel
3:16.
“For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations,
and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly
destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.
Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall
come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be
melted with their blood. And all the host of heaven
shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled
together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down,
as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig
from the fig tree.” Is. 34:2-4.
“It is at midnight that God manifests His power
for the deliverance of His people. The sun appears,
shining in its strength. Signs and wonders follow in
quick succession. The wicked look with terror and
amazement upon the scene, while the righteous behold
with solemn joy the tokens of their deliverance.
Everything in nature seems turned out of its course. The
streams cease to flow. Dark, heavy clouds come up and
clash against each other. In the midst of the angry
heavens in one clear space of indescribable glory,
whence comes the voice of God like the sound of many
waters, saying: ‘It is done.’ Revelation 16:17.
“That voice shakes the heavens and the earth.
There is a mighty earthquake, ‘such as was not since
men were upon the earth, so mighty and earthquake,
and so great.’ Verses 17,18. The firmament appears to
open and shut. The glory from the throne of God seems
flashing through. The mountains shake like a reed in
the wind, and ragged rocks are scattered on every side.
There is a roar as of a coming tempest. The sea is lashed
into fury. There is heard the shriek of a hurricane like
the voice of demons upon a mission of destruction. The
whole earth heaves and swells like the waves of the
sea. Its surface is breaking up. Its very foundations
seem to be giving way. Mountain chains are sinking.
Inhabited islands disappear. The seaports that have
become like Sodom for wickedness are swallowed up by
the angry waters. Babylon the great has come in
remembrance before God, ‘to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of His wrath.’ Great
hailstones, everyone ‘about the weight of a talent,’ are
doing their work of destruction. Verses 19,21. The
proudest cities of the earth are laid low. The lordly
palaces, upon which the world’s great men have lavished
their wealth in order to glorify themselves, are crumbling

159

GEMS FROM REVELATION
to ruin before their eyes. Prison walls are rent asunder,
and God’s people, who have been held in bondage for
their faith, are set free.” Great Controversy, 636,637.
“God is our refuge and strength, a very present help
in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth
be removed, and though the mountains be carried
into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof
roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with
the swelling thereof.” Psalm 46:1-3.

REVELATION 6:15-17
And the kings of the earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every
bond man, and every free man, hid
themselves in the dens and in the rocks of
the mountains;
And said to the mountains and rocks,
Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sitteth on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb.
For the great day of his wrath is come;
and who shall be able to stand?
Kings, Great Men, Rich Men, Chief Captains, Mighty
Men, Bond Man, and Free Man.—
“ ‘The kings of the earth’ would include all rulers
of nations. The ‘chief captains’ are doubtless the
military leaders. The military tribunes of the Roman
army were commanders of thousands and were
recognized as ‘chief captains.’ The ‘great’ and ‘rich’
men of the earth are included among the lost. ‘Not
merely those in civil and military authority will be
terror-stricken, but the self-satisfied and complacent
rich,’ (Robertson). See James 5:1-5. The ‘mighty men’
are those who usually scoff at fear. The ‘bondman’ and
‘free man’ are the two opposites of society. Slavery still
exists and will doubtless continue till Christ returns.
...Seven classes who are unprepared are named by the
Author of the Apocalypse and they doubtless represent
all classes of the wicked.” Bunch, TR, 53.
“(Rev. 6:12-17 and Rev. 7:9-17 quoted.) In these
scriptures two parties are brought to view. One party
permitted themselves to be deceived and took sides with
those with whom the Lord has a controversy. They
misinterpreted the messages sent them and clothed
themselves in robes of self-righteousness. Sin was not
sinful in their eyes. They taught false-hood as truth, and
by them many souls were led astray.” 9 Testimonies,
268.
Hid Themselves in Dens and Rocks of Mountains.—
“And they shall go into the holes of the rocks,
and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord,

and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake
terrible the earth.
“In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and
his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself
to worship, to the moles and to the bats; To go into the
clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged
rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his
majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.”
Isaiah 2:19-21
Fall On Us.—
“Then will the world’s dream of carnal security
be effectually broken. Kings who, intoxicated with
their own earthly authority, have never dreamed of a
higher power than they themselves, now realize that
there is One who reigns as King of kings. The great men
beheld the vanity of all earthly pomp for there is a
greatness above that of earth. The rich men throw their
silver and gold to the moles and bats, for it cannot save
them in that day. The chief captains forget their brief
authority, and the mighty men forget their strength.
Every bondman who is in the still worse bondage of sin,
and every freeman—all classes of the wicked, from the
highest down to the lowest—join in the general wail
of consternation and despair.
“They who never prayed to Him whose arm could
bring salvation, now raise an agonizing prayer to rocks
and mountains to bury them forever from the sight of
Him whose presence brings to them destruction. Fain
would they now avoid reaping what they have sown by a
life of lust and sin. Fain would they now shun the
fearful treasure of wrath which they have been heaping
up for themselves against this day. Fain would they bury
themselves and their catalogue of crimes in everlasting
darkness. So they flee to the rocks, caves, caverns, and
fissures which the broken surface of the earth now
presents before them. But it is too late. They cannot
conceal their guilt or escape the long-delayed vengeance.
...Before that day comes with its fearful scenes, we pray
you, reader, give your most serious and candid attention
to your salvation.
“Many now affect to despise the institution of
prayer, but at one time or another all men will pray.
Those who will not now pray to God in penitence, will
then pray to the rocks and mountains in despair; and this
will be the largest prayer meeting ever held.” Smith,
DR, 450,451.
“Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye
shall see him, and they also which pierced him: And all
nations of the earth shall wail because of him. Even
so, Amen.” Revelation 1:7.
“But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves and
for your children. For behold, the days are coming, in
the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the
wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave
suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains,
Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us. For if they do

160

REVELATION 6
these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the
dry?” Luke 23:28-30.
“From the scene before Him, Christ looked forward
to the time of Jerusalem’s destruction. In that terrible
scene, many of those who were now weeping for Him
were to perish with their children.
“From the fall of Jerusalem the thoughts of Jesus
passed to a wider judgment. In the destruction of the
impenitent city He saw a symbol of the final destruction
to come upon the world. He said, ‘Then shall they
begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the
hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in a green
tree, what shall be done in the dry?’ By the green
tree, Jesus represented Himself, the innocent Redeemer.
God suffered His wrath against transgression to fall on
His beloved Son. Jesus was to be crucified for the sins
of men. What suffering, then, would the sinner bear who
continued in sin? All the impenitent and unbelieving
would know a sorrow and misery that language would
fail to express.” Desire of Ages, 743.
“In these and many other Scriptures is abundance
of evidence that the world will not be converted when
Christ returns, as some contend.” Bunch, TR, 53.
Hide Us.—
“When Christ shall come in His glory and the glory
of His Father, with all the heavenly angels surrounding
Him, escorting Him on His way with voices of triumph,
while strains of the most enchanting music fall upon the
ear, all will then be interested; there will not be one
indifferent spectator. Speculations will not then engross
the soul. The miser’s piles of gold, which have feasted
his eyes, are no more attractive. The palaces which the
proud men of earth have erected, and which have been
their idols, are turned from with loathing and disgust.
No one pleads his lands, his oxen, his wife that he has
just married, as a reason why he should be excused from
sharing the glory that bursts upon his astonished vision.
All want a share, but know that it is not for them.
“In earnest, agonizing prayer they call for God to
pass them not by. The kings, the mighty men, the lofty,
the proud, the mean man, alike bow together under a
pressure of woe, desolation, misery inexpressible;
heart-anguished prayers are wrung from their lips.
Mercy! mercy! Save us from the wrath of an offended
God! A voice answers them with terrible distinctness,
sternness, and majesty: ‘Because I have called, and ye
refused; I have stretched out My hand, and no man
regarded; but ye have set at nought all My counsel,
and would none of My reproof: I also will laugh at
your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh.’
“Then kings and nobles, the mighty man, and the
poor man, and the mean man, alike, cry there most
bitterly. They who in the days of their prosperity
despised Christ and the humble ones who followed in
His footsteps, men who would not humble their dignity
to bow to Christ, who hated His despised cross, are now
prostrate in the mire of the earth. Their greatness has all

at once left them, and they do not hesitate to bow to the
earth at the feet of the saints. They then realize with
terrible bitterness that they are eating the fruit of their
own way, and are filled with their own devices. In their
supposed wisdom they turned away from the high,
eternal reward, rejected the heavenly inducement, for
earthly gain. The glitter and tinsel of earth fascinated
them, and in their supposed wisdom they became fools.
They exulted in their worldly prosperity as though their
worldly advantages were so great that they could
through them be recommended to God, and thus secure
heaven.
“Money was power among the foolish of earth, and
money was their god; but their very prosperity has
destroyed them. They became fools in the eyes of God
and His heavenly angels, while men of worldly ambition
thought them wise. Now their supposed wisdom is all
foolishness, and their prosperity their destruction. Again
ring forth shrieks of fearful, heart-rending anguish:
‘Rocks and mountains, fall on us, and hide us from
the face of Him that sitteth on the throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of His wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand?’ To the caves
of the earth they flee as a covert, but these fail to be such
then.” 2 Testimonies, 41,42.
“The sinner could not be happy in God’s
presence; he would shrink from the companionship
of holy beings. Could he be permitted to enter heaven,
it would have no joy for him. The spirit of unselfish
love that reigns there—every heart responding to the
heart of Infinite Love—would touch no answering chord
in his soul. His thoughts, his interests, his motives,
would be alien to those that actuate the sinless dwellers
there. He would be a discordant note in the melody of
heaven. Heaven would be to him a place of torture;
he would long to be hidden from Him who is its light,
and the center of its joy. It is no arbitrary decree on the
part of God that excludes the wicked form heaven; they
are shut out by their own unfitness for its
companionship. The glory of God would be to them a
consuming fire. They would welcome destruction,
that they might be hidden from the face of Him who
died to redeem them.” Steps to Christ, 17,18.
The Face of Him that Sitteth on the Throne.—
“Terribly will that prayer be fulfilled in the great
judgment day. When Christ shall come to the earth
again, not as a prisoner surrounded by a rabble will men
see Him. They will see Him then as heaven’s King.
Christ will come in His own glory, in the glory of His
Father, and the glory of the holy angels. Ten thousand
times ten thousand, and thou-sands of thousands of
angels, the beautiful and triumphant sons of God,
possessing surpassing loveliness and glory, will escort
Him on His way. Then shall He sit upon the throne of
His glory, and before Him shall be gathered all nations.”
Desire of Ages, 739.

161

“When the Son of man shall come in his glory,

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon
the throne of his glory.” Matt. 25:31.
“[1 Corinthians 15:24-28 quoted.] These verses
show that the Son reigns or is in charge of the work of
ending the reign of rebellion. This is what is involved
at the Second Advent. It is Christ the Son of God who
is in charge—not God the Father. On these grounds,
we conclude that the Father is not present or is not
involved in the Second Advent, in cleansing this planet
of rebellion. This is the work of God the Son.” Cooke,
#31-UR, 28.
Wrath of the Lamb.—
“On whose side are we? The world cast Christ out, the
heavens received Him. Man, finite man, rejected the
Prince of life; God, our sovereign Ruler, received Him
into the heavens. God has exalted Him. Man crowned
Him with a crown of thorns, God has crowned Him with
a crown of royal majesty. We must all think candidly.
Will you have this man Christ Jesus to rule over you, or
will you have Barabbas? The death of Christ brings to
the rejecter of His mercy the wrath and judgments of
God, unmixed with mercy. This is the wrath of the
Lamb. But the death of Christ is hope and eternal life to
all who receive Him and believe in Him.” (Letter 31,
1898). 5BC, 1107

has fallen upon the ear of John. ‘The great day of His
wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?’ The
apostle himself was awed and overwhelmed.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 444.
“But who may abide the day of his coming? And
who shall stand when he appeareth? For he is like a
refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap. And he shall sit as
a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the
sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that
they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness.” Malachi 3:2,3.
“Who can stand before his indignation? And
who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? His fury is
poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by
him. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of
trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.”
Nahum 1:6,7.
“Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Or
who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean
hands, and a pure heart: who hath not lifted up his soul
unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God
of his salvation.” Psalm 24:3-5.
“If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord,
who shall stand?” Psalm 130:3.
“The sinners in Zion are afraid. Fearfulness hath
surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell
with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell
with everlasting burnings?
He that walketh
righteously, and speaketh uprightly: he that despiseth
the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from
holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of
blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil: He shall
dwell on high: his place of defence shall be the
munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him: his waters
shall be sure.” Isaiah 33:14-16.

Wicked Fleeing From Christ.
Who Shall Be Able to Stand?—
“I call upon ministers who have been handling the
word of God, ‘Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the
Lord.’ I ask the people who have listened to the truths
from the pulpit, What are your feelings in anticipation of
that great day? In that day you have each an individual,
personal interest. Be assured, God will not be mocked
with pretensions. Have you the wedding garment on?
“We hear now of earthquakes in divers places, of
fires, of tempests, of disasters by sea and land, of
pestilence, of famine. What weight do these signs have
upon you? This is only the beginning of what shall be.
The description of the day of God is given through John
by the Revelator. The cry of the terror-stricken myriads

“Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may
be accounted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.”
Luke 21:36.
Those Who Stand are Part of the White Horse.—
“We all in solemn silence gazed on the cloud as it
drew nearer and became lighter, glorious, and still more
glorious, till it was a great white cloud. The bottom
appeared like fire; a rainbow was over the cloud, while
around it were ten thousand angels, singing a most
lovely song; and upon it sat the Son of man. His hair
was white and curly and lay on His shoulders; and upon
His head were many crowns.
His feet had the
appearance of fire; in His right hand was a sharp sickle;
in His left, a silver trumpet. His eyes were a flame of
fire, which searched His children through and through.
Then all faces gathered paleness, and those that God had

162

REVELATION 6
rejected gathered blackness. Then we all cried out,
‘Who shall be able to stand? Is my robe spotless?’
Then the angels ceased to sing, and there was some time
of awful silence, when Jesus spoke: ‘Those who have
clean hands and pure hearts shall be able to stand;
My grace is sufficient for you.’ At this our faces
lighted up, and joy filled every heart. And the angels
struck a note higher and sang again, while the cloud
drew still nearer the earth.” Early Writings, 15,16.

“That he might present it to himself a glorious
church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing;
but that it should be holy and without blemish.” Eph.
5:27.
“He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed
in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of
the book of life, but I will confess his name before my
Father, and before his angels.” Revelation 3:5.

163

GEMS FROM REVELATION

164

REVELATION 7

REVELATION 7
THE SEALING OF THE 144,000
REVELATION 7:1-8
1 And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four
corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the
wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.
2 And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the
seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four
angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea.
3 Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till
we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.
4 And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and
there were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all
the tribes of the children of Israel.
5 Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad
were sealed twelve thousand.
6 Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Nephthalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Manasses were sealed twelve thousand.
7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar
were sealed twelve thousand.
8 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.

REVELATION 7:1
And after these things I saw four
angels standing on the four corners of the
earth, holding the four winds of the earth,
that the wind should not blow on the earth,
nor on the sea, nor on any tree.
After These Things—
“The time of the work here introduced is
established beyond mistake. The sixth chapter closed
with the events of the sixth seal, and the seventh seal is
not mentioned until we reach the beginning of
Revelation 8. The whole of Revelation 7 is therefore
thrown in here parenthetically. Why is it thus
introduced at this point? Evidently it is given for the
purpose of stating additional particulars concerning
the sixth seal. The expression, ‘after these things,’
does not mean after the fulfillment of all the events
previously described, but after the prophet had been
carried in vision to the close of the sixth seal, that the
consecutive order of events as given in Revelation 6
might not be broken, his mind is called to what is
mentioned in Revelation 7 as further particulars in
regard to that seal. We inquire, Between what events in
that seal is this work done? It must be accomplished
before the departing of the heavens as a scroll, for
after that event there is no place for such a work as
this. It must take place after the signs in the sun,

moon, and stars, for these signs have already been
fulfilled, and such a sealing work has not yet been
accomplished. It comes in therefore between the 13th
and 14th verses of Revelation 6. There, as already
shown, is just where we now stand. Hence the first part
of Revelation 7 relates to a work the accomplishment of
which may be looked for now.” Smith, DR, 453.
“The seventh chapter of the book of Revelation
continues the description of events taking place under
the sixth seal. Already the signs, which prophecy
foretold would appear in the heavens, have been seen.
Not only did men witness the phenomena, but as early as
1844, and since that time, these things have been
recognized as signs of the second appearing of the Son
of man, and as such, have been preached before all the
world. When the Saviour was giving the signs by which
men should know of the approach of the second advent,
He mentions, in addition to the strange appearance in the
heavens, ‘upon the earth distress of nations, with
perplexity.’ This distress of nations follows the
falling of the stars, and as it is the subject with which
the seventh chapter of Revelation is introduced, it
places that chapter, when considered chronologically,
between the thirteenth and fourteenth verses of the
sixth chapter of Revelation.” Haskel, SSP, 127.
“Chapter seven is an interruption in the vision of
the seven seals covering the Christian era, in order to
answer the question ...‘Who shall be able to stand?’”
Bunch, TR, 53,54.
I Saw Four Angels Holding the Four Winds.—
“Angels are now restraining the winds of strife,
that they may not blow until the world shall be warned
of its coming doom; but a storm is gathering, ready to
burst upon the earth; and when God shall bid His angels
loose the winds, there will be such a scene of strife as no
pen can picture.” Education, 179,180.
“Men cannot discern the sentinel angels
restraining the four winds that they shall not blow until
the servants of God are sealed; but when God shall bid
His angels loose the winds, there will be such a scene of
strife as no pen can picture ...the judgments of God that
are about to fall upon a doomed world.” 6 Testimonies,
408.
“John sees the elements of nature—earth-quake,
tempest, and political strife—represented as being held
by four angels. These winds are under control until
God gives the word to let them go. There is the safety of
God’s church. The angels of God do His bidding,

165

GEMS FROM REVELATION
holding back the winds of the earth, that the winds
should not blow on the earth, nor the sea, nor on any
tree, until the servants of God should be sealed in their
foreheads.” Testimonies to Ministers, 444.
“Angels were united in the work of Him who
had broken the seals and taken the book. Four
mighty angels hold back the powers of this earth till the
servants of God are sealed in their foreheads. The
nations of the world are eager for conflict, but they are
held in check by the angels. When this restraining
power is removed, there will come a time of trouble and
anguish.
Deadly instruments of warfare will be
invented. Vessels, with their living cargo, will be
entombed in the great deep. All who have not the spirit
of truth will unite under the leadership of satanic
agencies. But they are to be kept under control till
the time shall come for the great battle of
Armageddon.” Letter 79, 1900.
“Angels are belting the world, refusing Satan his
claims to supremacy, made because of the vast multitude
of his adherents. We hear not the voices, we see not
with the natural sight the work of these angels, but
their hands are linked about the world, and with
sleepless vigilance they are keeping the armies of
Satan at bay till the sealing of God’s people shall be
accomplished.” (Letter 79, 1897). 7BC, 967.
Four Corners of the Earth.—
“This expression denotes the four quarters, or the
four points of the compass, and signifies that these
angels in their particular sphere have charge of the whole
earth.” Smith, DR, 454.
“He shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall
assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.”
Isaiah 11:12.
“Thus saith the Lord GOD unto the land of Israel;
An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the
land.” Ezekiel 7:2.
Four Winds.—
“And upon Elam will I bring the four winds from
the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them
toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation
whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come. For I will
cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and
before them that seek their life: and I will bring evil
upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the LORD; and
I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed
them:” Jer. 49:36,37.
“Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil shall go
forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall
be raised up from the coasts of the earth.” Jeremiah
25:32.
“Winds in the Bible symbolize political com-

motion, strife, and war. (Daniel 7:2; Jeremiah 25:32.)
The four winds, held by four angels standing in the four
quarters of the earth, must denote all the elements of
strife and commotion that exist in the world. When they
are all loosed and all blow together, it will constitute
the great whirlwind just referred to in the prophecy of
Jeremiah.” Smith, DR, 454.
“When the Saviour saw in the Jewish people a
nation divorced from God, He saw also a professed
Christian Church united to the world and the papacy.
And as He stood upon Olivet, weeping over Jerusalem
…so He is weeping over and pleading with sinners in
these last moments of time. Soon He will say to the
angels who are holding the four winds, ‘Let the
plagues loose; let darkness, destruction, and death come
upon the transgressors of my law.’” R&H, 10/8/1901.
“John sees the elements of nature—earth-quake,
tempest, and political strife—represented as being held
by four angels.” Testimonies to Ministers, 444.
“As the angels of God cease to hold in check the
fierce winds of human passion, all the elements of
strife will be let loose. The whole world will be
involved in ruin more terrible than that which came upon
Jerusalem of old.” Great Controversy, 614.
“A WIND, symbolically, or figuratively means a
sword, or destroying weapon which will come upon all
the inhabitants of the earth when the four messengers let
go, or as it would be more literally expressed when they
cease to have the power to restrain mob law, violence
and blood, by the power of their organized
governments. Please see the specimens which have
been exhibited in Europe since the beginning of 1848,
particularly Paris, the capital of France, on the 22 nd of
February, 20-23 June last, and now. And also Vienna,
the capital of the Empire of Austria, and some eight or
ten other kingdoms and states, and then we shall begin to
learn what John means by the holding or letting go a
wind.” Bates, Seal of God, 16,17.
Trees.—
“To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to
give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness; that they might be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that he might
be glorified.” Isaiah 61:3.
Jesus, A Covert From the Wind.—
“And a man [Jesus] shall be as an hiding
place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest;
as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land.” Isaiah 32:2.

REVELATION 7:2,3

166

REVELATION 7

And I saw another angel ascending from
the east, having the seal of the living God:
and he cried with a loud voice to the four
angels, to whom it was given to hurt the
earth and the sea,
Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the
sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God in their foreheads.
Ascending From the East.—
“Let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let
them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth
in his might.” Judges 5:31
“But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings.”
Malachi 4:2.
“And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came
from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise
of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory.”
Ezekiel 43:2.
“Another literal angel, having charge of another
specific work, is here introduced. Instead of the words
‘ascending from the east,’ some translations read,
‘ascending from the sun-rising,’ which is a more literal
translation. The expression evidently refers to manner
rather than locality, for as the sun rises with rays at
first oblique and comparatively powerless, then
increases in strength until it shines in all its meridian
power and splendor, so the work of this angel begins
in moderation, moves onward with everaccumulating influence, and closes in strength and
power.” Smith, DR, 454.
“That truth arises and is on the increase,
stronger, and stronger. It’s the seal! It’s coming up!
It arises, commencing from the rising of the sun.... Its
beaming rays running out to invigorate and cheer, and
warm the earth, is first cold and feeble, because its rays
are horizontal, but as she (apparently) ascends in the
heavens, they strike obliquely, and continues on
strengthening in power and effulgence until its
vertical rays come directly down upon us.” Bates,
Seal of God, 25-27.
“The east is the location from which any object is
first seen when approaching our world from outer space.
It is the designated point of the compass from which
heavenly powers approach the earth. It is a declaration
that the angel or message is from heaven—it is God
inspired.” Cooke, #11-UR, 3.
“The ascending angel [messenger] from the east
having the seal of God, represents a movement of people
heralding the 7th-day sabbath truth.” PJ

A Seal.—
“A seal is defined to be an instrument of sealing,
that which ‘is used by individuals, corporate bodies, and
states, for making impressions on wax, upon instruments
of writing, as an evidence of their authenticity.’ The
original word in this text is defined, ‘A seal, i.e., a signet
ring; a mark, stamp, badge; a token, a pledge.’ The verb
signifies: ‘To secure to any one, to make sure; to set a
seal or mark upon anything in token of its being genuine
or approved; to attest, to confirm, to establish, to
distinguish by a mark.’ With these definitions as a basis,
we compare Genesis 17:11 with Romans 4:11, and
Revelation 7:3 with Ezekiel 9:4, and find that the words
‘token,’ ‘sign,’ ‘seal,’ and ‘mark’ are used in the
bible as synonymous terms. The seal of God brought
to view in our text is to be applied to the servants of
God. In this case it is not some literal mark to be made
in the flesh, but some institution or observance having
special reference to God, which will serve as a ‘mark
of distinction’ between the worshipers of God and
those who are not His servants, though they may
profess to follow Him.
“A seal is used to render valid or authentic any
enactments or laws that a person or power may
promulgate. Frequent instances of its use occur in the
Scriptures. In 1 Kings 21:8, we read that Jezebel ‘wrote
letters in Ahab’s name, and sealed them with his
seal.’ These letters then had all the authority of King
Ahab. Again, in Esther 3:12: ‘In the name of King
Ahasuerus was it written, and sealed with the king’s
ring.’ So also in Esther 8:8: ‘The writing which is
written in the king’s name, and sealed with the king’s
ring, may no man reverse.’
“A seal is used in connection with some law or
enactment that demands obedience, or upon
documents that are to be made legal, or subject to the
provision of law. The idea of law is inseparable from a
seal.
“...We must understand a seal to be strictly that
which gives validity and authenticity to enactments
and laws. This is found in the name or signature of the
lawmaking power, expressed in such terms as to show
what the power is, and its right to make laws and
demand obedience. Even with a literal seal, the name
must always be used as indicated in the references given
above. An instance of the use of the name alone seems
to occur in Daniel 6:8: ‘Now, O king, establish the
decree, and sign the writing, that it be not changed,
according to the law of the Medes and Persians,
which altereth not.’ In other words affix the signature
of royalty, which shows who it is that demands
obedience, and what his right is demand it.
“In the prophecy of Isaiah 8, we read: ‘Bind up
the testimony, seal the law among My disciples.’ This
must refer to a work of reviving in the minds of the
disciples some of the claims of the law which had been
overlooked, or perverted from their true meaning. In the
prophecy this is called sealing the law, or restoring to its
seal, which had been taken from it.
“The 144,000, who in the chapter before us are said

167

GEMS FROM REVELATION
to be sealed with the seal of God in their foreheads, are
again brought to view in Revelation 14:1, where they are
said to have the Father’s name written in their
foreheads.” Smith, DR, 454-456.
The Seal of the Living God.—
“From the foregoing reasoning, facts, and
declarations of Scripture, two conclusions inevitably
follow:
“1. The seal of God is found in the law of God.
“2. The seal of God is that part of His law which
contains His name, or descriptive title, showing who He
is, the extent of His dominion, and His right to rule.”
Smith, DR, 456.
“The law of God is …contained in the Decalogue,
or ten commandments. We have, then, but to examine
these commandments to see which one it is that
constitutes the seal of the law, or in other words, makes
known the true God, the lawmaking power.
“The first three commandments mention the word
‘God,’ but we cannot tell from these who is meant, for
there are multitudes of objects to which this name is
applied. There are ‘gods many and lords many,’ as the
apostle says. (1 Corinthians 8:5.) We pass over the
fourth commandment for the time being. The fifth
contains the words ‘Lord’ and ‘God,’ but does not define
them, and the remaining five precepts do not contain the
name of God at all. With that part of the law which we
have examined, it would be impossible to convict the
grossest idolater of sin. The worshiper of images could
say, This idol before me is my god, his name is god, and
these are his precepts. The worshiper of the heavenly
bodies could also say, The sun is my god, and I worship
him according to this law. Thus without the fourth
commandment the Decalogue is null and void, as far as
it pertains to the definition of the worship of the true
God.” Smith, DR, 456,457.
“The fourth commandment reads: ‘Remember the
Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labor,
and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work.
...For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day:
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
hallowed it.’ Herein lie the three specifications of a
seal: first, the name—the Lord thy God, Jehovah;
second, the authority—Creator; third, the extent of
territory—the heavens and earth. Take away this
command from the Decalogue, and it would contain
no seal. God’s right to rule rests in the fourth
commandment, and the seal will be placed in the
foreheads of those who thus know God. The knowledge
of the creative and the redeeming power of God, is
revealed by Christ in the fourth commandment of the
Decalogue.” Haskel, SSP, 135.
“Now we have a weapon against idolatry. Now
this law can no longer be applied to false gods, who

‘have not made the heavens and the earth.’ Jeremiah
10:11. The Author of this law has declared who He is,
the extent of His dominion, and His right to rule; for
every created intelligence must at once assent that He
who is the Creator of all has a right to demand obedience
from all His creatures.
Thus with the fourth
commandment in its place, this wonderful document, the
Decalogue, the only document among men which God
ever wrote with His own finger, has a signature, it has
that which renders it intelligible and authentic, it has a
seal. But without the fourth commandment, the law is
incomplete and unauthoritative.
“From the foregoing logic it is evident that the
fourth commandment constitutes the seal of the law of
God, or the seal of God. The Scriptures give direct
testimony on this conclusion. We have seen already
that in Scripture usage, ‘sign,’ ‘seal,’ ‘token,’ and
‘mark’ are synonymous terms. The Lord expressly
says that the Sabbath is a sign between Him and His
people. ‘Verily My Sabbaths ye shall keep; for it is a
sign between Me and you throughout your
generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that
doth sanctify you.’ Exodus 31:13. The same fact is
again stated in Ezekiel 20:12,20. Here the Lord told His
people that the very object of their keeping the Sabbath
was that they might know that He is the true God. This
is the same as if the Lord had said, ‘The Sabbath is a
seal. On My part it is the seal of My authority, the sign
that I have the right to command obedience; on your part
it is a token that you accept Me to be your God.’
“…Thus the Sabbath of the fourth command-ment
is taken by the Lord as a sign between Him and His
people, or the seal of His law for all time. By keeping
that commandment people signify that they are the
worshipers of the true God.
In the same
commandment God makes Himself known as their
rightful ruler, inasmuch as He is their Creator.
“In harmony with this idea, the significant fact is to
be noticed that whenever the sacred writers wish to point
out the true God in distinction from false gods of every
description, an appeal is made to the great facts of
creation, upon which the fourth commandment is based.
(See 2 Kings 19:15; 2 Chron. 2:12; Neh. 9:6; Psalm
96:5; 115:4-7,15; 121:2; 124:8; 134:3; 146:6; Isaiah
37:16; 42:5; 44:24; 45:12; 51:13; Job 9:8; Jeremiah
10:10-12; 32:17; 51:15; Acts 4:24; 14:15; 17:23, 24.)”
Smith, DR, 457-460.
“Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the
sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their
generations, for a perpetual covenant. It is a sign
between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six
days the LORD [His name] made [His office—Creator,
Maker] heaven and earth [His territory—all of
creation], and on the seventh day he rested, and was
refreshed.” Exodus 31:16,17.
“All who keep the seventh day signify by this act
that they are worshipers of Jehovah. The Sabbath is the
sign or man’s allegiance to God as long as there are

168

REVELATION 7
any upon the earth to serve Him.
The fourth
commandment is the only one of all the ten in which are
found both the name and the title of the Lawgiver. It is
the only one that shows by whose authority the law is
given. Thus it contains the seal of God, affixed to His
law as evidence of its authenticity and binding force.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 307.

gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin.’ Ex. 33:18,19;
34:6, 7. This is the fruit that God desires from His
people. In the purity of their characters, in the holiness
of their lives, in their mercy and loving-kindness and
compassion, they are to demonstrate that the ‘law of the
Lord is perfect, converting the soul.’ Ps. 19:7.” 6
Testimonies, 221.
“The seal of the living God will be placed upon
those only who bear a likeness to Christ in character.”
Review & Herald, 3/21/1895.
“Now is the time to prepare. The seal of God will
never be placed upon the forehead of an impure man or
woman. It will never be placed upon the forehead of
the ambitious, world-loving man or woman. It will
never be placed upon the forehead of men or women of
false tongues or deceitful hearts. All who receive the
seal must be without spot before God—candidates for
heaven.” 5 Testimonies, 216.

The fourth commandment contains the seal of God
“Moreover also I gave them My sabbaths, to be a
sign between me and them, that they might know that I
am the Lord that sanctify them.
“And hallow My sabbaths; and they shall be a sign
between me and you, that ye may know that I am the
Lord your God.” Ezekiel 20:12,20.
“Those who would have the seal of God in their
foreheads must keep the Sabbath of the fourth
commandment. This is what distinguishes them from
the disloyal, who have accepted a man-made institution
in the place of the true Sabbath. The observance of
God’s rest day is the mark of distinction between him
that serveth God and him that serveth Him not.”
Manuscript 27, 1899.
The Seal, a Mark of Sanctification.—
“And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount
Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand,
having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.”
Rev. 14:1.
“And the LORD descended in the cloud, and stood
with him there, and proclaimed the name of the
LORD.” Exodus 34:4.
“We are called to represent to the world the
character of God as it was revealed to Moses. In answer
to the prayer of Moses, ‘Show me Thy glory,’ the Lord
promised, ‘I will make all My goodness pass before
thee.’ ‘And the Lord passed by before him, and
proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and

“The high priest in the Israelite sanctuary wore a
turban with a plate over his forehead engraved with the
words, ‘Holiness to the Lord’ (Ex. 28:36-38),
indicating his special consecration to God. Since the
saints are called priests in Revelation (1:6; 5:10; 20:6),
the mark on their forehead suggests this dedication to
God.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 255.
The Sealing Work.—
“How does one receive the seal of the law? The
believer receives the seal of the law by his observance
of the true Sabbath. ‘Hallow my Sabbaths and they
shall be a sign [or seal] between me and you.’ Ezek.
20:20.” Cooke, #11-UR, 9
“Since we have now ascertained that the seal of
God is His holy Sabbath, with which His name is
identified, we are prepared to proceed with the
application. By the scenes introduced in the verses
before us—the four winds apparently about to blow,
bringing war and trouble upon the land, and this work
restrained until the servants of God should be sealed—
we are reminded of the houses of the Israelites marked
with the blood of the paschal lamb, and spared as the
destroying angel passed over to slay the firstborn of the
Egyptians. (Exodus 12.) We are also reminded of the
mark made by the man with a writer’s inkhorn on all
those who were to be spared by the men with the
slaughtering weapons who followed after. (Ezekiel 9.)
We conclude that the seal of God placed upon His
servants is some distinguishing mark, or religious
characteristic, though which they will be exempted
from the judgments of God that fall on the wicked
around them.
“As we have found the seal of God in the fourth
commandment, the inquiry follows, Does the observance
of that commandment involve any peculiarity in

169

GEMS FROM REVELATION
religious practice? —Yes, a very marked and striking
one. It is one of the most singular facts to be met with in
religious history that, in an age of such boasted gospel
light as the present, when the influence of Christendom,
through the combined influences of paganism and the
papacy, has been beguiled into the keeping of the first
day. A person has only to begin the observance of the
day enjoined in the commandment, when a mark of
peculiarity is upon him at once. He is distinct from
both the professedly religious and the secular world.”
Smith, DR, 460,461.
“This one thing I do, forgetting those things which
are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which
are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore, as
many as be perfect, be thus minded.” Phil. 3:14,15.
“We may talk of the blessings of the Holy Spirit,
but unless we prepare ourselves for its reception, of what
avail are our works? Are we striving with all our power
to attain to the stature of men and women in Christ? Are
we seeking for His fullness, ever pressing toward the
mark set before us—the perfection of His character?
When the Lord’s people reach this mark, they will be
sealed in their foreheads. Filled with the Spirit, they
will be complete in Christ, and the recording angel will
declare, ‘It is finished.’” Review & Herald, 6/10/1902.
“It is not a seal or mark that can be seen, but a
settling into the truth, both intellectually and
spiritually, so they cannot be moved.” (Manuscript
173, 1902). 4BC, 1161.
“ ‘In order to have the wax take a clear, strong
impression of the seal, you do not dash the seal upon it
in a hasty, violent way; you carefully place the seal on
the plastic wax and quietly, steadily press it down
until it has hardened in the mold. In like manner deal
with human souls.’ Ministry of Healing, 494. We see
that the sealing is a process that takes time. The
pressure of the seal upon those that are sealed
increases unto the mind reflects perfectly the seal’s
character. Then the sealing process is completed and
the stamp is removed.” PJ
“Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure,
having this seal. The Lord knoweth them that are His.
And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ
depart from iniquity.” 2 Tim. 2:19.
Seal Not Give to Members of Secret Societies.—
“I am very thankful to our gracious heavenly
Father that He has given you strength through His
imparted grace to cut yourself loose from the Free
Mason lodge and all that relates to the society. It was
not safe for you to have any part with this secret order.
Those who stand under the blood-stained banner of
Prince Immanuel cannot be united with the Free
Masons or with any secret organization. The seal of

the living God will not be placed upon anyone who
maintains such a connection after the light of truth
has shone upon his pathway. Christ is not divided, and
Christians cannot serve God and mammon. The Lord
says, ‘Come out from among them, and be ye separate,...
and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you,
and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be My sons
and My daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.’”
Evangelism, 622.
Sealing in Rev. 7, the Same as in Ezekiel 9.—
“The mighty angel is seen ascending from the east
(or sunrising). This mightiest of angels has in his hand
the seal of the living God, or of Him who alone can give
life, who can inscribe upon the foreheads the mark or
inscription, to whom shall be granted immortality,
eternal life. It is the voice of this highest angel that had
authority to command the four angels to keep in check
the four winds until this work was performed, and until
he should give the summons to let them loose.
“…This sealing of the servants of God is the
same that was shown to Ezekiel in vision.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 444,445.
The Sealing in Ezekiel 9.—
“And the LORD said unto him, go through the
midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set
a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and
that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst
thereof.” Ezekiel 9:4.
“The angel with the writer’s ink horn is to place a
mark upon the foreheads of all who are separated from
sin and sinners, and the destroying angel follows this
angel.” (Letter 12, 1886). 4BC, 1161.
The Sealing and the Exodus.—
“Only those who have the seal of God on their
foreheads will be protected against the coming wrath of
God and the Lamb (6:15-17). One cannot miss the
echo from Israel’s Exodus when a mark of blood from
the Passover lamb had to be placed over the door of
every Israelite house in Egypt to protect those who
trusted God from the plague of death (Exodus 12:7, 2223).” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 142.
“A mark is placed upon every one of God’s people
just as verily as a mark was placed over the doors of
the Hebrew dwellings, to preserve the people from the
general ruin. God declares, ‘I gave them my Sabbaths,
to be a sign between me and them, that they might
know that I am the Lord that sanctify them.’” Review
& Herald, 2/6/1900.
The Servants of Our God.—
“Before the final crisis breaks, God will draw a
sharp dividing line between the loyal and disloyal,
marking off plainly those who are to be eternally His.”
Thiele, OSIR, 109.

170

REVELATION 7
“The sealing angel is not commissioned from Jesus
to come and make men the servants of Christ, but to seal
those who are already His ‘servants.’ ...These are to
receive a special seal for the special purpose of assuring
them safety in the unprecedented time of trouble.”
Were, 144,000 Sealed!, 51.
“The ones to be sealed are already ‘servants of...
God’ (vs. 3), but their characters need to be fixed so that
being righteous, they will be righteous still (22:11),
incapable of compromise with the antichrist powers
(13:15-17; 14:1). It is through the sealing work that the
promise to Philadelphia is fulfilled: ‘I will keep you
from the hour of trial which is coming on the whole
world, to try those who dwell upon the earth’ (3:10).”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 261.
Identity of the Sealing Angel.—
“The angel ascending from the east, having the seal
of the living God, is a divine messenger in charge of a
work of reform to be carried on among men
involving the Sabbath of the fourth commandment.
The agents of this work on the earth are of course
ministers of Christ, for to men is given the
commission of instructing their fellow men in Bible
truth. But as there is order in the execution of all the
divine counsels, it seems not improbable that a literal
angel may have the charge and oversight of this reform.
“We have already noticed that the chronology of
this work locates it in our own time. This is further
evident from the fact that in the next scene after the
sealing of these servants of God, they appear before the
throne with palms of victory in their hands. The sealing
is therefore the last work to be accomplished for
them prior to their deliverance from the destruction
brought upon the work in connection with the second
advent.
“In Revelation 14 we find the same work again
brought to view under the symbol of an angel flying in
the midst of heaven with the most terrible warning that
ever fell upon the ears of men. While we shall speak of
this more fully when we reach that chapter, we refer to it
now because it is the last work to be accomplished for
the world before the coming of Christ, which is the next
event in order in that prophecy, and hence must
synchronize with the work here brought to view in
Revelation 7:1-3. The angel with the seal of the living
God is therefore the same as the third angel of
Revelation 14.
“This view strengthens the foregoing exposition of
the seal. As the result of the sealing work in
Revelation 7, a certain company are sealed with the
seal of the living God, while as the result of the third
angel’s message of Revelation 14 a company of people
obey all the ‘commandments of God.’ Revelation
14:12. It is the fourth commandment of the Decalogue
and that alone which the Christian world is openly
violating and teaching men to violate. That this is the
vital question in this message is evident from the fact
that the keeping of the commandments, including the

Lord’s Sabbath, is what distinguishes the servants of
God from those who worship the beast and receive his
mark. As will be hereafter shown, this mark is the
observance of a counterfeit Sabbath.
“After thus briefly noticing the main points of the
subject, we now come to the most striking feature of all.
In accordance with the foregoing chronological
argument, we find this work already in process of
fulfillment before our eyes. The third angel’s message
is going forth. The angel ascending from the east is
on his mission. The reform on the Sabbath question
has begun; and it is surely, though yet in comparative
silence, working its way through the land. It is destined
to agitate every country that receives the light of the
gospel, and it will result in bringing out a people
prepared for the soon coming of the Saviour, and sealed
for His everlasting kingdom. The sealing of the servants
of God by the angel mentioned in verse 3, is therefore in
recognition of their faithfulness in keeping the law of
God, who is identified in the fourth commandment as the
Creator of heaven and earth, and who established the
seventh-day Sabbath in commemoration of that great
work.” Smith, DR, 461-463.
“...The sealing angel of 7:2,3, who seals God’s
end-time people (while other angelic forces hold back
the winds of total trouble and strife), is to be identified
with the work of the third angel of 14:9-11. Both
have a worldwide message, both present that message in
the same time slot—prior to Christ’s return, and both
deal with the Sabbath truth. One heralds it as the seal
of God’s law of the Ten Commandments; the other
warns against the acceptance of a counterfeit
Sabbath, the mark of the beast.” Biblical Research
Inst., 1SOR, 245.
“The ascending angel represents a special message;
and as his work comes in after the signs of the second
advent of Christ, mentioned under the sixth seal, we
conclude that the sealing is identical with the work of
the third message of chap. 14:9-12. The third message,
bearing on its front the Sabbath of the Lord, arose in
obscurity, its first teachers being penniless, uneducated
men, and the positions taken by them were exceedingly
unpopular and crossing. But the work has gradually
moved on, gaining strength by every effort put forth by
its true friends, and its future power, light, and glory, are
symbolized in chap. 18:1-5.” White, James, War and the
Sealing, R&H, 4/25/1865.
“ANOTHER MESSENGER:
How shall we
understand this? Answer, men and women which are
moved upon by the word and spirit of God to execute
his will here upon the earth. Why cannot this
messenger or angel mean an invisible one? Answer,
because we never hear invisible angels or messengers
preaching with loud voices to men. See the text, also
Rev. 14:7, [‘Saying with A LOUD VOICE, Fear God,
and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is
come,’] what the Advent people cried with loud voices

171

GEMS FROM REVELATION
in 1842 and ’44. These in the 7th chapter are some of
the same messengers that have continued to pass on
through the three messages in [ch.] 14: and are now
‘keeping the commandments of God and the faith of
Jesus.’ 12th verse....
“He says, I saw another messenger: does he mean
to say there was but one? No: for in the 3rd verse the
same voice says, ‘till WE have sealed,’ etc., showing
the plural number. Look at the 14th chapter and 6th
verse. He says there, too, ‘I saw another,’ the same
expression. Now our history shows that there were
hundreds teaching from the same chronological charts
that William Miller was, all of one stamp. Then it was
the oneness of the message all on one theme, the
coming of the Lord Jesus at a certain time, 1844.
“So I understand our text, the work is one, the
Sabbath keepers ascending with the Sabbath, ‘the
seal of the living God.’” Bates, Seal of God, 17.
“Who among our teachers are awake and as faithful
stewards of the grace of God are giving the trumpet a
certain sound? Who are voicing the message of the
third angel, calling upon the world to make ready for
the great day of God? The message we bear has the
seal of the living God.” Counsels to Parents, Teachers,
and Students, 459.
“This mighty Sabbath truth, the sign between
God and man, has come up once more free from
sectarian shackles in Babylon since a cry at midnight:
though weak at first it has been increasing through
all opposition: shining in its strength and beauty,
showing that it is a test by which the true children of
God are to be tried, and lastly, ‘a seal of the living God,’
to seal them in their foreheads, for the great day of
God’s wrath! When he shall roar out of Zion and utter
his voice from Jerusalem, and shake the heavens, earth,
sea, and all nations.” Bates, Seal of God, 25-27.
“I then saw the third angel.
Said my
accompanying angel, ‘Fearful is his work. Awful is his
mission. He is the angel that is to select the wheat
from the tares, and seal, or bind, the wheat for the
heavenly garner. These things should engross the
whole mind, the whole attention.’” Early Writings, 118.
“These announcements [Rev. 18:1-5, the fourth
angel], uniting with the third angel’s message,
constitute the final warning to be given to the
inhabitants of the earth.” Great Controversy, 604.
Jesus Leads the Sealing Work.—
“Unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings.”
Malachi 4:2.
“The mighty angel is seen ascending from the east
(or sunrising). This mightiest of angels has in his hand
the seal of the living God, or of Him who alone can
give life, who can inscribe upon the foreheads the

mark or inscription, to whom shall be granted
immortality, eternal life. It is the voice of this highest
angel that had authority to command the four angels to
keep in check the four winds until this work was
performed, and until he should give the summons to let
them loose.” Testimonies to Ministers, 444,445.
“(Rev. 7:2 quoted.) Who is this?—the Angel of
the Covenant. He comes from the sunrising. He is the
DaySpring from on high. He is the Light of the
world.” Manuscript 59, 1895.
Holding the Winds (The Events of 1848, as Seen from
Earth).—
“Four angels were commissioned to hold the four
winds until the work was accomplished. Winds are a
symbol of war. In fulfillment of this we should expect to
find that during some period of the world’s history the
winds of war were miraculously held, while the work of
restoring the seal to the law of God was going forward in
the earth.
“There have always been upon the earth some
adherents of the seventh-day Sabbath; but the work
of restoring the breach which had been made in the
law was begun about 1845, by those who were then
watching for the second coming of the Lord. After the
time set for Him to come had passed, in the autumn of
1844, the attention of those who had expected Christ to
return to the earth at that time was directed to the
heavenly sanctuary, where by faith they saw Christ
officiating as their High Priest. As they followed the
Saviour in His work, ‘the temple of God was opened
in heaven, and there was seen in His temple the ark
of His testament.’ Their attention was attracted to the
law contained in that ark, and some of them recognized
the binding claim of the Sabbath of the Lord, and
accepted it as the seal of the law. About 1847-48 the
Sabbath began to be preached as the seal of the law
of the living God.
“In 1848 occurred one of the greatest upheavals in
the national affairs of Europe that had been for many
centuries.” Haskell, CAIS, 223,224.
“In 1848, mob violence again broke out in France.
For two years there had been a scarcity of food, and the
rabble rebelled against all authority. The king, Louis
Phillippe, abdicated, and escaped to England. Except for
the courage and firmness of a few French statesmen,
who guided affairs through this critical period, the
scenes of the Revolution of 1789, would have been
repeated. …Instead, the motion for a provisional
government, prevailed. …This was the eventful year of
1848.
“Judson, in his work entitled ‘Europe in the
Nineteenth Century,’ says this revolution ‘was like a
lighted match touched to the dry prairie grass after a
drought. The flame flashed at once throughout the
continent.’ In Germany ‘new ministries were installed
which were pledged to a liberal policy.’ ‘Prussia and
Austria were thoroughly disturbed by the movement for

172

REVELATION 7
freedom and national unity.’ In Germany nearly five
hundred men gathered, determined to organize a
provisional government. The disturbances in Prussia,
forced the king to swear to maintain a new constitution.
Both Hungary and Vienna revolted, and this furnished
the long coveted occasion for the Italians to throw off
Austrian rule. Thus, in a brief period of time, many
crowned heads of Europe submitted themselves to the
people.
“In the midst of the turmoil and strife, came a
sudden calm. No man could assign any reason for it.
Like the troubled waters of Gennesaret when Christ
spoke peace out of the storm, tumult and confusion
ceased. The four angels had been stationed on the earth
to hold the winds of strife till the servants of God could
be sealed. Europe had been wrought upon until the
power of an absolute monarchy was practically a
thing of the past. There was now an opportunity for
the ripening of the principles of the Reformation.
The closing work in the earth will be a continuation of
the movement set on foot when the darkness of the
Middle Ages was broken. God has prepared the earth
for the rapid spread of the Gospel, and the sealing work
is now going on.” Haskel, SSP, 129-132.

European Revolutions—1848
These revolutions were sparked by Karl Marx’s
Communist Manifesto, and his loud cry
ending the book: “Workers of the world UNITE!”
“The famous New York editor Horace Greely
spoke of the period as follows: ‘It was a wonder to us all
what started so suddenly that confusion among nations,
but it a greater wonder still what stopped it.’” Thiele,
OSIR, 139.
Holding the Winds (The Events of 1848, As Seen From
Heaven).—
“At the commencement of the holy Sabbath,
January 5, 1849, we engaged in prayer with Brother
Belden’s family at Rocky Hill, Connecticut, and the
Holy Ghost fell upon us. I was taken off in vision to
the most holy place, where I saw Jesus still
interceding for Israel....

“Then my attending angel directed me to the city
again, where I saw four angels winging their way to
the gate of the city. They were just presenting the
golden card to the angel at the gate when I saw another
angel flying swiftly from the direction of the most
excellent glory, and crying with a loud voice to the other
angels, and waving something up and down in his hand.
I asked my attending angel for an explanation of what I
saw. He told me that I could see no more then, but he
would shortly show me what those things that I then saw
meant.
“Sabbath afternoon one of our number was sick,
and requested prayers that he might be healed. We all
united in applying to the Physician who never lost a
case, and while healing power came down, and the sick
was healed, the Spirit fell upon me, and I was taken off
in vision.
“I saw four angels who had a work to do on the
earth, and were on their way to accomplish it. Jesus was
clothed with priestly garments. He gazed in pity on the
remnant, then raised His hands, and with a voice of deep
pity cried, ‘My blood, Father, My blood, My blood, My
blood!’ Then I saw an exceeding bright light come from
God, who sat upon the great white throne, and was shed
all about Jesus.
Then I saw an angel with a
commission from Jesus, swiftly flying to the four
angels who had a work to do on the earth, and
waving something up and down in his hand, and
crying with a loud voice, ‘Hold! Hold! Hold! Hold!
Until the servants of God are sealed in their
foreheads.’
“I asked my accompanying angel the meaning of
what I heard, and what the four angels were about to do.
He said to me that it was God that restrained the powers,
and that He gave His angels charge over things on the
earth; that the four angels had power from God to hold
the four winds, and that they were about to let them
go; but while their hands were loosening, and the
four winds were about to blow, the merciful eye of
Jesus gazed on the remnant that were not sealed, and He
raised His hands to the Father and pleaded with Him that
He had spilled His blood for them. Then another angel
was commissioned to fly swiftly to the four angels and
bid them hold, until the servants of God were sealed
with the seal of the living God in their foreheads.”
Early Writings, 37,38.
The Sealing Delayed.—
“The Lord God is a jealous God; yet He bears long
with the sins and transgressions of His people in this
generation. If the people of God had walked in His
counsel, the work of God would have advanced, the
messages of truth would have been borne to all people
that dwell on the face of the whole earth. ...But because
the people are disobedient, unthankful, unholy, as
were ancient Israel, time is pro-longed that all may
hear the last message of mercy proclaimed with a
loud voice. The Lord’s work has been hindered, the
sealing time delayed. Many have not heard the truth.
But the Lord will give them a chance to hear and be

173

GEMS FROM REVELATION
converted, and the great work of God will go forward.”
(Letter 106, 1897). Faith I Live By, 288.
“In this passage the winds are held back—the
day of the Lord is delayed—for a work to be done in
the lives of God’s people (cf. 2 Pet. 3:8-10). Here is one
factor that contributes to the apparent delay of the
Advent.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 261.
Holding the Winds Since 1848.—
“The time during which the winds are held could
not from the nature of the case be a time of profound
peace. This would not answer to the prophecy, for in
order to make it manifest that the winds are being held,
there must be disturbance, agitation, anger, and
jealousy among the nations, with occasional outbursts
of strife, like fitful gusts breaking away from the
imprisoned and struggling tempest. These outbursts
must be unexpectedly checked. Then, but not otherwise,
would it be evident to him who looked at events in the
light of prophecy, that for some good purpose the
restraining hand of Omnipotence was laid upon the
surging elements of strife and war. Such has been the
aspect of our times.
New and unlooked-for
complications have suddenly arisen throwing the
world into apparently inextricable confusion, and
threatening immediate and direful war, when
suddenly and unaccountably all subsided into quiet
again.” Smith, DR, 463,464.
“We are unable to understand or explain the ebb
and flow of ...war and peace [since 1848] on any other
basis than the revelation of Jesus Christ given through
the prophet John and recorded in the verses before us.
When it suits the plans and purposes of God to
permit the winds of strife to blow, then human nature
untouched by the grace of God is seen in unbridled
display. But when He says, ‘It is enough,’ the angel
cries, ‘Hold, Hold, Hold, Hold,’ and the strife ceases that
the work of God may proceed. Thus it will be until the
great consummation of the plan of salvation.
“Are you troubled, dear reader, over the turmoil
and confusion among the nations? Do you desire to
know what it all means? You will find the answer in the
picture presented in these verses. ‘The Most High
ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoever He will.’ Dan. 4:32. In His own chosen
time He will make ‘wars to cease unto the end of the
earth.’ Ps. 46:9.” Smith, DR, 465.
“The spirit of anarchy is permeating all nations,
and the outbreaks that from time to time excite the
horror of the world are but indications of the pent-up
fires of passion and lawlessness that, having once
escaped control, will fill the earth with woe and
desolation.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 102.
“Only a moment of time, as it were, yet re-mains.
But while already nation is rising against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom, there is not now a general

engagement. As yet the four winds are held until the
servants of God shall be sealed in their foreheads. Then
the powers of earth will marshal their forces for the last
great battle.” 6 Testimonies, 14.
“We hear now of earthquakes in divers places, of
fires, of tempests, of disasters by sea and land, of
pestilence, of famine. What weight do these signs have
upon you? This is only the beginning of what shall
be.... If such scenes as this are to come, such
tremendous judgments on a guilty world, where will be
the refuge for God’s people? How will they be sheltered
until the indignation be overpast? John sees the
elements of nature—earthquake, tempest, and political
strife—represented as being held by four angels. These
winds are under control until God gives the word to
let them go.” Testimonies to Ministers, 444.
“The restraining Spirit of God is even now being
withdrawn from the world. Hurricanes, storms,
tempests, fire and flood, disasters by sea and land,
follow each other in quick succession. Science seeks to
explain all these. The signs thickening around us,
telling of the near approach of the Son of God, are
attributed to any other than the true cause. Men
cannot discern the sentinel angels restraining the four
winds that they shall not blow until the servants of God
are sealed; but when God shall bid His angels loose the
winds, there will be such a scene of strife as no pen can
picture.” 6 Testimonies, 408.
“I saw that the four angels would hold the four
winds until Jesus’ work was done in the sanctuary, and
then will come the seven last plagues.” Early Writings,
36.
When Are the Servants of Our God Sealed?—
“The sealing takes place during a time of
suspended wrath. The judgments of God on the wicked
cities of the plain were held back till Lot and his family
were safe. To them the message was given: ‘Haste
thee, escape thither; for I cannot do anything till thou
come thither.’ (Gen. 19:22).” Bunch, TR, 57.
“If the light of truth has been presented to you,
revealing the Sabbath of the fourth commandment, and
showing that there is no foundation in the Word of God
for Sunday observance, and yet you still cling to the
false Sabbath, refusing to keep holy the Sabbath
which God calls ‘My holy day,’ you receive the mark
of the beast. When does this take place? When you
obey the decree that commands you to cease from
labor on Sunday and worship God, while you know
that there is not a word in the Bible showing Sunday to
be other than a common working day, you consent to
receive the mark of the beast, and refuse the seal of
God.” (Review & Herald, 7/13/1897). Evangelism 235.
“The following verses show that the sealing takes
places during the Loud Cry of the Third Angel (also

174

REVELATION 7
known as The Fourth Angel’s Message):
“a) ‘And the glory of the God of Israel was gone
up from the cherub, whereupon he was, to the
threshold of the house. And he called to the man
clothed with linen, which had the writer’s inkhorn by
his side. 4 And the Lord said unto him, Go through
the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem,
and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that
sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be
done in the midst thereof.’ Ezekiel 9:3,4.
“When does the sealing begin? When the glory of
God goes up from the cherub to the threshold of the
house. Notice this parallel verse, which occurs at
exactly the same time.
“b) ‘And the glory of the Lord went up from the
cherub, and stood over the threshold of the house;
and the house was filled with the cloud, and the
COURT WAS FULL OF THE BRIGHT-NESS OF
THE LORD’S GLORY. And the sound of the
cherubim’s wings was heard even to the outer court,
as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh.’
Ezekiel 10:4,5.
“The courtyard of the heavenly sanctuary is the
earth. The earth will be lightened with the Lord’s
glory (character). This is when the sealing and the
loud cry of the Fourth Angel takes place. Notice this
parallel verse:
“c) ‘And after these things I saw another angel
come down from heaven, having great power; and
the earth was lightened with his glory.’ Rev. 18:1.
“This is when the sealing occurs.
“d) ‘And behold, the glory of the God of Israel
came from the way of the east: and his voice was like
a noise of many waters: and the earth shined with his
glory.’ Ezekiel 43:2.
“This fourth parallel verse again talks about the
same time period when the earth shines with the Lord’s
glory. And this glory comes from the ‘way of the east.’
This is the same direction that the ascending angel
with the seal of God comes from.” PJ
“When the final test shall be brought to bear upon
men, then the line of distinction will be drawn between
those who serve God and those who serve Him not.
While the observance of the false Sabbath in compliance
with the law of the state, contrary to the fourth
commandment, will be an avowal of allegiance to a
power that is in opposition to God, the keeping of the
true Sabbath, in obedience to God’s law, is an evidence
of loyalty to the Creator. While one class, by accepting
the sign of submission to earthly powers, receive the
mark of the beast, the other choosing the token of
allegiance to divine authority, receive the seal of
God.” Great Controversy, 605.
“By the decree enforcing the institution of the
papacy in violation of the law of God, our nation will
disconnect herself from righteousness.
...As the
approach of the Roman armies was a sign to the
disciples of the impending destruction of Jerusalem,

so may this apostasy be a sign to us that the limit of
God’s forbearance is reached, that the measure of our
nation’s iniquity is full, and that the angel of mercy is
about to take her flight, never to return. ...The mark of
deliverance will be set upon the men who keep God’s
commandments, who revere His law, and who refuse
the mark of the beast or of his image.” 5 Testimonies,
451,452.
“I was pointed down to the time when the third
angel’s message was closing. The power of God had
rested upon His people; they had accomplished their
work and were prepared for the trying hour before them.
They had received the latter rain, or refreshing from
the presence of the Lord, and the living testimony
had been revived. The last great warning had sounded
everywhere, and it had stirred up and enraged the
inhabitants of the earth who would not receive the
message.
“I saw angels hurrying to and fro in heaven. An
angel with a writer’s inkhorn by his side re-turned
from the earth and reported to Jesus that his work was
done, and the saints were numbered and sealed. Then
I saw Jesus, who had been ministering before the ark
containing the ten commandments, throw down the
censer. He raised His hands, and with a loud voice said,
‘It is done.’” Early Writings, 279.
“When Jesus leaves the sanctuary, then they who
are holy and righteous will be holy and righteous still;
for all their sins will then be blotted out, and they will
be sealed with the seal of the living God. But those
that are unjust and filthy will be unjust and filthy still.”
Early Writings, 48.
“(Dan. 12:1 quoted). When this time of trouble
comes, every case is decided: there is no longer
probation, no longer mercy for the impenitent. The seal
of the living God is upon His people. This small
remnant, unable to defend themselves in the deadly
conflict with the powers of earth that are marshaled by
the dragon host, make God their defense.”
5
Testimonies, 213.
When The Winds are Let Loose.—
“I saw angels hurrying to and fro in heaven. An
angel with a writer's inkhorn by his side returned from
the earth and reported to Jesus that his work was done,
and the saints were numbered and sealed. Then I saw
Jesus, who had been ministering before the ark
containing the ten commandments, throw down the
censer. He raised His hands, and with a loud voice said,
‘It is done.’ And all the angelic host laid off their
crowns as Jesus made the solemn declaration, ‘He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let
him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.’
Every case had been decided for life or death.’ Early
Writings, 279,280.
“Here we see that when the sealing work is

175

GEMS FROM REVELATION
completed, probation closes. It is at this time that the
four winds are let loose.” PJ
“Just before we entered it (the time of trouble),
we all received the seal of the living God. Then I saw
the four angel’s cease to hold the four winds. And I
saw famine, pestilence and sword, nation rose against
nation, and the whole world was in confusion.” DayStar, 3/14/1846.
Four Angels to Hurt Earth and Sea [Not Trees].—
“In Rev. 7:2, it is declared that the four angels were
given [power] to hurt the earth and the sea. The trees are
not mentioned. The trees, therefore, are not hurt after
the close of probation. They survive safely. They
represent those that are sealed.” PJ
“Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel
of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor
sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But his delight is in the
law of the Lord; and in his law doth he meditate day and
night. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers
of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his
leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth
shall prosper. The ungodly are not so: but are like the
chaff which the wind driveth away.” Ps. 1:1-4.
“Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord,
and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a tree
planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by
the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her
leaf shall be green: and shall not be careful in the year
of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.”
Jer. 17:7,8.
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me; because the
Lord hath anointed me ...to appoint unto them that
mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the
oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be
glorified.” Is. 61:1,3.
“If we have been mercifully shielded from
accident, if lightning and tempest have passed us by
unharmed, if the waves that talked with death have
submerged the proud vessels but have brought the one
on which we sailed to the harbor, let us bow in
gratitude to God and thank Him that the power of
mighty angels, at His bidding, have held back the
winds and waves that they did not destroy.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 15, 221.
(Prayed) With a Loud Voice, Saying, Hurt Not!—
“Another angel, ascending from the east, cried to
them, saying: ‘Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor
the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God
in their foreheads.’ This points out the work we have
now to do. A vast responsibility is devolving upon men
and women of prayer throughout the land to petition

that God will sweep back the cloud of evil and give a
few more years of grace in which to work for the
Master.” 5 Testimonies, 717,718.
“Let us cry to the God of heaven in earnest, united
prayer, for the angels to hold the four winds till
missionaries shall be sent to all parts of the world, till
we have proclaimed the warning against disobedience to
the law of Jehovah, and against worshiping the beast and
his image.” Review & Herald, 12/18/1888.
“Let our prayers ascend to God that the four
angels may still hold the four winds, that they may
not blow to injure or destroy until the last warning
has been given to the world. ...If our people were half
awake, if they realized the nearness of the events
portrayed in the Revelation, a reformation would be
wrought in our churches, and many more would believe
the message.” 6 Testimonies, 61,62.
“I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for
all men; For kings, and for all that are in authority; that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty.” 2 Timothy 2:1,2.
In Their Foreheads.—
“The forehead and hand as the sites for receiving
the mark and the seal are significant. These terms are
first mentioned in the Pentateuch in connection with the
commands of God: ‘You shall bind them as a sign
upon your hand, and they shall be as frontlets
between your eyes’ (Deut. 6:8).
“The context indicates that this means the total
response of the mind, emotions, and behaviour: ‘You
shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and
with all your soul, and with all your might’ in every
activity of life, whether teaching or talking, sitting or
walking, lying down or rising up (Deut. 6:5-8). The
forehead symbolized the mind, the thought-life; and
the right hand indicates the deed or action. Both rival
powers wish to control the mind and behaviour. The
followers of the Lamb all have the name of God upon
their foreheads; whereas the followers of the beast have
the mark on the forehead (indicating belief, allegiance)
or the hand only (indicating forced obedience without
mental assent).” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 256.
“The seal of God and the character of God are
inseparable. In Rev. 14:1 the sealed company are said to
have the ‘Father’s name written in their foreheads.’
Seal, sign, mark, and name are synonymous terms. God
signs, marks or seals with His name, and name signifies
character. The sealing is done because of victory over
sin and the restoration of the image or character of God
in the hearts, minds, or foreheads of His people. The
forehead was the place where the high priest wore the
golden plate with the inscription, ‘Holiness to the
Lord.’ The seal is the sign of a holy character. It is
placed in the forehead where all can see it.

176

REVELATION 7
“The Sabbath command is the only positive
injunction in the Decalogue which tells us to do
something that the world can see as evidence that we
worship the Creator. ...That Sabbath observance is an
important part of the sealing message is evident from
Rev. 14:6-14. Those who obey God and possess His
seal or mark, also warn against a false or counterfeit sign
or mark which is the outward sign of disobedience and
rebellion.” Bunch, TR, 57,58.
“The Lord has shown me the danger of letting
our minds be filled with worldly thoughts and cares.
I saw that some minds are led away from present truth
and a love of the Holy Bible by reading other exciting
books; others are filled with perplexity and care for what
they shall eat, drink, and wear. Some are looking too far
off for the coming of the Lord. Time has continued a
few years longer than they expected; therefore they think
it may continue a few years more, and in this way their
minds are being led from present truth, out after the
world. In these things I saw great danger; for if the mind
is filled with other things, present truth is shut out,
and there is no place in our foreheads for the seal of
the living God.” Early Writings, 58.
THE THREE SEALINGS OF THE SAINTS
Jesus
The
The
The Final
Christ
Believer Sabbathkeeper
Remnant
1—The Seal of
2—The Seal
3—The Seal
of Redemption
the Holy Spirit
Of the Law
At His
At
By True
At Close of
BapConSabbath
Probation
tism
version
Observance
An Inward
An Outward
An Invisible
Sign of
Sign of
Sign of
Acceptance
Creation and
Victory and
with God
Sanctification
Deliverance
An Assurance of:
An Assurance An Assurance
of:
of:
Owner- Salvation: One’s Origin: Protection:
Forgiven
Created in
From seven
ship:
by God.
that he
God’s image. last plagues.
Ownerbelongs
One’s
Ownership:
ship: A
to God.
Restoration: Receives
Son of
Restored to
God’s name.
MessiGod
God’s image. Destiny:
ahship:
InheriThat He
New
tance:
was
Jerusalem.
Will
God’s
Fitness:
enter the
annoint
Christ’s
kingdom
ed.
name on him.
of God.
Maturity and
stability
of
character.
From: Cooke #11-UR

were sealed: and there were sealed an
hundred and forty and four thousand of all
the tribes of the children of Israel.
Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the tribe of Rueben were
sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad
were sealed twelve thousand.
Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the tribe of Nephthalim were
sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Manasses were sealed twelve thousand.
Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed
twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were
sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Issachar were sealed twelve thousand.
Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed
twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph were
sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.
Hundred and Forty and Four Thousand Sealed.—
“And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on mount
Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand,
having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.”
Rev. 14:1.
“Soon we heard the voice of God like many waters,
which gave us the day and hour of Jesus’ coming. The
living saints, 144,000 in number, knew and understood
the voice, while the wicked thought it was thunder and
an earthquake…. The 144,000 were all sealed and
perfectly united. On their foreheads were the words of
God, New Jerusalem, and a glorious star containing
Jesus’ new name.” 1 Testimonies, 59.
When the 144,000 are Sealed.—
“The fact that all who are sealed at the
commencement of this time of trouble are afterward
seen standing upon Mount Zion with the Lamb, is
proof that their probation closes with the commencement
of this scene of trouble. Compare Rev.7:4; 14:1. In
other words, they are then accounted worthy to escape
the things that are to come to pass, and to stand before
the Son of man. Luke 21:36. The very time when they
are thus accounted worthy to stand before the Saviour, is
at the close of our Lord’s priesthood; and the time of
trouble itself comes when that priesthood is
exchanged for his kingly office.” Andrews, JEO,
90,91.
(See also Rev. 14:1-5 for additional description of
the 144,000.)

REVELATION 7:4-8
And I heard the number of them which

Of All the Tribes of the Children of Israel.—
“The number sealed is here stated to be one
hundred forty-four thousand. From the fact that twelve

177

GEMS FROM REVELATION
thousand are sealed from each of the twelve tribes, many
suppose that this work must have been accomplished as
far back at least as the beginning of the Christian Era,
when these tribes were literally in existence. They do
not see how it can apply to our own time, when every
trace of distinction between these tribes has been so long
and so completely obliterated. We refer such persons to
the opening language of the Epistle of James: ‘James, a
servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the
twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.
My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers
temptations.’ Those whom James here addresses are
Christians, for they are his brethren. Some were
converts from paganism and others were Jews, yet they
are all included in the twelve tribes. How can this be?
Paul explains in Romans 11:17-24. In the striking figure
of grafting which the apostle there introduces, the tame
olive tree represents Israel.
“Some of the branches, the natural descendants of
Abraham, were broken off because of unbelief in Christ.
Through faith in Christ the wild olive scions, the
Gentiles, are grafted into the tame olive stock, and
thus the twelve tribes are perpetuated. Here we find
an explanation of the language of the same apostle:
‘They are not all Israel which are of Israel,’ and ‘he is
not a Jew, which is one outwardly,... but he is a Jew,
which is one inwardly.’ Romans 9:6-8; 2:28,29. So
we find on the gates of the New Jerusalem—which is a
New Testament, or Christian, city—the names of the
twelve tribes of the children of Israel.
On the
foundations of this city are inscribed the names of the
twelve apostles of the Lamb. (Revelation 21:12-14.)
“If the twelve tribes belonged exclusively to the
Jewish era, the more natural order would have been to
have their names on the foundations, and those of the
twelve apostles on the gates; but no, the names of the
twelve tribes are on the gates. As through these gates, so
inscribed, all the redeemed hosts will go in and out, so
all the redeemed will be reckoned as belonging to
these twelve tribes, whether on earth they were Jews
or Gentiles.” Smith, DR, 465-467.
“And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather
yourselves together, that I may tell you that which
shall befall you in the last days. Gather yourselves
together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto
Israel your father.”
Genesis 49:1,2.
(See also
Deuteronomy 33.)
Twelve Tribes.—
“Twelve is God’s kingdom number, as many
students of Bible numbers agree. In ancient Israel there
were 12 tribes; 12 rods; 12 spies; 12 stones gathered
from Jordan; 12 stones in the high priest’s breastplate....
“The use of 12 as the number of Christ’s kingdom
is the same in the Old and the New Testaments. Jesus
ordained 12 apostles. There are 12 gates in the New
Jerusalem. ‘and at the gates 12 angels, and the names
written thereon, which are the names of the 12 tribes
of Israel.... And the wall of the city had 12

foundations, and in them the names of the 12 apostles
of the Lamb.... He measured the wall thereof, 144 (12
X 12) cubits.’ (Rev. 21:12-17). After picturing the 12
foundations of the city we read: ‘the twelveth was
amethyst.
And the 12 gates were 12 pearls.’
(v.20,21). The tree of life also bears ‘twelve manner of
fruits.’ (22:2). The word twelve occurs 10 times in
John’s description of the New Jerusalem, but it is
obvious that the 144 is intended to be understood as 12
X 12 and thus make up the 12 times that 12 comes into
this picture of the capital city of the kingdom of Christ.”
Were, 144,000 Sealed!, 99,100.
The Names of the Tribes.—
“The Lord names individuals according to their
character, and since He has chosen the names of the
twelve sons of Jacob,–whence came the twelve tribes of
Israel–as names of the twelve divisions of the one
hundred and forty-four thousand, there must be
something in the character of Jacob’s sons and of the
twelve tribes of Israel worthy of careful study.”
Haskell, CAIS, 174.
“Character alone is the basis of the sealing
work. The promise of the new earth was made to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but the literal descendants of
these patriarchs, failed to develop a character which
would place upon them a seal of the living God, and they
were rejected as a nation. Then the Gentiles, like
branches from a wild olive tree, were, contrary to nature,
grafted into the Jewish root; and those who bear fruit
unto righteousness will partake of the inheritance once
promised to Jews of the flesh. The places in the twelve
tribes, which might have been filled by the direct
descendants of Abraham, will be occupied by
children by adoption. The attention of all heaven is
directed toward this sealing work; for when it is over, the
plan of redemption is completed. The one hundred and
forty-four thousand are divided into classes called by the
names of the twelve tribes of Israel. These are
character names, and those who develop the character,
will be classed under the tribe bearing a name
indicating that character.” Haskel, SSP, 136.
The Tribe of Judah.—
“The records state that Judah, the fourth son,
‘prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the
Chief Ruler.’ Jacob, upon his deathbed, pronounced the
prophetic words: ‘The scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until
Shiloh come; and unto Him shall the gathering of the
people be.’
“How did Judah prevail above his brethren, and
thus inherit the spiritual birthright? This is a subject
worthy of careful study by everyone who desires a part
in the great spiritual birthright by which we today may
become heirs of the eternal inheritance. We have no
record of Judah’s ever prevailing over his brethren by
force of arms. But a careful study of the lives of the
twelve sons of Jacob, reveals the fact that Judah was a

178

REVELATION 7
leader. When he offered to stand as surety for
Benjamin, Jacob consented to let Benjamin go into
Egypt, although Reuben’s offer had been refused.
When Jacob and his family arrived in Egypt, Jacob ‘sent
Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto
Goshen.’ When the sons of Jacob were in great
perplexity because the ruler of Egypt demanded
Benjamin as a hostage, it was Judah who pleaded their
cause so earnestly that Joseph threw off his disguise, and
made himself known unto his brethren.
“By strict integrity to principle, Judah had won the
confidence of his father and his brethren. The whole
story is told in the blessing pronounced over Judah by
his aged father, just before his death: ‘Judah, thou art
he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be
in the neck of thine enemies; thy father’s children
shall bow down before thee.’
“…Judah won the respect of his brethren in the
everyday contact of the home life. This confidence was
not born in a moment; but day by day his strict integrity
won their respect, until of their own free will, not from
force of circumstances, they praised him and bowed
down before him. A life of conflict and victory over
the selfish tendencies of his own heart, is bound up in
the words, ‘Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren
shall praise.’
“…Twelve thousand of the one hundred and fortyfour thousand will enter the holy city under the name of
Judah—persons who, in times of perplexity, have been
recognized by their brethren as trusted leaders.
“…Judah was an independent tribe. After the death
of Saul, they did not wait for others to acknowledge
David as king, but crowned him king of Judah, and
David reigned over them seven and one-half years
before he was crowned king over all Israel.”
“…The tribe of Judah furnished a galaxy of names
noted in sacred history. No other tribe furnished the
world so many mighty men of God. At the head of the
list is the one incomparable name—Jesus of Nazareth,
the Lion of the tribe of Judah.” Haskell, CAIS, 186188.
The Tribe of Reuben.—
“And of unstable Reuben it is said, ‘Let Reuben
live, and not die.’ He became the ‘excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power.’” Haskel, SSP,
138.
“Reuben… means ‘Behold a son,’ indicating that
all this company are sons of God.” Bunch, TR,69.
“It was not sins committed against the public that
debarred Reuben from the privileges of the first-born; he
proved himself untrue in the home life. He had no
regard for the honor of his own family. His father and
his brethren could not trust him in their private life.
“…At the time of the battle of Megiddo, which is
in many respects a type of the final battle of
Armageddon, it is stated that ‘in the divisions of
Reuben there were great searchings of heart.’ Here is

the secret of the whole matter. There are multitudes of
men and women in the world today with characters like
Reuben. They are ‘unstable as water,’ with no power
in themselves to do any good thing; but if they will
begin earnestly to search their hearts, they will
discover their own weakness; and if they turn to God,
He will come to their rescue, and pronounce over them,
as He did over Reuben of old, ‘Let such a one live and
not die.’” Haskell, CAIS, 187,176,177.
The Tribe of Gad.—
“The prophetic words of his dying father open up a
volume in the life and character of this son: ‘Gad, a
troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at
the last.’ Gad may be taken as a type of the backslider,
who is overcome by a troop of temptations, but awakens
to his danger; and in the strength given him from God,
overcomes at last, and enters the pearly gates of the New
Jerusalem, rejoicing in the Lord.
“The secret of the Gadites’ being victorious over
their enemies, is given in the account of one of their
great battles: ‘They cried to God in the battle, and He
was entreated of them; because they put their trust in
Him.’
“…Twelve thousand of the one hundred forty-four
thousand will also be marshaled under the name of
Gad—twelve thousand, who arise from backslidings
and defeat, acknowledge their transgressions, claim
the promises of God, wash their robes in the blood of
the Lamb, and enter as victors the city of God.”
Haskell, CAIS, 194,195.
The Tribe of Asher.—
“Since the name Asher …is given to one division
of the one hundred and forty-four thousand, the character
of Asher is the most important thing for us to consider;
and as little or nothing is recorded of his life, we shall
have to take the prophetic words of Jacob and Moses as
a guide in the study….
“The precious promise, ‘As thy days, so shall thy
strength be,’ was given to Asher, the one Jacob said
‘should yield royal dainties,’ and of whom Moses said,
‘Let him dip his foot in oil.’ In ordinary life the one
who dips his foot in oil, and apparently passes smoothly
through life, receives little sympathy. Sympathy is
usually extended to the one who does not have his feet
oiled, and experiences all the roughness by the way; but
God knows that the person who holds up his head
and goes cheerily through life, giving ‘royal dainties’
of kind words of cheer to others, often in reality
experiences heavier trials than the one who sighs and
cries on account of the roughness of the way; and to
them He says, ‘As thy days, so shall thy strength be.’
“It is a glorious thing to dip the foot in oil! Oil is a
symbol of the Holy Spirit; the one whose feet even, are
anointed with the Spirit of God, will pass over the rough
places in life with a heart full of praise and thanksgiving.
Under the feet of such a one will be iron and brass–a
firm foundation. He will not sink amid the pitfalls of
life, for God assures him, ‘As thy days, so shall thy

179

GEMS FROM REVELATION
strength be.’
“…When Hezekiah held his great Passover and
invited all Israel to join in celebrating the feast at
Jerusalem, some entire tribes laughed at the messengers
and mocked them; ‘nevertheless divers of Asher...
humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.’ It
takes moral stamina to be true to God when the surging
masses on every side are rejecting the light of God’s
world. That spirit of faithfulness never left the tribe, and
when the Saviour entered His temple for the first time in
human form, of the two persons in all the city of
Jerusalem who were in a spiritual condition to recognize
the ‘Babe as the Redeemer of the world,’ one was the
prophetess Anna of the tribe of Asher.” Haskell, CAIS,
198-200.
The Tribe of Naphtali.—
“Naphtali has a precious gift that every one may
covet: ‘He giveth goodly words.’ Unencumbered by
many of the heavy burdens and responsibilities borne by
some of his brethren, he has time to find those who are
downcast and discouraged, and by his ‘goodly words’ to
encourage the despondent and comfort the sorrowful.
“Naphtali does not represent the unruly tongue that
‘is set on fire of hell;’ far from it, for he ‘giveth goodly
words,’ and ‘pleasant words are as a honeycomb,
sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.’ Let no one
think because Naphtali spoke ‘goodly words’ that he
represented a light, unstable character; for in the great
typical battle of Megiddo, ‘Naphtali were a people that
jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places
of the field.’ Judges 5:18.
“The literal translation of the original is very
emphatic, ‘they desolated their lives to death,’ they
were determined to conquer or die, and therefore
plunged into the thickest of the battle. The cause of
God was more precious to them than life, and they did
not shrink from fighting in the high places of the field,
exposed to the fiery darts of the enemy, if the success of
the battle demanded it.
“There will be twelve thousand of the tribe of
Naphtali that throughout all eternity will ‘follow the
Lamb whithersoever He goeth;’ twelve thousand that
during their probationary life on this earth spoke ‘goodly
words,’ and in difficult places, fearlessly stood firm at
their post of duty, ready to sacrifice their lives rather
than compromise the cause of God.” Haskell, CAIS,
191,192.
“Napthalim means ‘wrestlings’ or one who
wrestles and prevails. ‘With great wrestlings have I
wrestled with my sister and have prevailed.’ (Gen.
30:8.) It signifies that this group are prevailers or
overcomers.” Bunch, TR, 70.
The Tribe of Manasseh.—
“Manasseh, meaning ‘forgetting’—representing
those who forgive and forget.—replaces Dan in the list
of the tribes of Israel given in Rev. 7.” Were, 144,000
Sealed!, 102.

“The blessing of the Lord was prized by Manasseh
and his descendants. Although they lived at a distance
from the center of the nation, and from the temple, and
though they had become a part of the northern kingdom,
yet they took an interest in all the reforms instituted
by the good kings of Judah. When King Asa broke
down the idols and renewed the worship of the Lord,
they came to him ‘in abundance’ from Manasseh,
‘when they saw that the Lord his God was with him.’
“When Hezekiah held his great Passover feast,
representatives from Manasseh humbled their hearts and
came and partook of the Passover. They also joined in
the work of breaking down the images in their own
territory.
“The work of reform in the days of Josiah was also
carried to the land of Manasseh. They did not lose
their interest in the temple at Jerusalem, but gave of
their means to restore it after its defilement during the
reigns of Manasseh and Amon. It is supposed that the
eightieth Psalm was written by some inspired penman of
the house of Joseph during one of these seasons of
reform.
“…The blessing of the Angel rested upon
Manasseh, and while Ephraim and Manasseh were the
names of the two portions given to Joseph in the earthly
possession, the names given to the two divisions of the
one hundred and forty-four thousand in the kingdom of
God will be Manasseh and Joseph. The name of
Manasseh is thus immortalized, while that of Ephraim
sinks into oblivion.” Haskell, CAIS, 218,219.
The Tribe of Simeon.—
“It may be thought strange by some that the name
of a man who was famous only for murder and sin,
should be inscribed on one of the gates of the Holy City
of God, and that one twelfth of the one hundred and
forty-four thousand will enter the city of God bearing the
name of that man. But the fact that one has
committed sin will never exclude him from the
kingdom of God. All have sinned. It is unconfessed
sin that debars any one from receiving eternal life. Jesus
is the only one born of woman that is sinless. He alone
of all the family of Adam will throughout eternity have
an uncovered life record. No part of His record will be
covered. But our life record, marred by sin, will be
covered by Christ’s righteousness. The blood of Christ
can cleanse from sin of the deepest dye, and even
murderers can enter heaven; not as murderers, but as
pardoned sinners; for ‘though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool.’ Gathered out of the
sin and wickedness of the last generation, there will
be twelve thousand redeemed ones, who through the
virtue of the blood of Christ, will be grafted into the
tribe of Simeon, and throughout eternity will represent
that tribe on the earth made new.” Haskell, CAIS,
180,181.
The Tribe of Levi.—

180

REVELATION 7
“Their fidelity to Jehovah when the other tribes
apostatized, secured their appointment to the sacred
service of the sanctuary….” Patriarchs & Prophets,
235.
“Character is formed by the way individuals meet
the common events of everyday life; but it is tested by
the way they meet the crises of life. At Sinai the
people of God passed through one of the greatest crises
in the history of the church, when the whole multitude of
Israel worshiped the golden calf. It was at this time,
when even God Himself was ready to destroy Israel,
that the tribe of Levi came forward, and by their
faithfulness helped to save the cause of God. When
Moses came down from the mount and found the
children of Israel worshiping the golden calf, he stood in
the gate of the camp, and said, ‘Who is on the Lord’s
side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi
gathered themselves together unto him. And he said
unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, put every
man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate
to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man
his neighbor. And the children of Levi did according to
the word of Moses.’
“At the time of this crisis the honor of God and His
cause was dearer to the Levites than all worldly
connections; neither brothers, companions, or
friends, stood between them and their duty to God.
As a reward for their faithfulness, the priesthood—
portion of the birthright—was given to the sons of
Levi….
“Jacob on his deathbed denounced Levi’s sins; but
Moses in his parting blessing, extolled him above all
others. Of Levi he said, ‘Let thy Thummim and thy
Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at
Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the
waters of Meribah; who said unto his father and to
his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he
acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own
children: for they have observed Thy word, and kept
Thy covenant.
They shall teach Jacob Thy
judgments, and Israel Thy law: they shall put
incense before Thee, and whole burnt-sacrifice upon
Thine altar. Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept
the work of his hands.’
“…One twelfth of the one hundred forty-four
thousand will be marshaled under the name of Levi.
They will be persons who, on account of sin, merited
only curses, but who forsook sin; and while men all
around them were wavering and falling, they stood
true to God and His cause, and will receive a rich
blessing from the hands of a merciful God.” Haskell,
CAIS, 182-185.
“But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok,
that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the
children of Israel went astray from me, they shall
come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall
stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood,

saith the Lord GOD: They shall enter into my sanctuary,
and they shall come near to my table, to minister unto
me, and they shall keep my charge.” Ezekiel 44:15,16.
The Tribe of Issachar.—
“Of the children of Issachar, which were men that
had understanding of the times, to know what Israel
ought to do.” 1 Chron. 12:32.
“Jacob likens him to the patient ass or donkey,
bearing two such heavy burdens that he couches down
beneath them. The fact that this is not a common
animal, but a ‘strong’ one, indicates the strength of
Issachar’s character. ‘Issachar is a strong ass couching
down between two burdens.’ Then the patriarch
reveals the secret of Issachar’s self-sacrificing life by
giving the motive that actuated him in carrying the
double burdens: ‘He saw that rest was good, and the
land that it was pleasant; and ISSACHAR bowed his
shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.’
“Many lose the blessing by murmuring and
complaining when they are required to carry double
burdens. But Issachar was sustained by the thought of
the pleasant land in store and the rest by and by. The
same hope will sustain burden-bearers at the present
day.”
“Issachar had clear discernment. The record
states, ‘The children of Issachar were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel
ought to do.’ They represented men that bore heavy
responsibilities, pillars in the cause of God. They were
not like Zebulun, expert warriors, ready to rush
impulsively into the fiercest of the fight on a moment’s
notice; but they were able to plan the battle, and to
carry the burden of the work.
“It takes all the different phases of Christian
character to represent the perfect character of Christ.
The burden-bearer fills as important a place in the work
of God as the kingly Judah or the Levitical teacher.”
Haskell, CAIS, 202,203.
The Tribe of Zebulon.—
“Deborah, in her song of triumph after the battle of
Megiddo, says that among the tribes of Zebulun were
those who handled ‘the pen of the writer,’ or as the
margin reads, ‘they that draw with the pen.’ This would
indicate that they were a literary or artistic people.
“In the battle which was a type of the great battle of
Armageddon, Zebulun ‘jeopardized their lives unto the
death in the high places of the field;’ or, according to
the marginal reading, they ‘exposed to reproach their
lives.’ God and His cause were more precious to them
than their own lives or reputation.
“Twelve thousand of the one hundred and fortyfour thousand will enter the city of God under the name
of Zebulun—twelve thousand who, when the enemies of
the Lord are numerous and popular, will expose ‘to
reproach their lives unto the death in the high places
of the field.’ There will be men in high places who, like
those of Zebulun of old, ‘handle the pen of the writer,’

181

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and wield a wide influence; these men, when the cause
of God is in a crisis, will rise up and ‘jeopardize their
lives unto the death in the high places,’ thus bringing
victory to the cause of God.
“It was pure love that actuated Zebulun in that
ancient battle, for Deborah says, ‘They took no gain of
money.’
“…Over two hundred years later there was another
crisis in the cause of God. Saul was dead, and the true
hearted in Israel ‘came to David to Hebron, to turn the
kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of the
Lord.’ Every tribe was represented, but no tribe
excelled Zebulun in number and equip-age. Fifty
thousand expert warriors came, bringing their own
instruments of war. They were ‘rangers of battle,’ able
to ‘set the battle in array;’ and what was of more value
to the cause of God than numbers or skill, ‘they were
not of double heart,’ but men the Lord could trust in
a crisis.
“…The land of Zebulun has the high honor of
being the childhood home of Jesus. Nazareth was
situated within its borders. The people here had an
opportunity of seeing and hearing more of Christ than
those in any other place.” Haskell, CAIS, 205-207.
The Tribe of Joseph.—
“On the pages of sacred history, Joseph stands
prominent among the few characters of whom
Inspiration has recorded no faults. Joseph received
one of the three portions of the birthright. It is
interesting to note that each part of that birthright has
been immortalized.
“Joseph, separated from his brethren, surrounded
by idolaters in a strange land, gained a victory which
entitled him to the double portion of the inheritance.
Two portions of the promised land were given to the
family of Joseph; and throughout eternity, these two
divisions of that distinct company—the one hundred and
forty-four thousand—bearing the names, one of Joseph
and the other of Manasseh, the son of Joseph, will be a
reminder of his faithfulness. This was prophetically
announced in the blessing given by his father:
“‘The blessings of thy father and of thy mother
Have prevailed beyond the blessings of the eternal
mountains, Beyond the glories of the everlasting hills;
“‘They shall rest upon the head of Joseph, And
upon the crown of the head of him Who was
separated from his brethren.’
“…When the dreams of Joseph’s childhood were
fulfilled, and his brothers bowed with their faces to the
earth before him, then he remembered his dreams. May
we not conclude that Joseph, when he commanded the
officers to take Simeon and bind him before their eyes,
remembered how Simeon once bound himself,
unmindful of his cries for mercy, while these same men
looked on without any pity for him?
“…Joseph had no resentment in his heart; he could
say to those men, ‘It was not you that sent me hither,
but God.’ ‘Ye thought evil against me; but God
meant it unto good.’ Joseph saw only the Lord’s hand

in it all. When sold as a slave to Potiphar, he realized he
was in God’s hands. His faith took hold of God; and
while serving Potiphar, ‘the muscles of his hands were
strengthened through the power of the Mighty One of
Jacob.’” Haskell, CAIS, 208-210.
The Tribe of Benjamin.—
“When dying, Rachel gave her newborn son the
name of ‘Benoni, that is, the son of my sorrow; but his
father called him Benjamin, that is, the son of the
right hand’ (Gen. 35:18, margin). Benjamin was born
in Bethlehem (see vs. 16-19), and is a type of Jesus Who
was also born in Bethlehem. Jesus was born into this
world to be ‘a man of sorrow’ (Isa. 53:3), but later to sit
‘on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the
heavens’ (Heb. 8:1). Thus both names given to
Benjamin ...apply to Jesus. All who are redeemed, like
their Lord, will know from their own experience
what it means to be sons of sorrow; but ‘if we suffer,
we shall also reign with Him,’ (2 Tim. 2:12) and be
sons of His right hand. Of all redeemed companies, the
remnant church is destined to drink to the dregs the cup
of sorrow. Their experience will more nearly be like to
those Jesus had on earth than any others.” Were,
144,000 Sealed!, 103,104.
“The character of the tribe seems to be portrayed
by the prophetic words of Jacob in his parting blessing:
‘Benjamin shall raven as a wolf: in the morning he
shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the
spoil.’ These words do not describe an enviable
character, but rather that of a child indulged and petted
until it is self-willed and petulant, as one might expect
the youngest son in a large family would be, with no
mother to control him.
“…The prophetic words of Moses in his parting
blessing on the tribes, indicate that there would be a
decided change from the character portrayed by Jacob:
‘Of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall
dwell in safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him
all the day long, and he shall dwell between His
shoulders.’
“…It is interesting to notice the similarity between
the character of the ancient tribe and that of the leading
apostle to the Gentiles, who said of himself, ‘I also am
an Israelite... of the tribe of Benjamin.’ Saul,
afterward called Paul, is first introduced to us as
witnessing the stoning of Stephen; and ‘consenting unto
his death.’ Next we hear of him as a ravening wolf,
making ‘havoc of the church, entering into every
house, and haling men and women,’ and committing
them to prison. Like a savage wolf, thirsty for the blood
of his prey, he was ‘breathing out threatenings and
slaughter against the disciples of the Lord.’ There
was no safety for any of the beloved of the Lord near
such a character. But the same strength of character
that will cause one to ‘raven as a wolf,’ and to hurt
and destroy the people of God, will, when converted,
shield and protect the honor of God and His cause.
“From that time, that Saul, the Benjamite, had had

182

REVELATION 7
one view of Jesus, his wolf-like nature departed, and the
beloved of the Lord could dwell in safety by him. The
saints a Damascus were in no danger: he who had
designed to destroy them was now their friend, ready to
protect them at any time.
“God never forgets to return an act of kindness.
When Saul shielded and protected the ‘beloved of the
Lord,’ the Lord covered him all the day long; nothing
could harm him. The sting of the poisonous serpent was
powerless. There was not enough water in the sea to
drown him. God covered him all the day long.”
Haskell, CAIS, 213-215.
The Tribes Listed.—
“It will be observed that the enumeration of the
tribes here differs from that given in other places. In the
text before us, Ephraim and Dan are omitted, and Levi
and Joseph put in their places. The omission of Dan is
accounted for by commentators on the ground that that
tribe was the one chiefly addicted to idolatry. (See
Judges 18.) The tribe of Levi here takes its place with
the rest, as in the heavenly Canaan the reasons for their
not having an inheritance will not exist as in the
earthly. Joseph is probably substituted for Ephraim, it
being a name which appears to have been applied to the
tribe of either Ephraim or Manasseh. (Numbers 13:11).”
Smith, DR, 467,468.
The Omission of Dan.—
“The tribe of Dan is omitted in the final count, and
two portions are given to the family of Joseph to make
up the twelve. Of Dan it was said: ‘Dan shall judge his
people, as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan shall be a
serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth
the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.’
God purposed that Dan should judge Israel righteously.
Keen observation, and quick discernment are necessary
for a judge. These gifts were given to Dan, but instead
of using them aright, he was ‘a serpent by the way, an
adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that
his rider shall fall backward.’ In other words, he
became a backbiter, a cruel critic. The gift intended for
a blessing, when perverted, became an injury, causing
others to fall. The cruel critic, the one who always
detects the evil in others and speaks of it first, has the
gift of judgment misdirected. None who persist in this
work, can ever enter the kingdom of heaven; for the
‘accuser of our brethren’ was cast out of heaven once,
and neither he, nor his representatives, will ever enter its
shining portals again.” Haskel, SSP, 138,139.
The Order of the List.—
“The tribes of Israel as enumerated in Rev. 7 are
not given in the order of their birth, but in such an
order that the meaning of their names preaches the
gospel. For instance, Judah was the fourth son, yet his
name heads the list, because he, being the kingly tribe,
represents Jesus ‘The King of the Jews,’ also because
his name means ‘Praise.’ In the days of Jehoshaphat, the
people of God were faced with perils. The king of Judah

‘appointed singers unto the Lord [margin, ‘praisers’]
that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went
out before the army, and say, Praise the Lord ...and
when they began to sing and to praise, the Lord’ gave
them victory over their enemies (2 Chron. 20:21-24).
Thus at the commence-ment of these names we are given
the secret of victory. The tribe of Judah led the way in
the march across the wilderness to the Promised Land,
and its standard was the lion. This is the significance of
the cheering message of assurance which was given by
one of the elders:… ‘Weep not: behold, the Lion of
the tribe of Juda, the root of David, hath prevailed.’
(Rev. 5:5). For it is Jesus, the King of the [spiritual]
Jews (Rev. 2:9; 3:9) who leads His people through this
world to the eternal Canaan.
“Setting out the names in the order in which they
are given in Rev. 7 we see that, by this arrange-ment of
names according to their meanings and not according
to their order of birth, we have God’s message of
assurance to those who are sealed among the tribes of
Israel:
Judah (#4) ‘Praise’
Reuben (#1) ‘A son’
Gad (#7) ‘A company’ of sons redeemed and
Asher (#8) ‘Happy after
Nephtalim (#6) ‘Wrestling’ in prayer
Manasseh (#13) ‘Forgetting’ self and the past
Simeon (#2) ‘Hearing’ God’s Word
Levi (#3) ‘Joined’ to God as
Issachar (#9) ‘Servants’
Zebulon (#10) ‘Dwelling’ with
Joseph (#11) ‘Added’ joys and special
Blessings as
Benjamin (#12) ‘Sons of the right hand,’ for ‘In thy
presence is fullness of joy; at Thy
right hand there are pleasures for
evermore.’ (Ps. 16:11).”
Were, 144,000 Sealed!, 102,103.
Out Of.—
“Twelve thousand were sealed ‘out of’ each of the
twelve tribes, showing that not all who in the records of
heaven had a place among these tribes when this sealing
work began, stood the test and were overcomers at last,
for the names of those already in the book of life will be
blotted out unless they overcome. (Revelation 3:5.)”
Smith, DR, 468.

VISION OF THE REDEEMED
REVELATION 7:9-17
9 After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no
man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands.
10 And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our
God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.
11 And all the angels stood round about the throne, and

183

GEMS FROM REVELATION
about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the
throne on their faces, and worshipped God.
12 Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto
our God for ever and ever. Amen.
13 And one of the elders answered, saying unto me,
What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and
whence came they?
14 And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said
to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb.
15 Therefore are they before the throne of God, and
serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth
on the throne shall dwell among them.
16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more;
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat.
17 For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

REVELATION 7:9,10
After this I beheld, and, lo, a great
multitude, which no man could number, of
all nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, stood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and
palms in their hands.
And cried with a loud voice, saying,
Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb.
After This I Beheld.—
“With the vision of the great multitude the scene
shifts from earth to heaven. At the same time we
detect a change in mood. The sealing of the servants of
God takes place against the dark and grim background of
God’s impending judgment. The fury of His wrath
looms over the wicked like a violent storm. But terror
and gloom give way to unrestrained joy as we move
from earth to heaven.” Battistone, God’s Church, 98.
A Great Multitude.—
“Who are these in the 9th verse of the 7th chapter?
Answer, all the righteous dead from Abel to the
resurrection, which I have no doubt will be seen
uniting with the 144,000 living saints, at the
anniversary of the feast of Tabernacles in the 7th
month.” Bates, Seal of God, 39.
“Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as
good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in
multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore
innumerable. These all died in faith, not having
received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and
were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the
earth…. And these all, having obtained a good report
through faith, received not the promise: God having

provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect.” Hebrews 11:12,13,
39,40.
“Paul includes the living, “us,” the 144,000 with
the dead, “they,” the Great Multitude in the category
of the Redeemed—“those that are made perfect.” PJ
“When the few of each successive generation, from
righteous Abel to the close of probation, who have
bent their lonely footsteps in the narrow path to Mount
Zion, shall reach their everlasting rest, they will
constitute that ‘great multitude which no man could
number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues,’ arrayed in heaven’s purity and brightness.
Not one of these had come out of that imaginary period
of a converted world. No, not one. What an imposing
scene! (Rev. 7:13,14 quoted.).” White, James, Bible
Adventism, 39,40.
“The conflict is over. All tribulation and strife are
at an end. Songs of victory fill all heaven as the
redeemed stand around the throne of God. All take
up the joyful strain, ‘Worthy, worthy is the Lamb that
was slain, and lives again, a triumphant conqueror.’
“‘I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no
man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands.’” My Life Today, 348.
Which No Man Can Number.—
“This is the theme, this is the song—Christ all and
in all—in anthems of praise resounding through heaven
from thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand and
an innumerable company of the redeemed host.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 433.
“The redeemed of the Lord are an innumerable
company, which no man can number; but among that
multitude is one separate company, who are numbered
and are designated by their number—one hundred
and forty-four thousand.” Haskell, CAIS, 221.
Clothed With White Robes, and Palms in Hands.—
“He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed
in white raiment.” Rev. 3:5.
“And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How
long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And
white robes were given unto every one of them.” Rev.
6:10,11.
“John was strengthened to live in the presence of
his glorified Lord. Then before his wondering vision
were opened the glories of heaven. He was permitted to
see the throne of God and, looking beyond the conflicts
of earth, to behold the white-robed throng of the
redeemed. He heard the music of the heavenly angels
and the triumphant songs of those who had overcome

184

REVELATION 7
by the blood of the Lamb and the word of their
testimony.” Acts of the Apostles, 582,583.
“Nearest the throne are those who were once
zealous in the cause of Satan, but who, plucked as
brands from the burning, have followed their Saviour
with deep, intense devotion. Next are those who
perfected Christian characters in the midst of
falsehood and infidelity, those who honored the law
of God when the Christian world declared it void, and
the millions, of all ages, who were martyred for their
faith. And beyond is the ‘great multitude, which no
man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues, ...before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in
their hands.’ (Rev. 7:9.) Their warfare is ended, their
victory won. They have run the race and reached the
prize. The palm branch in their hands is a symbol of
their triumph, the white robe an emblem of the
spotless righteousness of Christ which now is theirs.”
Great Controversy, 665.
Anti-type of Feast of Tabernacles.—
“The terminology of verses 9 and 10 shows that
this marvelous scene is the antitype, a fulfillment of
the celebrated feast of tabernacles of Old Testament
times. This feast or festival was the final gathering of
Israel for the ceremonial year. It was celebrated when
the final harvest of the land had been gathered in. It
lasted for eight joyful days during which the Israelites
dwelt in temporary shelters or booths reminding them of
the wilderness wanderings of their forebears. All this
was typical of the final gathering of God’s people in
the heavenly Kingdom.” Cooke, #11-UR, 12.
Salvation to Our God and Unto the Lamb.—
“This is a recognition by the numberless multitude
that God and the Lamb have redeemed them. …The
ascription to both God and the Lamb is significant
evidence of their equality.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
784.

REVELATION 7:11,12
And all the angels stood round about the
throne, and about the elders and the four
beasts, and fell before the throne on their
faces, and worshipped God.
Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and
power, and might, be unto our God for ever
and ever. Amen.
All the Angels Sing.—
“The scene around God’s throne is the same as
already referred to in chapter 4. In their worship of God
a sevenfold praise is directed to Him.” Metcalf, GPDR,
92.

“The four and twenty elders fall down before him
that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for
ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne,
saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and
honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and
for thy pleasure they are and were created.” Rev.
4:10,11.
“And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many
angels round about the throne and the beasts and the
elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; Saying with
a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honour, and glory, and blessing.” Rev. 5:11,12.
The Elders.—
“Notice the elders are here associated with the
heavenly beings, rather than the great multitude.” PJ.

REVELATION 7:13-15
And one of the elders answered, saying
unto me, What are these which are arrayed
in white robes? and whence came they?
And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest.
And he said to me, These are they which
came out of great tribulation, and have
washed their robes, and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb.
Therefore are they before the throne of
God, and serve him day and night in his
temple: and he that sitteth on the throne
shall dwell among them.
One of the Elders Answered, Saying.—
“It is the truth of God received in the heart and
practiced in the life that makes man thus precious in the
sight of God. As John sees this precious company
refined and purified around the throne of God, the angel
inquires, ‘What are these which are arrayed in white
robes? and whence came they?’ And John answers,
‘Sir, thou knowest.’” Sermons & Talks, Vol. 1, 35.
“John beholds an innumerable company, precious,
refined, purified, around the throne of the Majesty of
Heaven. The angel inquires of John, "What are these
which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came
they?" and John answers, "Sir, thou knowest." Then the
angel declares: "(verses 14, 15 quoted)." ST, 12/22/1887
[ Ed. note: Notice in the quotation above that one
of the elders was not one of the redeemed. He is called
an angel.]
What Are These …Arrayed in White Robes?—
“At first glance one might conclude that the elder is

185

GEMS FROM REVELATION
referring to the great multitude of verse 9, because they
alone are so described. However, when one realizes that
all the redeemed will be clothed in white, it may
suggest something special about a particular group. The
only other group mentioned in the chapter is the saints
represented by the number 144,000. Will there be
something distinctive regarding the white robes of this
group? White robes symbolize righteous character—
‘the righteousness of the saints.’ (Rev. 19:8.)
“The group symbolized by the 144,000 will reach a
degree of character development in which they are
described as having the seal of God, or the name of God,
and having no guile and without fault. (Rev. 14:1-5).
We suggest that they will reach a degree of character
development that will be in advance of all other
groups of God’s people. This appears to be confirmed
in the following verses of the chapter. Another point
that suggests that the elder is not alluding to the great
multitude is his question—‘Whence came they?’ Verse
9 clearly states from whence the great multitude came,
so it is justifiable to conclude that the elder is referring
to the first group in the chapter—the 144,000. The
details in verses 14-17 confirm this conclusion.” Cooke,
#11-UR, 14,15.
“Then, as if again to call attention to the little
company who have suffered most, one elder, pointing
to the one hundred and forty-four thousand, said,
‘What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and
whence came they?’ Haskel, SSP, 139.
“And he answered and spake unto those that stood
before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from
him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine
iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with
change of raiment. And I said, Let them set a fair mitre
upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and
clothed him with garments. And the angel of the LORD
stood by.” Zech. 3:4,5.
“After thus solemnly investing him [Joshua] with
the dignity of the priesthood the Angel declared: ‘Thus
saith the Lord of hosts; If thou wilt walk in My ways,
and if thou wilt keep My charge, then thou shalt also
judge My house, and shalt also keep My courts, and I
will give thee places to walk among these that stand
by.’ [Zech. 3:7]. He would be honored as the judge
or ruler over the temple and all its services; he should
walk among attending angels, even in this life, and
should at last join the glorified throng around the
throne of God.
“…Zechariah’s vision of Joshua and the Angel
applies with peculiar force to the experience of God’s
people in the closing up of the great day of
atonement.
“…Satan urges before God his accusations against
them, declaring that they have by their sins forfeited the
divine protection, and claiming the right to destroy them
as transgressors. He pronounces them just as deserving
as himself of exclusion from the favor of God. ‘Are

these, he says, ‘the people who are to take my place in
heaven and the place of the angels who united with
me?...’” 5 Testimonies, 469, 472,473.
“The pure communion with holy beings, the
harmonious social life with the blessed angels and with
the faithful ones of all ages who have washed their
robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb,
the sacred ties that bind together "the whole family in
heaven and earth" (Ephesians 3:15)--these help to
constitute the happiness of the redeemed.” Great
Controversy, 677.
“This white-robed group describes all of the
redeemed, but applies particularly to the 144,000.”
PJ
He Said Unto Me.—
“And the angel said, ‘These are they who have
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb.’ (See Rev. 7:13-14). There is a fountain in
which we may wash from every stain of impurity. And
says the angel, ‘He shall lead them to fountains of living
waters, and shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.’
(See v. 17.) This will be the happy privilege of those
that have kept the commandments of God in the earth.
Sermons & Talks, Vol. 1, 20.
“As John saw the multitude standing around the
throne of God, the question was asked, ‘What are these
which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came
they?’—‘These are they which came out of great
tribulation,’ the angel answered, ‘and have washed
their robes, and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb.’” Signs, 4/17/1901.
“Notice in the above statements that Spirit of
Prophecy says ‘the angel answered’, which identifies
the elder as an angelic being.” PJ
Came Out of Great Tribulation.—
“The Great Multitude go through tribulation
to enter the kingdom of heaven, but the 144,000 will go
through the Time of Jacob’s Trouble, or great
tribulation, the ‘final conflict.’” Cooke, #11-UR, 15.
“ ‘These are they which came out of great
tribulation;’ They [the 144,000] have passed through
the time of trouble such as never was since there was a
nation; they have endured the anguish of the time of
Jacob’s trouble; they have stood without an intercessor
through the final outpouring of God’s judgments. But
they have been delivered, for they have ‘washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb.’ ‘In their mouth was found no guile: for they
are without fault’ before God. ‘Therefore are they
before the throne of God, and serve Him day and
night in His temple: and He that sitteth on the throne
shall dwell among them.’ They have seen the earth
wasted with famine and pestilence, the sun having power

186

REVELATION 7
to scorch men with great heat, and they themselves have
endured suffering, hunger, and thirst. But ‘they shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither
shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes.’ Rev. 7:14-17.
“In times of crisis or anguish the greatest horror is
to experience the absence of God. When God does not
rescue, when He does not make His presence felt, when
His only answer to our questions is silence, then the soul
is overwhelmed with doubt, despair, and darkness. The
great struggle of the time of trouble is to have faith in
the simple word of God without any external or
internal evidence to support it. This was the struggle
of Christ when He cried out, ‘My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me?’ His triumphant cry, ‘It is
finished!’ was a victory of naked faith without any
evidence except the word of God to support it.” Biblical
Research Inst., 1SOR, 278.
“In all ages the Saviour’s chosen have been
educated and disciplined in the school of trial. They
walked in narrow paths on earth; they were purified in
the furnace of affliction. For Jesus’ sake they endured
opposition, hatred, calumny.
They followed Him
through conflicts sore; they endured self-denial and
experienced bitter disappointments. By their own
painful experience they learned the evil of sin, its power,
its guilt, its woe; and they look upon it with abhorrence.
A sense of the infinite sacrifice made for its cure,
humbles them in their own sight, and fills their hearts
with gratitude and praise which those who have never
fallen cannot appreciate. They love much, because they
have been forgiven much. Having been partakers of
Christ’s sufferings, they are fitted to be partakers with
Him of His glory.” Great Controversy, 649,650.
“We must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God.” Acts 14:22.
“The white-robed ones who surround the throne
of God are not composed of that company who were
lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, and who
choose to drift with the current rather than to breast the
waves of opposition.
All who remain pure and
uncorrupted from the spirit and influence prevailing at
this time will have stern conflicts. They will come
through great tribulation; they will wash their robes of
character and make them white in the blood of the Lamb.
These will sing the song of triumph in the kingdom of
glory.” My Life Today, 321.
“Suffering has been the portion of the people of
God from the days of the martyr Abel. The patriarchs
suffered for being true to God and obedient to His
commandments. The great Head of the church suffered
for our sake; His first apostles and the primitive church
suffered; the millions of martyrs suffered, and the

Reformers suffered. And why should we, who have the
blessed hope of immortality, to be consummated at the
soon appearing of Christ, shrink from a life of suffering?
Were it possible to reach the tree of life in the midst of
the Paradise of God without suffering, we would not
enjoy so rich a reward for which we had not suffered.
We would shrink back from the glory; shame would
seize us in the presence of those who had fought the
good fight, had run the race with patience, and had laid
hold on eternal life. But none will be there who have
not, like Moses, chosen to suffer affliction with the
people of God. The prophet John saw the multitude of
the redeemed, and inquired who they were. The prompt
answer came: ‘These are they which came out of great
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made
them white in the blood of the Lamb.’ 1 Testimonies,
78.
Robes Washed in Blood.—
“The idea of washing away scarlet sins so that they
are whiter than snow is found in Isaiah 1:18 and Psalm
51:7. But to use blood for bleaching is unique to John.
Perhaps a contrast can be seen here: Jesus stained His
garments in our blood—He became sin for us—that
our garments might become white in His blood—we
become the righteousness of God in Him (2 Cor.
5:21).
“…Note that when Aaron and his sons were
consecrated for the priesthood their garments were
sprinkled with blood (Lev. 8:30). Cleansing garments
with blood was thus part of the priestly ritual.” Biblical
Research Inst., 1SOR, 265.
“And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the
blood which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon
Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and
upon his garments with him; and sanctified Aaron, and
his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with
him.” Lev. 8:30.
White Robes.—
“He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in
white raiment.” Revelation 3:5.
“Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father.” Rev. 1:5.
“If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.” 1 John 1:9.
They Serve Him Day and Night.—
“Their white robes entitle them to minister day and
night in God’s temple.
Thus the promise to
Philadelphia is fulfilled:” Biblical Research Inst.,
1SOR, 265.
“Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, and he shall go no more out.”
Revelation 3:12

187

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law
is within my heart.” Ps. 40:8.
“The final feature concerning the 144,000 is that
they stand ‘with the Lamb.’ …[Rev. 7:15,17 quoted.]
This reveals the tremendous privilege that will be given
to this group…. They will probably be at the
headquarters of God’s kingdom—‘they are before
the throne,’ they are ‘in the temple.’ They have a
position of high responsibility. They escort Christ,
they are ‘with him.’ It is believed by some that they
will take the place of the fallen angels—not that they
will become angels—but they will take the place of the
fallen angels. What a privilege!” Cooke, #22-UR,
12,13.
He That Sitteth on the Throne Shall Dwell Among
Them.—
“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me
in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his throne.” Rev. 3:21.
“The angels of glory find their joy in giving—
giving love and tireless watchcare to souls that are fallen
and unholy. Heavenly beings woo the hearts of men;
they bring to this dark world light from the courts above;
by gentle and patient ministry they move upon the
human spirit, to bring the lost into a fellowship with
Christ which is even closer than they themselves can
know.” Desire of Ages, 21.
“Satan has an accurate knowledge of the sins that
he has tempted God's people to commit, and he urges his
accusations against them, declaring, that by their sins
they have forfeited divine protection, and claiming that
he has the right to destroy them. He pronounces them
just as deserving as himself of exclusion from the favor
of God. "Are these," he says, ‘the people who are to
take my place in heaven, and the place of the angels
who united with me?’” Prophets & Kings, 588, 589

REVELATION 7:16,17
They shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any more; neither shall the sun light
on them, nor any heat.
For the Lamb which is in the midst of
the throne shall feed them, and shall lead
them unto living fountains of waters: and
God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes.
Hunger and Thirst, Sun and Heat.—
“The Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The
sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by
night.” Psalm 121:5,6.

“They [the 144,000] have seen the earth wasted
with famine and pestilence, the sun having power to
scorch men with great heat, and they themselves have
endured suffering, hunger, and thirst. But ‘they shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither
shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes.’ Rev. 7:14-17.” Great Controversy, 649.
“The 144,000 live through the time when power
is given unto the sun ‘to scorch men with fire.’
Revelation 16:8,9. Though they are shielded from the
deadly effect which it has upon the wicked around them,
we cannot suppose that their sensibilities will be so
deadened that they will feel no unpleasant sensations
from the terrific heat. No, as they enter the fields of the
heavenly Canaan, they will be prepared to appreciate the
divine assurance that the sun shall not injure them.”
Smith, DR, 470, 471.
The Lamb Shall Lead Them.—
“The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He
maketh me to lie down in green pastures: He leadeth
me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul: He
leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for His name’s
sake.” Psalm 23:1-3.
“These are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever He goeth.” Rev. 14:4.
Living Fountains of Water.—
“They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of Thy house; and Thou shalt make them drink of the
river of Thy pleasures.” Psalm 36:8.
“They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the
heat nor sun smite them: for he hath mercy on them
shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he
guide them.” Isaiah 49:10.
“Our lifework here is a preparation for the life
eternal. The education begun here will not be completed
in this life; it will be going forward through all
eternity—ever progressing, never completed. More and
more fully will be revealed the wisdom and love of God
in the plan of redemption. The Saviour, as He leads
His children to the fountains of living waters, will
impart rich stores of knowledge. And day by day the
wonderful works of God, the evidences of His power in
creating and sustaining the universe, will open before the
mind in new beauty. In the light that shines from the
throne, mysteries will disappear, and the soul will be
filled with astonishment at the simplicity of the things
that were never before comprehended.” Ministry of
Healing, 466.
“Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give
him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give

188

REVELATION 7
him shall be in him a well of water springing up into
everlasting life. …Come, see a man, which told me all
things that ever I did: Is not this the Christ?” John
4:14, 29.
God Shall Wipe Away All Tears.—
“And God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the
former things are passed away.” Rev. 21:4.

rebuke of His people shall He take away from off all the
earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.” Is. 25:8.
“It will take a thousand years as we review the
record books to wipe away all tears.” PJ
“He does not literally wipe away tears from the
eyes of His people, for there will be no tears in that
kingdom to be wiped away. He wipes away tears by
removing all causes of tears.” Smith, DR, 759.

“He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord
God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the

189

GEMS FROM REVELATION

190

REVELATION 7

191

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 8
REVELATION 8:1-13
1 And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven about the space of half an hour.
2 And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to
them were given seven trumpets.
3 And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a
golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he
should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar
which was before the throne.
4 And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of
the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel’s hand.
5 And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the
altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and
thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.
6 And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound.
7 The first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire
mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the
third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
8 And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great
mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third
part of the sea became blood.
9 And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and
had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed.
10 And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of
the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters;
11 And the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third
part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the
waters, because they were made bitter.
12 And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the
moon, and the third part of the stars; so as the third part of them
was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the
night likewise.
13 And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of
heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters
of the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the
three angels, which are yet to sound!

THE SEVENTH SEAL
REVELATION 8:1
And when he had opened the seventh
seal, there was silence in heaven about the
space of half an hour.
When He Had Opened The Seventh Seal.—
“The first verse of this chapter relates to the events
of the preceding chapters, and therefore should not
have been separated from them by the division of the
chapter. The series of seven seals is here resumed and
concluded. The sixth chapter of Revelation closed with
the events of the sixth seal, and the eighth chapter begins
with the opening of the seventh seal. Hence the seventh
chapter stands parenthetically between the sixth and
seventh seals, and it appears that the sealing work of
Revelation 7 belongs to the sixth seal.” Smith, DR, 473.
There Was Silence in Heaven.—

“This silence is also in marked contrast with the
rejoicing in heaven at the beginning of this vision. It is
like a great calm after a terrific storm. The ‘silence’ is
indicative of intense interest and awful expectancy.”
Bunch, TR, 54.
“Normally in the presence of God there is continual
music and praise. ‘They rest not day nor night,
crying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty.’ Rev.
4:8. What could bring silence to heaven?” Cooke, #10UR, 25,26.
“When the Lord appears, He comes with all the
holy angels with Him. (Mt. 25:31.) When all the
heavenly harpers leave the courts above to come to
this earth with their divine Lord as He descends to
gather the fruit of His redeeming work, will there not
be silence in heaven?” Smith, DR, 473.
“When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and
all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
throne of his glory.” Matthew 25:31.
“And He [the Father] shall send Jesus Christ, which
before was preached unto you.” Acts 3:20.
“All the inhabitants of heaven, and probably the
leaders of other worlds as well as others, will accompany
Christ. But the Father remains alone, awaiting the
return of His Son with the saints. Undoubtedly He
waits in silence. There is no praise because none is
present to produce it.” Cooke #10-UR, 28.
“Soon our eyes were drawn to the east, for a small
black cloud had appeared, about half as large as a man’s
hand, which we all knew was the sign of the Son of man.
We all in solemn silence gazed on the cloud as it drew
nearer and became lighter, glorious, and still more
glorious, till it was a great white cloud. The bottom
appeared like fire; a rainbow was over the cloud, while
around it were ten thousand angels singing a most lovely
song; and upon it sat the Son of man. His hair was white
and curly and lay on His shoulders; and upon His head
were many crowns. His feet had the appearance of fire;
in His right hand was a sharp sickle; in His left, a silver
trumpet. His eyes were as a flame of fire, which
searched His children through and through. Then all
faces gathered paleness, and those that God had rejected
gathered blackness. Then we all cried out, ‘Who shall
be able to stand? Is my robe spotless?’ Then the
angels ceased to sing, and there was some time of
awful silence, when Jesus spoke: ‘Those who have clean
hands and pure hearts shall be able to stand; My grace is
sufficient for you.’ At this our faces lighted up, and joy

192

REVELATION 8
filled every heart. And the angels struck a note higher
and sang again, while the cloud drew still nearer the
earth.” Early Writings, 15,16.
“Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy
peace, and be not still, O God. For, lo, thine enemies
make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted up the
head. They have taken crafty counsel against thy
people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They
have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a
nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance. For they have consulted together with
one consent: they are confederate against thee.” Psalm
83:1-5.
Half an Hour.—
“The length of this period of silence, if we consider
it prophetic time, would be about seven days.” Smith,
DR, 473.
“Then Jesus’ silver trumpet sounded, as He
descended on the cloud, wrapped in flames of fire.
He gazed on the graves of the sleeping saints, then raised
His eyes and hands to heaven, and cried, ‘Awake!
awake! awake! ye that sleep in the dust, and arise.’ Then
there was a mighty earthquake. The graves opened, and
the dead came up clothed with immortality. The
144,000 shouted, ‘Alleluia!’ as they recognized their
friends who had been torn from them by death, and in
the same moment we were changed and caught up
together with them to meet the Lord in the air.
“We all entered the cloud together, and were
seven days ascending to the sea of glass, when Jesus
brought the crowns, and with His own right hand placed
them on our heads. He gave us harps of gold and palms
of victory.” Early Writings, 16.
“Jesus is the ‘Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end, the first and the last.’ Rev. 22:13. He
used seven days to create the world in the beginning, and
He uses seven special days to end the world.” Unknown
Source.
Great Reunion!—
“Then the saints of God begin that epic journey of
seven awe inspiring days through outer space, back to
the Father’s house. What a marvelous prospect! In the
great reunion day all the saints will return together to the
kingdom. There we shall receive the promised reward.
‘I beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man
could number of all nations and kindreds and people
and tongues stood before the throne and before the
lamb clothed with white robes and palms in their
hands, and cried with a loud voice saying, Salvation
to our God which sits upon the throne and to the
Lamb.’ Rev. 7:9-10. Imagine the glorious experience
when we finally stand before the throne, and see the face
of our wonderful God. ‘They shall hunger no more,
neither thirst anymore. …And God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.’ Rev. 7:13,17.” Cooke, #10-

UR, 29,30.
The Seven Seals as a Whole.—
“Taken as a whole we may say that these seals
represent the great apostasy in the church. The first seal
represents the apostolic church in its purity. The
succeeding seals, the church in its apostasy. But the
true church occasionally appears this side the first seal.
It is the oil and the wine of the third seal, the martyrs
of the fourth and fifth seals; and those who will be
saved at the coming of Christ to which the last seal
brings us. While the apostate church will be among
those who will call for the rocks and mountains to fall on
them and hide them from his presence in the day of His
wrath.” White, James et al., The Biblical Institute,
Lesson 21, “The Seven Seals,” 1877.

JESUS AT THE
ALTAR OF INCENSE
REVELATION 8:2
And I saw the seven angels which stood
before God; and to them were given seven
trumpets.
I Saw.—
“This verse introduces a new and distinct series of
events.” Smith, DR, 474.
A Trumpet.—
“When Israel came out of Egypt and was
established in the promised land, God said, ‘If ye go to
war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth
you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets.’
Numbers 10:9. Thus a trumpet blast to an Israelite
meant war. Years later Jeremiah wrote, ‘My bowels,
my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart
maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, because
thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet,
the alarm of war.’ Jeremiah 4:19. Thus a trumpet
sound indicated war. Hence, these seven trumpets
would indicate seven great wars.” Straw, SR, 54.
“A trumpet denotes an invasion of enemy forces.
This is made very clear by Jeremiah, ‘Blow ye the
trumpet in the land, cry, gather together and say,
Assemble yourselves and let us go into the defenced
cities.” Jer. 8:14. It denotes an invasion is imminent,
enemy forces are at hand.” Cooke, #12-UR, 8,9.
“The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and
hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord.
...That day is a day of wrath. ...A day of trumpet and
alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high
towers. And I will bring distress upon men, that they
shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned

193

GEMS FROM REVELATION
against the Lord.” Zephaniah 1:14-17.
“The trumpet, or bugle sound, is the call to war;
and the history of the trumpets is one long story of
war and bloodshed, but in order that men might learn
that the hand of God is overruling in every army, and
that He guides in every war, the story of the trumpets is
left on record.” Haskel, SSP, 145.
Seven Angels Given Seven Trumpets.—
“And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven
trumpets of rams’ horns: and the seventh day ye shall
compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow
with the trumpets.
“And it shall come to pass, that when they make a
long blast with the ram’s horn, and when ye hear the
sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a
great shout; and the wall of the city shall fall down flat,
and the people shall ascend up every man straight before
him.
“And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and
said unto them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let
seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns
before the ark of the LORD.” Joshua 6:4-6.
“To enter the Promised Land, Israel had to conquer
Jericho. As the trumpets brought doom to Jericho, so
the seven trumpets of Revelation bring down the twophased 4th empire of Pagan and Papal Rome. Then
Christ’s 5th kingdom can be set up.” PJ
The Vision of the Seven Trumpets.—
“With what do these [seven] trumpets deal?
With the wars, commotions, and political upheavals
which result in the breaking up and downfall of the
Roman Empire—the first four with the downfall of
Western Rome, the fifth and sixth with the downfall of
Eastern Rome, and the seventh with the final downfall
of Rome in its broadest sense, or all the kingdoms of
the world.” Bible Readings for the Home, 289.
“The great leading features of Daniel’s visions
were the four great governments of antiquity, beginning
with the Babylonian, and ending with the Roman, in its
papal form. Not so, however, with John; he lived when
three of those governments had passed away, and the
fourth and last was in being, and in the height of its glory
as a universal monarchy. Under that government John
was in banishment on the isle of Patmos, ‘for the word
of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ.’
Accordingly, instead of predicting the rise and triumph
of either of those four great governments, it was his part
to give the prophetic history of the fall of the last of
the four, and give us the various means by which that
great persecuting system should come to ruin.” SDA
Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 3.
“‘These trumpets are the counterpart of the
prophecy of the second chapter of Daniel. That
prophecy brings to view the dividing of the Roman

kingdom into ten parts as represented by the ten toes of
the great image; and the first four of the seven
trumpets introduce the events by which this division
was effected.’ J. White, The Biblical Institute, pp. 260267.” Rosenvold, SSAST, 20.
“The sounding of the seven trumpets I
understand to shadow forth the instrumentalities by
which the Roman empire was to be overthrown and
subverted, and finally ruined. …Under the first four
trumpets the two western divisions fell, and under the
fifth and sixth the eastern empire was crushed; but
under the seventh trumpet great Babylon entire will
sink to rise no more at all.” White, James, SST, iii.
Similarities Between Trumpets (Types) and Plagues
(Anti-types).—

TRUMPETS
(Types)

PLAGUES
(Anti-types)

1. Upon the earth ch. 8:7 Upon the earth. ch.16:2.
Upon the sea. ch. 16:3.
2. Upon the sea ch.8:8
3. Rivers & Fountains of Rivers and fountains of
waters. ch. 16:4.
waters ch. 8:10
Upon the sun. ch. 16:8.
4. Sun smitten ch. 8:12
Darkness. ch. 16:10
5. Air darkened ch. 9:2
River Euphrates. ch.
6. River Euphrates
16:12
ch.9:14
‘It is Done.’ ch.16:17
7. Mystery of God
finished, ch. 10:7.
Voices, thunders,
Lightnings, voices,
Lightnings, great
Thunderings
Earthquake, hail.
Earthquake, great
ch. 16:18.
hail. Ch. 11:19.
From: Cooke, #12-UR, 3.
Are the Trumpets and the Plagues the Same?—
“Because of their striking similarity, there are those
who attempt to confound the trumpets with the seven last
plagues. This very similarity in itself forbids their being
identical. Both the trumpets and plagues are still more
similar to the plagues of Egypt, but this does not prove
them to be the same. All of God’s judgments have
been similar, and all have been typical of the last.
Types and antitypes are always similar but never
identical.” Bunch, TR, 72.
“In spite of the striking similarities, the trumpets
and the plagues really cannot be the same. At least
four overriding differences distinguish them:
“1. The size of the areas affected. Most of the
trumpets affect a symbolic ‘third’ of the areas they
touch. See Revelation 8:7-12. No such restriction is
imposed on the plagues.
“2. The time involved. In the trumpet chapters we
encounter the relatively long periods of ‘five months,’
forty-two months,’ and others. Revelation 9:5,15;
11:2,11. By contrast, the seven plagues fall in ‘a single
day’ or even in ‘one hour.’ Revelation 18:8,10.
“3. Relationship to the sanctuary. The sanctuary

194

REVELATION 8
scene that introduces the trumpets portrays intercessory
ministry as still in progress. An angel is offering
incense. See Revelation 8:2-5. On the other hand, in the
scene that introduces the plagues, the sanctuary is
closed, so that ‘no other could enter’ it. Revelation
15:5-8.
“4. Location in the chiasm. Our organization chart
shows that the trumpets appear in the first or
historical half of the Revelation chiasm, while the
plagues appear in the end-time or eschatological half.
“We conclude that the plagues are still future to
our day. They will fall during a very short period
immediately following the close of human probation
when repentance is no longer possible, and immediately
prior to the second coming.” Maxwell, God Cares, 262.
“In the prophecy of the ‘Seven Trumpets,’ God
opens the scene in the first apartment of the Heavenly
Sanctuary. Rev. 8:2-5. He closes this chain of
prophecy with the ministry of heaven being
conducted in the second apartment where the
judgment is in session. Rev. 11:18,19. This revelation
should lead us to note two important points:
“a) That the prophecy of the ‘Seven Trumpets’
covers the period of the ministry of our Lord in the
Heavenly Sanctuary in the two great phases of His
ministry—in both the ‘Holy Place,’ and the ‘Most Holy
Place.’ Thus God would have us see that the ‘Seven
Trumpets’ cover the Christian era.
“b) In contrast, the ‘Seven Last Plagues’ are
poured out when there is no ministry in the Heavenly
Sanctuary. Rev. 15:8….
“c) Thus, it is clearly revealed in the ‘Revelation’
of Jesus Christ that the ‘Seven Trumpets’ cover the
Christian era while mercy’s hour lingers, whereas the
‘Seven Last Plagues’ are the wrath of God poured out on
the despisers of His mercy after probation’s hour has
closed.” Burnside, RWU, 119,120.

twofold. Before describing the events to transpire on
earth, a view is given of Christ’s mediatorial work in the
heavenly sanctuary. The heavenly and earthly events
run parallel and cover the Christian era. While God’s
judgments are being visited upon the nations of
earth, Christ is on duty at the throne of grace where
He ministers the sweet incense of His own righteousness
in behalf of repentant sinners and praying saints.”
Bunch, TR, 72.
Another Angel.—
“For there is one God, and one mediator between
God and men, the man Christ Jesus.” 1 Timothy 2:5.
“Wherefore He is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by Him, seeing He ever
liveth to make intercession for them.” Heb. 7:25.
“And the LORD, whom ye seek, shall suddenly
come to his temple, even the messenger [ANGEL] of
the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall
come, saith the LORD of hosts.” Malachi 3:1.
“It was the work of the priest in the daily
ministration to present before God the blood of the sinoffering, also the incense which ascended with the
prayers of Israel. So did Christ plead His blood before
the Father in behalf of sinners, and present before
Him also, with the precious fragrance of His own
righteousness, the prayers of penitent believers.”
Great Controversy, 420,421.
“The intercession of Christ in man's behalf in
the sanctuary above is as essential to the plan of
salvation as was His death upon the cross. By His
death He began that work which after His resurrection
He ascended to complete in heaven.”
Great
Controversy, 489.

“Six trumpets are symbolic, one is literal, while
six plagues are literal, one symbolic.” Cooke, #12-UR,
4.

“By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of
praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips
giving thanks to his name.” Heb. 13:15.

REVELATION 8:3,4
And another angel came and stood at
the altar, having a golden censer; and there
was given unto him much incense, that he
should offer it with the prayers of all saints
upon the golden altar which was before the
throne.
And the smoke of the incense, which
came with the prayers of the saints,
ascended up before God out of the angel’s
hand.

“If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.” 1 John 2:1.

An Introductory Scene to the Trumpets.—
“This vision, like the two that precede it, is

Stood at the Altar.—
“[Rev. 8:3 quoted.]
Here the prophet was
permitted to behold the first apartment of the
sanctuary in heaven; and he saw there the ‘seven
lamps of fire’ and ‘the golden altar,’ represented by the
golden candlestick and the altar of incense in the
sanctuary on earth.” Great Controversy, 414-415.
“Directly before the ark, but separated by the
curtain, was the golden altar of incense. The fire upon
this altar was kindled by the Lord himself, and was
sacredly cherished by feeding it with holy in-cense,
which filled the sanctuary with its fragrant cloud, day
and night. Its fragrance extended for miles around the

195

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Prayers empowered by Christ’s righteousness is one of
the mightiest weapons of the Christian.” PJ from
Prophecy Research Initiative Email.

tabernacle.” Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 4a, 8-9.

‘It is a part of God’s plan to grant us, in answer to
the prayer of faith, that which He would not bestow did
we not thus ask.’” Great Controversy, 525.

The Altar of Incense in the Holy Place.
“After His ascension, our Saviour was to begin His
work as our High Priest. ...As Christ’s ministration was
to consist of two great divisions, each occupying a
period of time and having a distinctive place in the
heavenly sanctuary, so the typical ministration
consisted of two divisions, the daily and the yearly
service, and to each a department of the tabernacle was
devoted.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 357.
The Horns of the Altar of Incense.—
“Blood was placed on each of the four horns of the
Altar of Incense in the daily services and as a final step
in the Day of Atonement service (Leviticus 4:7; Exodus
30:10). Why the horns? They symbolized the Saviour’s
redeeming power.
“The LORD …is my shield, and the horn of my
salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour;
thou savest me from violence.” 2 Sam. 22:2-3.
“Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath
visited and redeemed his people, And hath raised up an
horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David” Luke 1:68-69, 2:11.
“The four horns, located at each corner, were
covered with the same gold (representing divinity) as the
altar was. (Exodus 30:1-10, 37:25). The four horns
represent the four points of the compass. See Rev. 7:1:
the ‘four’ angels standing on the “four corners” of the
earth.
“They point outward and upward. The mercy
of Christ, the forgiving power of that sacrificial blood,
extends outward and upward. The final message of the
gospel and the Three Angels of Rev. 14 goes to all
directions of the world. “For I am not ashamed of the
gospel of Christ for it is the power of God unto
salvation [from sin] to everyone that believeth.”
Romans 1:16, [Mt.1:21].
“Inside the four horns, from the protected center
comes the quiet incense of Christ’s righteousness that
joins with the saints’ prayers to be a sweet odor
acceptable to God. The place of prayer is a place of
protection surrounded by the horns of God’s power.

Setting of Trumpets Indicates Time of Fulfillment.—
“The setting of the trumpets clearly indicates
that the first six were fulfilled before 1844 AD. In the
introduction to the trumpets an angel offers the prayers
of the saints at the altar of incense in the heavenly
temple. This ministry was performed in the first
apartment of the sanctuary which continued from
Christ’s ascension until 1844 when it transferred the
second apartment of the heavenly temple. In the sixth
trumpet also, it says, ‘I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden altar which is before God.’ Rev.
9:3. This is another first apartment scene indicating
that the sixth trumpet was taking place during the
time when the ministry of Christ was in the first
apartment, i.e. before 1844 AD.” Cooke #12-UR, 2,3.
Having a Golden Censer.—
“In the first apartment I saw the candlestick with
seven lamps, the table of shewbread, the altar of incense,
and the censer.” Early Writings, 251,252.
“The holy places of the sanctuary in heaven are
represented by the two apartments in the sanctuary on
earth. As in vision the apostle John was granted a view
of the temple of God in heaven, he beheld there ‘seven
lamps of fire burning before the throne.’ Rev. 4:5. He
saw an angel ‘having a golden censer; and there was
given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with
the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which
was before the throne.’ Rev. 8:3. Here the prophet
was permitted to behold the first apartment of the
sanctuary in heaven.” Great Controversy, 414.

The Golden Censer
“On the Day of Atonement, when the high priest
entered into the Most Holy place, he carried with him a
censer filled with precious odors, the fragrance of

196

REVELATION 8
which was wafted by the breezes far beyond the
tabernacle court.” Haskel, SSP, 146.
“And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is
called the Holiest of all; Which had the golden censer,
and the ark of the covenant overlaid roundabout with
gold.” Hebrews 9:4.
“Between the cherubim was a golden censer, and
as the prayers of the saints, offered in faith, came up
to Jesus, and He presented them to His father, a
cloud of fragrance arose from the incense, looking
like smoke of most beautiful colors. Above the place
where Jesus stood, before the ark, was exceedingly
bright glory that I could not look upon; it appeared like
the throne of God. As the incense ascended to the
Father, the excellent glory came from the throne to
Jesus, and from Him it was shed upon those whose
prayers had come up like sweet incense. Light poured
upon Jesus in rich abundance and overshadowed the
mercy seat, and the train of glory filled the temple. I
could not long look upon the surpassing brightness. No
language can describe it. I was overwhelmed and
turned from the majesty and glory of the scene.”
Early Writings, 252.
“The prayers that are placed in the golden censer
of the Saviour’s merits are accepted by the Father.”
Signs, 11/18/1903.
Much Incense Offered With Prayers of All Saints.—
“The whole multitude of the people were praying
without at the time of incense.” Lk. 1:10.
“Let my prayer be set forth before thee as
incense; and the lifting up of my hands as the evening
sacrifice.” Psalm 141:2.
“Every morning and evening the high priest in the
ancient sanctuary entered the holy place and placed fresh
incense upon the fire which was constantly burning upon
the golden altar. Sufficient incense was placed there
each morning to last all day, and at evening the supply
was sufficient to keep the fragrant smoke ascending
through all the dreary hours of the night. As Israel
encamped about the tabernacle, each sleepless one could
detect the fragrance of the incense of the sanctuary as it
was borne upon the breezes of the night. While the
priest was placing the incense on the sacred fire, and
the dense volume of frag-rant smoke ascended, the
prayers of the whole multitude ascended with the
smoke.
“What could more fitly represent the real incense—
Christ’s righteousness—which He adds to the prayers of
His people from the golden altar before the Father’s
throne in heaven? The earthly priests served ‘unto the
example and shadow of heavenly things.’ Those who
believe this may know that every morning there is an
abundant supply of Christ’s righteousness offered, and
as they pour out their soul before God, their prayers will

not ascend alone; for the great High Priest will add
‘much incense’ with them, and the Father, looking upon
the righteousness of His Son, will accept the feeble
petitions of His child. All day and all night the incense
ascended; it repre-sented a never failing supply, and
testified that whenever a sinner cries out for help
there is righteousness for him.” Haskel, SSP, 146,147.
“The incense, ascending with the prayers of Israel
represented the merits and intercessions of Christ, His
perfect righteousness, which through faith is imputed
to His people, and which can alone make the worship of
sinful beings acceptable to God. Before the veil of the
most holy place, was an altar of perpetual
intercession; before the holy, an altar of continual
atonement.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 353.
“The religious services, the prayers, the praise, the
penitent confession of sin ascend from true believers as
incense to the heavenly sanctuary; but passing through
the corrupt channels of humanity, they are so defiled that
unless purified by blood, they can never be of value with
God. They ascend not in spotless purity, and unless
the Intercessor who is at God’s right hand presents
and purifies all by His righteousness, it is not
acceptable to God. All incense from earthly tabernacles
must be moist with the cleansing drops of the blood of
Christ. He holds before the Father the censer of His
own merits, in which there is no taint of earthly
corruption. He gathers into this censer the prayers,
the praise, and the confessions of His people, and
with these He puts His own spotless righteousness.
Then, perfumed with the merits of Christ’s propitiation,
the incense comes up before God wholly and entirely
acceptable. Then gracious answers are returned.
“O, that all may see that everything in obedience,
in penitence, in praise and thanksgiving must be placed
upon the glowing fire of the righteousness of Christ.
The fragrance of this righteousness ascends like a cloud
around the mercy seat.” (Manuscript 50,1900). 6BC,
1078.
Why Much Incense?—
“Because there was much prayer from the
saints. …The trumpets were God’s response to the
prayers of the saints. When God answered the much
praying of the saints—he sent the trumpets upon the
earth.
“…How marvelous is the power of the saints’
prayers! What would challenge the saints to much
prayer that could result in the judgments of the trumpets
upon the Roman empire? We suggest it was the great
apostasy. The ‘falling away’ of 2Thess. 2 had taken
place, ‘the man of sin’ had risen. Constantine had
amalgamated church and state, and much of the
Christian church had been brought to ruin. The true
faith was in peril, the majority of Christians had gone
astray. True believers knew that antichrist would come,
that apostasy would arise, and now, staring them in the
face throughout the church of the day, was stark idolatry.

197

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Saint and martyr worship were flooding the church. We
suggest that this is what led to much prayer. The
cause of God looked hopeless and no doubt only one
resort remained to the saints, and that was prayer
and the result of their prayers ascending to the
temple was the sending of divine judgments upon the
apostasy, in the form of the trumpets.
“There is a great lesson here for the saints today,
because God’s church is also in the midst of apostasy.
We also are to send our prayers to the sanctuary making
sure that they are purified with the merits of Christ.
Maybe the way that God will answer our prayers will be
to once again send judgments, but this time, judgments
on the church. Maybe the Lord will have to be drastic in
order to bring His church into line so that it may receive
the latter rain.
“ ‘When the judgments of God are in the earth,
then will the people learn righteousness.’ Isa. 26:9.”
Cooke, #12-UR, 15-17.
The Prayers of All Saints Offered.—
“Doubtless the entire work of mediation for the
people of God during the gospel era is here presented.
This is apparent from the fact that the angel offers his
incense with the prayers of all saints.” Smith, DR, 474.
“The offering which the High Priest makes, is the
prayers of all saints. From the time of the fall, heart
yearnings have been felt in heaven. Every prayer has
been recorded in the record books; never has one soullonging been passed by unheeded. Parents have prayed
for the conversion of their children, and children have
pleaded for their parents. The burden for souls in distant
lands, has often rested heavily on some faithful follower
of God; and although the ones prayed for may never
have been conscious of the fact, a connection was made
between heaven and earth, and the needy ones were
within the circuit. Heaven always responds to the call of
a soul; it is pledged to do so, and will fulfill the promise.
So the prayers which are ascending daily are as sure to
be answered as the truth is sure that God’s throne is
eternal.
Angels are rearranging environments,
changing circumstances, weaving about disinterested
souls a network of influences which will some day
lead to a surrender. God never forces Himself upon a
single life, but there is one way to connect a man with
heaven in spite of himself, and that way is through
prayer.” Haskel, SSP, 147,148.
“When, armed with the promises of God, you come
to the Father in the name of Jesus, the Great
Intercessor is seen by faith, standing at the altar of
incense and having in His hand the golden censer. You
hear His voice saying, ‘And I will pray the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you forever.’ John 14:16. What hope will
fill your poor discouraged heart! What shame and
remorse will you feel for your cherished unbelief!
“Would you not feel that if Christ is praying for
you, you can pray for yourself with an intensity of

perseverance, and that all inferior aid is just what it is—
finite and worthless? With Jesus as your Advocate, and
you believing, confessing your sins with contrition of
soul, and dying to self, would you not feel assured your
suit is indeed gained? Would you not feel the evidence
in your own soul that Jesus was amply able to do all
things for you, and that the foot of the cross was the only
place of safety for you?” “1888”, 868-869.
“The simple prayers indicted by the Holy Spirit
will ascend through the gates ajar, the open door which
Christ has declared: I have opened, and no man can
shut. These prayers, mingled with the incense of the
perfection of Christ, will ascend as fragrance to the
Father, and answers will come.” 6 Testimonies, 467.
“Christ is our only hope. Come to God in the name
of Him who gave His life for the world. Rely upon the
efficacy of His sacrifice. Show that His love, His joy,
is in your soul, and that because of this your joy is full.
Cease to talk unbelief. In God is our strength. Pray
much. Prayer is the life of soul. The prayer of faith is
the weapon by which we may successfully resist every
assault of the enemy.” (Manuscript 24, 1904). Selected
Messages, Vol. 1, 88.
Incense Renewed Morning and Evening.—
“And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every
morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn
incense upon it. And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at
even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense
before the Lord throughout your generations.” Exodus
30:7,8.
Worshiping When Incense Was Renewed.—
“Like the patriarchs of old, those who profess to
love God should erect an altar to the Lord wherever
they pitch their tent.... Fathers and mothers should
often lift up their hearts to God in humble supplication
for themselves and their children. Let the father, as
priest of the household, lay upon the altar of God the
morning and evening sacrifice, while the wife and
children unite in prayer and praise. In such a household
Jesus will love to tarry.
“Let the members of every family bear in mind
that they are closely allied to heaven. The Lord has a
special interest in the families of His children here
below. Angels offer the smoke of the fragrant incense
for the praying saints. Then in every family let prayer
ascend to heaven both in the morning and at the cool
sunset hour, in our behalf presenting before God the
Saviour’s merits. Morning and evening the heavenly
universe take notice of every praying household....”
Child Guidance, 518,519.
“Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray,
and cry aloud: and He shall hear my voice.” Psalm
55:17.

198

“Morning and evening your earnest prayers

REVELATION 8
should ascend to God for His blessing and guidance.
True prayer takes hold upon Omnipotence and gives us
the victory. Upon his knees the Christian obtains
strength to resist temptation.
“The father who is the ‘house band’ of the family
will bind his children to the throne of God by living
faith. Distrusting his own strength, he hangs his helpless
soul on Jesus and takes hold of the strength of the Most
High. Brethren, pray at home, in your family, night and
morning; pray earnestly in your closet; and while
engaged in your daily labor, lift up the soul to God in
prayer. It was thus that Enoch walked with God. The
silent, fervent prayer of the soul will rise like holy
incense to the throne of grace and will be acceptable
to God as if offered in the sanctuary. To all who thus
seek Him, Christ becomes a present help in time of need.
They will be strong in the day of trial.” 4 Testimonies,
615-616.
Before the Throne.—
“Prayer is the opening of the heart to God as to a
friend. Not that it is necessary in order to make known
to God what we are, but in order to enable us to receive
Him. Prayer does not bring God down to us, but
brings us up to Him.” Steps to Christ, 93.
Smoke of Incense Which Came With the Prayers.—
“Jesus stood by the ark, and as the saints’ prayers
came up to Him, the incense in the censer would
smoke, and He would offer up their prayers with the
smoke of the incense to His Father.” Early Writings, 32.
“In the typical service, fire was daily placed on
the altar of incense from the altar of sacrifice. Thus
was shown the close relation between the services of
the court and the holy place which together
constituted ‘the daily ministration.’ ...The incense
was placed on the fire and by this means only could the
cloud of fragrance ascend to God. It was the fire that
drew from the incense its fragrance and carried it upward
in a cloud of ascending smoke so that it filled both
apartments of the sanctuary and reaching the camp of
Israel called God’s people to prayer. This may also
represent the fact that out of fiery trials ascend to
God the most fragrant and effectual prayers.
Whenever the church has been crushed by bitter
persecution the lives of Christians have shed the most
fragrant influence in the world.” Bunch, TR, 74,75.
Ascended Up Before God.—
“Our text declares that the ‘much incense’ was
offered ‘with,’ or added to (margin)’the prayers of all
saints.’ It is the incense that makes the prayers
effectual. As the saints of God offer their prayers on
earth, the incense of Christ’s righteousness is offered in
heaven and thus added to them as they ascend to the
Father. The fact that the prayers ascend with ‘the
smoke of the incense’ shows that they are acceptable
to God. All prayers do not ascend to God. Only those
prayers that are mingled with faith and made fragrant

with the merits of Christ reach the throne of God. All
others fall lifeless at the feet of the petitioner.” Bunch,
TR, 74.

REVELATION 8:5
And the angel took the censer, and filled
it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the
earth:
and there were voices, and
thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.
Fire.—
“The fire upon this altar [in the earthly sanctuary]
was kindled by God Himself and was sacredly
guarded.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 348.
“In every true disciple this love, like sacred fire,
burns on the altar of the heart.” Acts of the Apostles,
334.
“When the heart of the speaker is sanctified
through the truth, his words will be living realities to
himself and to others. Those who hear him will know
that he has been with God and has drawn near to Him in
fervent, effectual prayer. The Holy Spirit has fallen
upon him, his soul has felt the vital, heavenly fire, and
he will be able to compare spiritual things with spiritual.
Power will be given him to tear down the strongholds of
Satan. Hearts will be broken by his presentation of
the love of God, and many will inquire: ‘What must I
do to be saved?’” 6 Testimonies, 68.
“The Saviour marks all our work as though done
unto himself; for he identifies his interest with that of
suffering humanity. Every one who names the name
of Jesus is called, so far as it lies in his power, to help
every other soul in the heavenward way. But let none
feel that Christ has placed them on the judgment-seat to
pass judgment on a brother or sister who is unfortunate,
or who falls into error. Many hearts are sorely stricken,
to whom words fitly spoken might bring peace and rest.
These souls are a test to their brethren and sisters,
revealing what is in the heart. All heaven is looking to
see how we treat those that need our help. It is this that
reveals whether the glowing fire of the first love is still
burning upon the altar of the heart.” Special
Testimonies, No.7, 58.
“We are in danger of mingling the sacred and the
common. The holy fire from God is to be used in our
efforts. The true altar is Christ; the true fire is the
Holy Spirit. This is our inspiration. It is only as the
Holy Spirit leads and guides a man that he is a safe
counselor. If we turn aside from God and from His
chosen ones to inquire at strange altars we shall be
answered according to our works.” Selected Messages,
Vol. 3, 300,301.
Took the Censer, and Filled it With Fire.—

199

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“And he [Aaron] shall take a censer full of
burning coals of fire from off the altar before the
Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small,
and bring it within the vail. And he shall put the incense
upon the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of the
incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the
testimony, that he die not.” Lev. 16:12,13.
“God had said: ‘The fire upon the altar shall be
burning in it; it shall not be put out: and the priest
shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burntoffering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the
fat of the peace-offerings. The fire shall ever be
burning upon the altar; it shall never go out.’ It was
from this altar that the fire for the censers should be
taken to kindle the incense that was to ascend before
God.” Review & Herald, 4/15/1894.
Casting the Censer Down.—
DENOTES JUDGMENT: “It is indisputable that
this temple scene is involved with the trumpets. Why
much incense? Because there was much prayer from the
saints. The prayers of the saints were being heard and as
a result, the ‘…censer is filled with fire and cast into
the earth…’ vs.5. Some conclude that this represents
the close of probation, but this must be rejected. Why
the fire? Fire does two things. It purifies or destroys,
purifies or punishes. Here it purifies the prayers of
God’s saints and punishes the saint’s oppressors. It
punishes the apostates. ‘Fire is cast upon the earth…’
It represents the judgments of God, the visitations of
justice in the form of the trumpets. It is not the close
of probation as such, unless it be the close of probation
in a local sense of the Roman empire.
“The trumpets were God’s response to the
prayers of the saints. When God answered the much
praying of the saints—he sent the trumpets upon the
earth. Matthew Henry, the elder statesman of Bible
commentators wrote, ‘These prayers that were thus
accepted in heaven, produced great changes upon
earth. The same angel with the same censer took the
fire of the altar and cast it into the earth and this
presently caused strange commotions, voices and
lightnings and thunders and an earthquake.’
Commentary on Rev. 8.
“…What was it that led to the special prayers of
the saints? Without doubt it was the overwhelming
apostasy that had come into the church, particularly the
church situated within the Roman empire. This apostasy
was supported by the authority of Rome, and so in
response to the prayers of the saints, God visits
Western Rome with the first four trumpet judgments
in an endeavor to bring His people back to truth—back
to loyalty to Christ. The fifth and sixth trumpets we
will show, fell on Eastern Rome, the seventh trumpet
falls on the whole world when it becomes Roman
again—Rome revived when ‘all the world wonders
after the beast.’ Rev.13:3.” Cooke, #12-UR, 15-17.

“O house of David, thus saith the LORD; Execute
judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled
out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out
like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of
the evil of your doings.” Jer. 21:12.
FINAL JUDGMENT: “That we are brought
forward to the end of time, is evident from the act of
the angel in filling the censer with fire and casting it
unto the earth; by this act he shows that his work is
done. No more prayers are to be offered up mingled
with incense. This symbolic act can have its application
only at the time when the ministration of Christ in the
sanctuary in behalf of mankind has forever ceased.
Following the angel’s act there are voices, thunderings,
lightnings, and an earthquake—exactly such occurrences
as we are elsewhere informed take place at the close of
human probation. (See Rev. 11:19; 16:17,18.)” Smith,
DR, 474,475.
“I saw angels hurrying to and fro in heaven. An
angel with a writer’s inkhorn by his side returned from
the earth and reported to Jesus that his work was done,
and the saints were numbered and sealed. Then I saw
Jesus, who had been ministering before the ark
containing the ten commandments, throw down the
censer. He raised His hands, and with a loud voice said,
‘It is done.’ And all the angelic host laid off their
crowns as Jesus made the solemn declaration, (Rev.
22:11 quoted.)” Early Writings, 280.
Thunderings, Lightnings, & Earthquake.—
“The close of probation is also identified by the
‘voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an
earthquake.’” Bunch, TR, 75.
“And there were voices, and thunders, and
lightnings; and there was a great earthquake, such as
was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake, and so great.” Rev. 16:18.
“When the Son of God hung upon Calvary, the
darkness gathered like the pall of death about the cross.
All nature sympathized with its dying Author. There
were thunderings and lightnings, and a mighty
earthquake….” Signs, 11/11/1889.
“These events indicate great activity in the
government of heaven at times of significant events:
Mt. Sinai (Ex. 19), Calvary, 1844, the Close of
Probation, and at the 7th plague. God’s voice is
thundering. Angels rush to and fro from heaven to earth,
and earth to heaven like lightning. Physical, mental,
and/or spiritual ‘earthquakes’ result from their activity.
(See Rev. 11:19 for more comments.) Unknown Source.
Why Are These Verses Inserted Here?—
“They are a message of hope and comfort for the
church. The seven angels with their warlike trumpets
had been introduced; terrible scenes were to take place

200

REVELATION 8
when they should sound; but before they begin to blow,
the people of God are directed to behold the work of
mediation in their behalf in heaven, and to look to
their source of help and strength during this time.
Though they should be tossed upon the tumultuous
waves of strife and war, they were to know that their
great High Priest still ministered for them in the
sanctuary in heaven. To that sacred place they could
direct their prayers with the assurance that they would be
offered with incense to their Father in heaven. Thus
could they gain strength and support in all their
tribulation.” Smith, DR, 475.
“The chief lesson to be learned from this
introductory vision is that during the terrible scenes
pictured by the seven trumpets, grace is abundantly
available to the saints of God. ...Where much iniquity
prevails, much mercy and righteousness is available
to the people of God.” Bunch, TR, 75.
“Where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound.” Rom. 5:20.
Satan Tries to Hide the View of Jesus at the Altar.—
“Professed Christians were turning to other
mediators, namely dead saints. They thus placed
themselves outside the protection of God. ‘While
waiting for the Last Day the souls of the righteous were
regarded as living in the presence of God and forming
for Him, in company with the angels, a kind of celestial
court. To the mind of the populace whose perceptions
in theology were not specially acute, the body of the
Blessed which was also, in virtue of the solidarity of
Christians or communion of saints, a body of
intercessors, presented some points of resemblance to
the ancient pantheon.... A particular saint protected
more particularly this or that country, showed himself
helpful in particular circumstances, healed this or that
disease. Benefit was to be derived from invoking him
near his tomb or in a sanctuary which was specially
dedicated to him.... To the martyrs of the persecutions
were speedily added the saints of the New and even of
the Old Testament.... The angels also were beginning to
receive religious homage.’ Duchense, ‘Early History of
the Christian Church,’ Vol. 3, pp. 9,10.
“Here is the reason why the angel ceased to offer
incense. The Church had turned away from Christ
and His merits to other mediators who had no merits
to give, and was bringing no incense with her prayers
to the altar. One Mediator, 1 Tim. 2:5. Come unto God
by Him, Heb. 7:25. God has a hedge about His own,
Job. 1:10. When Christians turn from the protection
of Christ’s blood, they step outside the protection and
are open to attacks of the enemy. As God withdrew
His protection from Israel and Judah, 1 Chron. 9:1, and
they were destroyed by Babylon, so now it was with
Christendom.” Burnside, RWU, 98,99.

REVELATION 8:6
And the seven angels which had the
seven trumpets prepared themselves to
sound.
The Seven Trumpets.—
“The subject of the seven trumpets is resumed.
These trumpets occupy the rest of this chapter and all of
Revelation 9. The blowing of the trumpets by the
seven angels comes as a complement to the prophecy
of Daniel 2 and 7, beginning with the breaking up of
the old Roman Empire into its ten divisions. In the
first four trumpets, we have a description of the special
events which marked Rome’s fall.” Smith, DR, 475.
When and Why the Seven Trumpets Were Blown.—
“The view of Jesus at the altar shows us a Saviour
who hears the cries of the righteous when they are
oppressed by spiritual wickedness in high places. The
trumpets are an answer to their prayers, and a
judgment against apostasy in the church. The first
trumpet could not have been blown until there was a
falling away first. This occurred after the days of
Constantine.” Unknown Source.
“Rome was decidedly pagan till Constantine’s
time, and then a transformation took place. In 385 AD,
the transformation had progressed to the point that
“Christians” began killing Christians. At first church
leaders complained, but then such things began to be
common place.
This was during the reign of
Theodosius. From his time onward, the Roman
Empire became decidedly Catholic rather than pagan
or Arian. 395 AD, the year he died, Alaric and his
Goths began their rampages that marked the end of the
glories of old Rome.” Pickle, STR, Part 19.
“Originally it was God’s plan that when His people
apostatized they should be punished. He said, ‘I will be
his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit
iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and
with the stripes of the children of men.’ 2 Sam. 7:14.
Later we have an example of how this was applied when
they had apostatized, and had made decrees in
opposition to God. He said, ‘O Assyrian, the rod of
mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine
indignation. I will send him against a hypocritical
nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give
him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey,
and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.’
Isa. 10:5,6.
“It will be noticed that these same principles were
meant for these trumpets; for after several of the
trumpets had come, it says, ‘And the rest of the men
which were not killed by these plagues yet repented
not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass,
and stone, and of wood; neither repented they of their
murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications,

201

GEMS FROM REVELATION
nor of their thefts.’ Rev. 9:20-21.
“This indicates that these plagues (wars) were sent
as punishments, to get the people to repent of their
apostasies. Where and when are we to look for these
wars? If they were against the apostasy they could not
begin until the apostasy took place. Although there
was a continual decline in the church, yet it was not until
392 AD, that Theodosius, the Emperor, outlawed
heathenism and endeavored to bring all the heathen into
the church. Here the apostasy had reached its
climax.” Straw, SR, 54.
“When evil reaches a certain stage, further
fellowship with evil-doers can benefit neither the
righteous nor the wicked, and separation becomes
imperative. Rome reached this condition just before
being overthrown by the barbarians from the north. A
Roman poet said: ‘Ye who desire to live a godly life,
depart from Rome; for, although all things are lawful
there, yet to be godly is unlawful.’” Bunch, TR, 253.
“The effect of this apostasy, which developed the
Papacy in the Roman Empire, was the complete ruin of
the Roman Empire. And this consequence of the
apostasy traced in these first three steps in the two lines
of prophecy of the Seven Churches and the Seven Seals,
is portrayed in the line of prophecy of the Seven
Trumpets.
“These events of the Seven Trumpets are important
in another sense also: …the peoples by whom was
wrought ‘the divine judgment of destruction upon this
nominally Christian, but essentially heathen, world,’ of
Western Rome especially, are, in their descent, the
great nations of today; and are today the living subjects
of the prophecies relating to our times.” Jones, GNOT,
6, 10.

THE FIRST TRUMPET
REVELATION 8:7
The first angel sounded, and there
followed hail and fire mingled with blood,
and they were cast upon the earth: and the
third part of trees was burnt up, and all
green grass was burnt up.
What to Expect of the First Trumpet.—
“This was the scene that John saw, following the
sounding of the trumpet. This war was to pro-duce
results similar to what would be accomplished by a
storm of hail and fire sweeping through the land.”
Straw, SR, 55.
The First Trumpet.—
“The blast of the first trumpet has its location at the
close of the fourth century and onward, and refers to the

desolating invasions of the Roman Empire by the
Visigoths under Alaric, and by other northern tribes.”
SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 15.
“In the year 395, the Goths, with their renowned
leader, Alaric, invaded the Eastern Roman Empire. As
they crossed the Danube, the dividing line between
the territory of the Romans and the wilds of
Germany, in the middle of a winter of uncommon
severity, they came like the hail from the north, and
one of the Roman poets has said, ‘They rolled their
ponderous wagons over the broad and icy back of the
indignant river.’ Alaric was no mean leader; but bold,
artful, and more than a match for any general in the
degenerate Roman army.” Haskel, SSP, 150.

Invasion of the Goths into the
Roman Empire, 395 AD. Rome Sacked, 410 AD.
“‘The dark cloud which was collected along the
coasts of the Baltic, burst in thunder upon the banks of
the upper Danube. The pastures of Gaul, in which flocks
and herds grazed, and the banks of the Rhine, which
were covered with elegant houses and well-cultivated
farms, formed a scene of peace and plenty, which was
suddenly changed into a desert, distinguished from
the solitude of nature only by smoking ruins. Many
cities were cruelly oppressed, or destroyed. Many
thousands were inhumanly massacred. The consuming
flames of war spread over the greatest part of the
seventeen provinces of Gaul.’ Alexander Keith, Signs
of the Times, Vol. I, p. 241.” Smith, DR, 477.
“In the year 408 Alaric descended upon Italy.
He hastily passed the Alps and the Po, pillaged the cities
of northern Italy, and advanced a constantly increasing
army to the city of Ravenna, where the pusillanimous
emperor had his capital.
Without meeting any
resistance, he proceeded along the Adriatic until he
came near Rome. Alaric took Ostia, the port of
Rome at the mouth of the Tiber, and demanded
unconditional surrender of the city itself.” Haskel,
SSP, 150.
Rome Conquered!—
“Three times in the three successive years, 408,
409, and 410, the city of Rome was besieged by
Alaric, and was afflicted with famine, pestilence, and all

202

REVELATION 8
the horrors that accompany a determined siege and
stubborn defense. At last, however, in 410, the final
siege was ended, and ‘eleven hundred and sixty-three
years after the foundation of Rome, the imperial city,
which had subdued and civilized so considerable a
portion of mankind, was delivered to the licentious
fury of the tribes of Germany and Scythia.’ For six
days the city was given up to pillage, to flame, to rapine,
to captivity, and to slaughter. ‘It is not easy to compute
the multitudes who from an honorable station and a
prosperous fortune, were suddenly reduced to the
miserable condition of captives and exiles.... This awful
catastrophe of Rome filled the astonished empire with
grief and terror’ to such an extent that they were fairly
‘tempted to confound the destruction of the capital
and the dissolution of the globe.’” Jones, GNOT, 15.
“For six days the city was in the hands of the
invaders. At the end of that time, ‘at the head of an
army, encumbered with rich and weighty spoils, their
intrepid leader advanced along the Appian Way into the
southern provinces of Italy, destroying whatever dared to
oppose his passage, and contenting himself with the
plunder of the unresisting country.’ [Gibbon’s Decline
and Fall, Vol. 3, p.56.]” Haskel, SSP, 151.
“ ‘In the pillage and fire of Rome, the streets of
the city were filled with dead bodies; the flames
consumed many public and private buildings; and the
ruins of a palace remained, after a century and a half, a
stately monument of the Gothic conflagration.’
“ ‘...The concluding sentence of the thirty-third
chapter of Gibbon’s History is of itself a clear and
comprehensive commentary; for in winding up his own
description of this brief but most eventful period, he
concentrates, as in a parallel reading, the sum of the
history.... But the words which precede it are not
without their meaning: “The public devotion of the age
was impatient to exalt the saints and martyrs of the
Catholic Church on the altars of Diana and Hercules.
The union of the Roman empire was dissolved; its
genius was humbled in the dust; and armies of
unknown barbarians, issuing from the frozen regions
of the North, had established their victorious reign over
the fairest provinces of Europe and Africa.” ’ Alexander
Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol. I, p. 253.” Smith, DR,
478.

earth with the hand.’ Is. 28:2. The prophet in
describing the Assyrian invasion likens it to a mighty
hailstorm.
“We can safely conclude that a storm such as
described in the first trumpet, denotes a military
invasion. The description in the symbol indicates that it
is an invasion from the North. Hailstorms that fell upon
Roman territory always came from the North, so this
suggests that this invasion would be from the
Northerly regions.” Cooke, #12-UR, 19.
“The terrible effects of this Gothic invasion are
represented as ‘hail,’ from the northern origin of the
invaders; ‘fire,’ from the destruction by flame of both
city and country; and ‘blood,’ from the terrible slaughter
of the citizens of the empire by the bold and intrepid
warriors.” Smith, DR, 476.
“The ‘fire mingled with blood’ represents the
terrible destruction inflicted as they went over Greece,
Asia Minor, Italy, Spain, and Southern France. Accounts of their warfare indicate there was hardly anything left but sky and earth.” Metcalf, GPDR, 95.
Hail, a Judgment for Apostasy.—
“As one peruses Isaiah chapters 28 and 29, it is
readily apparent that this judgment [of a ‘tempest of hail
and a destroying storm’] comes because of Israel’s
sin of drunkenness. …Yet, ‘they are drunken, but
not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong
drink.’ Is. 29:9,10. ...It is pretty clear that Isaiah 28 and
29 are using wine as a symbol of false doctrine. A
similar theme is found in Revelation, for Babylon the
Great makes all the world drink her wine, bringing
God’s wrath down upon her.” Pickle, STR, Part 9.
Cast Upon the Earth.—
“As the hail and fire mingled with blood were cast
upon the earth, ...this indicates that another power had
done the casting or was responsible for the invasions of
Rome. The Goths... were driven out of their own
countries by the Huns and literally thrust upon the
empire. When the Huns burst into Europe from the east,
the Goths were pushed across the Danube into Roman
territory.” Bunch, TR, 79.

“Here is indicated the cause of this war-scourge or
judgment. The church was being paganized under the
influence of the papacy.” Bunch, TR, 77.

The Third Part.—
“[In AD 337], the Roman Empire, after
Constantine the Great, was divided into three parts.
Hence the frequent remark, [‘the] third part’ ...is an
allusion to the third part of the empire which was under
the scourge.” Smith, DR, 478.

Hail and Fire, Mingled With Blood.—
“What does a hailstorm represent in prophecy?
The Old Testament, on which Revelation is based gives
the clue. In describing the invasion of the Assyrians into
the land of Israel, the prophet declares, ‘Behold, the
Lord hath a mighty and a strong one, which, as a
tempest of hail and destroying storm, as a flood of
mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the

“In the days of Constantine [AD 330], the empire
was divided, Rome being the western capital, and
Constantinople the eastern. At the death of Constantine,
three divisions were made in order to seat each one of
his three sons on a throne; this triple division is
recognized throughout the trumpet history. Of these
divisions, Italy, or the Western Roman Empire, was

203

GEMS FROM REVELATION
known as one third. While the three divisions are
referred to, the first division into an eastern and western
empire, is also preserved, until the capture of
Constantinople by the Turks.” Haskel, SSP, 149.
Trees and Green Grass Burnt Up.—
“In a season of such extreme heat that the beds of
the rivers were dry, Alaric invaded the dominion of the
West. A secluded ‘old man of Verona’ [the poet
Claudian], pathetically lamented the fate of his
contemporary trees, which must blaze in the
conflagration of the whole country; ...and, the emperor
of the Romans fled before the king of the Goths.” Smith,
DR, 477.
“Figuratively, trees represent people. The trees
burnt up would be trees of wickedness [people] in the
Roman empire (Mt. 7:17), not the trees of
righteousness, mentioned in Rev. 7:3.” PJ
Alaric Felt Compelled to Rome.—
“When Alaric sacked Rome in AD 410, Pope
Innocent was virtually governor of the city. He exhorted
Alaric to spare the churches.” Olsen, PSAD, 12.
“ ‘Alaric’s course was to Italy, as he told an Italian
monk. He felt a secret and preternatural impulse
which directed and even impelled his march to the
gates of Rome. As his trumpet sounded and his march
advanced, terrible omens and prognostications preceded
him. ‘The Christians,’ says Gibbon, ‘derived comfort
from the powerful intercession of the saints and
martyrs.’
[This reveals the apostasy of the
Christians.] Thrice, in fulfillment of his destiny, he
descended from the Alps onto the Italian plains, marking
his course at each step as the awe-struck historians of the
times tell us, in country and in town with ravage,
conflagration and blood, till the gates of Rome itself
were opened to the conqueror and the Gothic fires
blazed around the capitol.’
Elliot, ‘Horae
Apocalypticae’, Vol. I, p.351-353.
“In fulfilling the first trumpet it is significant to
notice that Alaric possessed a powerful conviction,
that he was divinely led to destroy Rome. This was
recognized by the people of the day. When Alaric was
intercepted by an Italian monk with a plea to spare the
city of Rome, Alaric assured him that he did not feel
disposed to commence the siege, but found himself
compelled by some hidden and irresistible impulse to
accomplish the enterprise.’” Sozamen’s History, Book
9, ch.6.” Cooke, #12-UR, 22.
First Trumpet Stuns the World.—
“Alaric’s effect upon history was not confined to
the physical conquest of Rome. Far more devastating
was his destruction of a myth. The psycho-logical blow
to the empire was enormous. To the people of that
day, the fall of the city was inconceivable. For twenty
or more generations, Rome had stood immovable,
imperishable, unassailable and unconquerable, in every

mind whether civilized or barbarian. Her fall was akin
in the general assumptions of the western peoples to
the fall of the sun or moon. The inconceivable had
occurred. The only certainty was that there were no
more certainties.” The Christians, Their First 2000
Years, Darkness Descends, 130.
“Gibbon’s remarks reveal that Alaric’s invasion
and sack of Rome dealt a deadly blow to the Roman
Empire. …‘At the hour of midnight …the inhabitants
[of Rome] were awakened by the tremendous sound of
the Gothic trumpet. Eleven hundred and sixty-three
years after the foundation of Rome, the imperial city,
which had subdued and civilized so considerable a part
of mankind, was delivered to the licentious fury of the
tribes of Germany and Scythia.
…This awful
catastrophe of Rome filled the astonished empire
with grief and terror.’ Gibbon, Vol. 3, p. 380,387.
Cooke, #12-UR, 24.
How People Living at That Time Reacted.—
“Sozomen—365-440 AD: ‘All persons of sense
were aware that the calamities which this siege (that of
Alaric) entailed upon the Romans were indications of
Divine wrath sent to chastise them for their luxury,
their debauchery, and their manifold acts of injustice
toward each other, as well as toward strangers.’
Sozomen’s Ecclesiastical History, Book IX, Ch. 6.
“Philostorgius—364-425 AD: ‘...the sword of the
Barbarians carried off large multitudes, and pestilence
and famine pressed upon them at the same time together
with large herds of wild beasts.... Hail, too, fell in many
places, bigger than a stone which would fill the hand....
It was found in some parts of such size that it weighed
no less than eight pounds ...most clearly revealing the
anger of God.’ Philostorgius’ Ecclesiastical History,
Book XI, Ch. 7.” Straw, SR, 56.

THE SECOND TRUMPET
REVELATION 8:8,9
And the second angel sounded, and as it
were a great mountain burning with fire was
cast into the sea: and the third part of the
sea became blood.
And the third part of the creatures
which were in the sea, and had life, died;
and the third part of the ships were
destroyed.
A Great Mountain.—
“‘A mountain is a natural symbol of strength, and
hence becomes a symbol of a strong and powerful
kingdom; for mountains are not only places of strength
in themselves, but they anciently answered the purposes

204

REVELATION 8
of fortified places, and were the seats of power. Hence
they are properly symbols of strong nations. “The stone
that smote the image became a great mountain, and
filled the whole earth.” Dan. 2:35, Jer. 51:25. ...We
naturally, then, apply this part of the symbol to some
strong and mighty nation....’ Barnes Commentary, on
Rev. p.228.” Straw, SR,57.
“Behold, I am against thee [Babylon],
destroying mountain.” Jeremiah 51:24,25.

O

“The burning mountain was pagan Rome, cast in
by the Vandals.” PJ
Cast Into the Sea.—
“What figure would better, or even so well,
illustrate the condition of navies, and the general havoc
of war on the maritime coasts? In explaining this
trumpet, we are to look for some events which will have
a particular bearing on the commercial world. The
symbol used naturally leads us to look for agitation and
commotion. Nothing but a fierce maritime warfare
would fulfill the prediction. If the sounding of the first
four trumpets relates to four remarkable events which
contributed to the downfall of the Roman Empire, and
the first trumpet refers to the ravages of the Goths under
Alaric, in this we naturally look for the next
succeeding act of invasion which shook the Roman
power and conduced to its fall. The next great
invasion was that of Genseric, at the head of the
Vandals.” Smith, DR, 479.
The Second Trumpet.—
“While Honorius, who had experienced the
invasion of the Goths, was still nominally the emperor of
Rome, the Vandals were making their presence felt in
Spain. They were a horde of barbarians who had come
from the northeast and for a time halted in the western
provinces of Rome. In 428 the terrible Genseric
became their leader, and at once the Vandals
assumed the aggressive. ...It was in 431 that the
Vandals crossed the Straits of Gibraltar. A few years
later (439), they were sole possessors of Carthage and
northern Africa. Rome could ill afford to lose her
African possessions; for they furnished both wealth and
food to the cities of Italy. Nevertheless Genseric and the
Vandals grew strong on the southern shore of the
Mediterranean.” Haskel, SSP, 152.
“‘Finding himself shut in to the South by the
desert, Genseric, we are told, cast his eyes to the sea, and
determined to create a naval power. And then, “the
fleets that issued from the port of Carthage again
claimed the empire of the Mediterranean. Sicily was
conquered by them, and Sardinia, and the other Western
isles; all that was in the third of the sea.”’ Vol. I, pp.
378,379, Horae Apocalypaecae, Elliott, 5th ed.”
“...‘The Vandals were unique among the
German nations by the fact that they maintained a
fleet.’ History of the Later Roman Empire, J. B. Bury,

Vol. I, p. 162; Source Book, p. 503.” Straw, SR, 57,58.
“From the port of Carthage he repeatedly made
piratical sallies, preyed on the Roman commerce, and
waged war with that empire.” Smith, DR, 479.
“In 455, Genseric, with his fleet, ‘cast anchor at the
mouth of the Tiber.’ Just at this time there was a crisis in
the imperial family in Rome, and the Emperor Maximus
was attacked by the people in the streets, and was stoned
to death, and cast into the Tiber. ‘On the third day after
the tumult, Genseric boldly advanced from the port of
Ostia to the gates of the defenseless city.’ There was no
army to defend the city; and Pope Leo the Great, at
the head of his clergy, met him outside of the gates,
and pleaded that he spare the city. However, all that
Genseric would even promise was that the people should
not be slaughtered, the buildings should not be burned,
and the captives should not be tortured. But the whole
city and its people ‘were delivered to the licentiousness
of the Vandals and Moors, whose blind passions
revenged the injuries of Carthage. The pillage lasted
fourteen days and nights; and all that yet remained of
public or private wealth, of sacred or profane treasure,
was diligently transported to the vessels of Genseric....
The holy instruments of the Jewish worship, the gold
table, and the gold candlestick with seven branches,
…had been ostentatiously displayed to the Roman
people in the triumph of Titus. They were afterwards
deposited in the Temple of Peace; and at the end of four
hundred years, the spoils of Jerusalem were transferred
from Rome to Carthage, by a barbarian who derived
his origin from the shores of the Baltic....” Jones,
GNOT, 17.

The arch of Titus shows the golden
candlestick being taken to Rome.
In 455 AD, the Vandals took it to Carthage;
It was never seen again.
“Of all the barbarians who attacked Rome the
Vandals were the worst. They took thousands of
Romans and sold them into slavery.” Metcalf, GPDR,
96.
“For many years he was the tyrant of the sea, and
imagined that he himself was fated to be the scourge of
the Romans.” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 21.

205

GEMS FROM REVELATION
The Third Part.—
The third part of the Roman empire. (See note
under the First Trumpet, Rev. 8:7.)
The Third Part of the Sea Became Blood.—
“‘In the spring of each year [between 461 and 467],
they equipped a formidable navy in the port of Carthage,
and Genseric himself, although in a very advanced age
still commanded in person the most important
expeditions.
His designs were concealed with
impenetrable secrecy, till the moment he hoisted sail.
When he was asked by his pilot what course he should
steer, “Leave the determination to the winds” replied
the Barbarian with pious arrogance, “they will transport
us to the guilty coast, whose inhabitants have provoked
the divine justice.” But Genseric himself deigned to
issue more precise orders; he judged the most wealthy
to be the most criminal. The Vandals repeatedly
visited the coasts of Spain, Liguria, Tuscany, Campania,
Lucania, Bruttium, Apulia, Calabria, Venetia, Dalmatia,
Epirus, Greece, and Sicily.... Their arms spread
desolation and terror, from the columns of Hercules
to the mouth of the Nile.’ [Gibbon, Vol. III, pp. 481486.]” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 22,23.

“[Eastern Rome] spent months in preparation of a
fleet. The forces of the East and the West united in
invading Africa. The Roman army stood under the walls
of Carthage. Genseric asked and obtained a five days’
truce. The wind became favorable to the warrior of the
Mediterranean. His vessels were manned with the
bravest of the Vandals and Moors, who in the darkness
of the night, towed a large number of ships loaded
with combustibles, into the very midst of the Roman
fleet. The fire spread from vessel to vessel. ‘The noise
of the wind, the crackling of the flames, the dissonant
cries of the soldiers and mariners, who could neither
command nor obey, increased the horror of the nocturnal
tumult.’ Many who might have escaped the flames, met
death at the hands of the Vandal warriors. Historians
state that eleven hundred Roman vessels were
destroyed. The burning mountain had fallen upon
the sea.” Haskel, SSP, 154,155.

“They took with them horses, so that their terror
spread inland from the port at which the fleet landed the
savage warriors. So hidden were the designs of Genseric
that the Roman world never knew where to look for
the next attack. As wealth and an abundance of plunder
were the objects of their greed, the Vandals usually
avoided fortified cities.” Haskel, SSP, 153,154.
Third Part of Creatures, Which Were in the Sea, Died.
The Third Part of Ships Were Destroyed.—
“To cope with this sea monarch, [in 457 AD], the
Roman emperor, Majorian, made extensive naval
preparations. ‘The imperial navy of three hundred
large galleys, with an adequate proportion of transports
and smaller vessels, was collected in the secure and
capacious harbor of Carthagena in Spain. ... But
Genseric was saved from impending and inevitable ruin
by the treachery of some powerful subjects, envious, or
apprehensive, of their master’s success. Guided by
their secret intelligence, he surprised the unguarded
fleet in the Bay of Carthagena: many of the ships
were sunk, or taken, or burnt; and the preparations of
three years were destroyed in a single day.’ Gibbon’s
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. III, pp. 481486.” Smith, DR, 479,480.
“His success at sea... so enraged Leo, the emperor
of eastern Rome, that he sent him word that, if he did not
desist from his ravages, he would send a force sufficient
to exterminate the Vandal power entirely. For this
purpose a fleet left Constantinople AD 468, and arrived
before Carthage. It consisted of 1113 vessels, at a cost
of 5,200,000 pounds sterling, and soldiers and mariners
about 100,000.” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 23.

“The third part of the ships were destroyed.”
Roman Navy Destroyed, 468 AD.
“In AD 429, he began his attacks upon the Romans,
and in AD 468, his crowning feat was accomplished.”
SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 25.
“Genseric was again recognized as the tyrant of the
sea. He lived to see the final extinction of the Roman
Empire of the West in 476. His was the work which
was permitted to be done at the sounding of the second
trumpet, in that nation where apostasy replaced the
true worship of God, and where the mystery of iniquity
was fast coming to power.” Haskel, SSP, 155.
Purpose of Second Trumpet.—
“We must not forget that the invasions of these
mysterious barbarian tribes constituted divine
judgments upon a nation that had defied God and
rejected His gospel and persecuted His people. Imperial
Rome felt so secure that their capital was called, ‘The
Eternal City.’ The Romans believed that their empire
would stand forever.” Bunch, TR, 82.
“In Rome the worship of the true God had been
polluted. The mystery of iniquity which had begun to
work in Paul’s day (2 Thessalonians 2:7) had made
much headway so that it was soon destined to become

206

REVELATION 8
the controlling power. Genseric’s attacks were for the
most part directed against this wicked and Goddefying power.” Metcalf, GPDR, 96.

should spread over the lands adjacent to them, and
watered by them.’ Albert Barnes, Notes on Revelation,
p.239.” Smith, DR, 483.
The Great Star Fell.—
“This trumpet has allusion to the desolating wars
and furious invasions of Attila, king of the Huns, against
the Roman power.” Smith, DR, 483.

THE THIRD TRUMPET
REVELATION 8:10,11
And the third angel sounded, and there
fell a great star from heaven, burning as it
were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part
of the rivers, and upon the fountains of
waters;
And the name of the star is called
Wormwood: and the third part of the
waters became wormwood; and many men
died of the waters, because they were made
bitter.
A Great Star.—
“In scripture a star represents a leader. While
Satan was the leader of the angels, it could refer to
another leader. In Rev. 1:20, the leaders in God’s
church are likened to stars. Dan. 8:10 indicates the
same. In Jude 1:13 apostate leaders are referred to as
‘wandering stars.’ …A falling star then may not only
refer to Satan, but to human leaders—even religious
leaders.” Cooke, #12-UR, 6.
“A star is a natural emblem of a prince or a ruler,
or one distinguished by rank, or by talent.... In the
application of this part of the symbol, therefore, we
naturally look for some prince or warrior of brilliant
talents who appears suddenly and sweeps rapidly
over the world, who excites consternation and alarm,
whose path is marked by desolation, and who is
regarded as sent from heaven to execute the divine
purposes—who comes not to bless the world by
brilliant talents well-directed, but to execute
vengeance on mankind.’ Barnes Commentary, pp.
232,233.” Straw, SR, 59.
What to Expect of the Third Trumpet.—
“There would be some chieftain or warrior who
might be compared with a blazing meteor; whose
course would be singularly brilliant; who would
appear suddenly like a blazing star, and then
disappear like a star whose light was quenched in the
waters. That the desolating course of that meteor would
be mainly on those portions of the world that abounded
with springs of water and running streams. That an
effect would be produced as if those streams and
fountains were made bitter; that is, that many persons
would perish, and that wide desolations would be caused
in the vicinity of those rivers and streams, as if a bitter
and baleful star should fall into the waters, and death

“The symbolic meteor representing the Huns ‘fell’
and was not ‘cast’ upon the empire…. The Huns were
not driven by another foe but came voluntarily except
as they claimed supernatural guidance.” Bunch, TR,
83.
The Third Trumpet.—
“Attila was king of the Huns. He organized the
different tribes of Europe under his command and
directed his attacks upon Rome.
“‘Attila’s Invasion of the Rivers.—About AD 450
in fulfillment of a treaty with Genseric, he (Attila)
moved against the Western provinces along the Upper
Danube; reached and crossed the Rhine at Basle, and
thence tracing the same great frontier stream of the West
down to Belgium, made its valley one scene of
desolation and woe.... (Horae Apocalyptical, E.B. Elliot,
Vol.1, p. 381. 5th Ed. London.)” Straw, SR, 59.
“At the sound of his war-cry, all Europe musters to
arms. Since Xerxes led his immense army against the
Greeks, no greater body of warriors had ever assembled
to act a part in the fulfillment of prophecy. The
engagement that succeeded is recorded as one of the four
decisive battles of history.
“Rome collects her forces to meet the intruder; she
also invites her very foes to lend a helping hand. The
Visigoths, Burgundians, and Franks joined the Roman
forces. They met in what is now French territory. At
Orleans, and finally at Chalons, the struggle between
one and a half millions of Romans and barbarians
[was fierce]. Neither party could claim a victory.
About 300,000 were left dead upon the battlefield.
After the conflict, the Roman general hastened to the
imperial city, and his confederates to their respective
kingdoms. Attila recruited his forces, and the next
spring appeared in the north of Italy with his army as
large as it was before it was reduced at Chalons.” SDA
Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 27,28.
“He was repulsed in the tremendous battle of
Chalons, and whither then, when thus forced to retrace
his steps, did he direct them? Whither but to fall on
another destined scene of ravage, “the European
fountain of waters,” in the Alpine valleys of Italy....’
Horae Apocalyptical, E.B. Elliot, Vol. 1, p. 381. 5th Ed.
London.
“Gibbon says, After this, ‘Attila pursued his march;
and as he passed, the cities of Altinum, Concordia, and
Padua, were reduced into heaps of stone and ashes.
The inland towns, Vicensa, Verona, and Bergamo, were

207

GEMS FROM REVELATION
exposed to the rapacious cruelty of the Huns. Milan and
Pavia submitted, without resistance, to the loss of their
wealth.... Attila spread his ravages over the rich plains
of modern Lombardy....’ As Attila approached Rome
the people were desperate, knowing that they had no
power to resist such an army as accompanied Attila. It
was then that Leo, the Bishop of Rome, volunteered
his services and went out to meet the coming army.
He appealed that the city be spared. Gibbon says:
‘The Barbarian monarch listened with favorable, and
even respectful attention; and the deliverance of Italy
was purchased by the immense ransom, or dowry, of
the princess Honoria....
“[Yet, in the meanwhile, Attila relieved his tender
anxiety by adding a beautiful maid, whose name was
Ildico, to the list of his innumerable wives.] Their
marriage was celebrated with barbaric pomp and
festivity, at the wooden palace beyond the Danube; and
the monarch oppressed with wine and sleep, retired at a
late hour from the banquet to the nuptial bed.... An
artery had suddenly burst; and as Attila lay in supine
posture, he was suffocated by a torrent of blood.’
“ ‘After his death ...the numerous sons whom so
many mothers bore to the deceased monarch, divided
and disputed, like a private inheritance, the sovereign
command of the nations of Germany and Scythia ...and
finally extinguished the empire of the Huns.’
Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, p. 196,
200-204, Vol. 3, Five Vol. Ed.” Straw, SR ,59,60.

Attila the Hun Meeting the Pope, 450 AD
“Attila died in AD 453, and almost immediately
the Huns disappeared from history. In spite of the
short period of their ascendancy, so rapacious were the
Huns in their devastations that their name has come
down through history as synonymous with the worst
slaughter and destruction.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
789.

prediction had expressly marked the term of Attila’s
desolating progress—“the third of the rivers and the
fountains of waters.” Already Attila had made bitter,
besides the surplusage of more Eastern scenes the river
line of the upper Danube and Rhine, and the Alpine
fountains of waters. Many [men] had died.... This
being done, his course was to end. “Thus far shalt thou
go and no further.”’
“ ‘This occurred AD 453. So the meteor was
extinct; the empire and power of the Huns broken. The
woe of the third trumpet had passed away.’ Horae
Apocalypticae, E.B. Elliot, Vol. 1, p. 382, 5th Ed.
London.” Straw, SR, 59,60.
The Name of the Star is Wormwood.—
“ ‘These words ...recall us for a moment to the
character of Attila, to the misery of which he was the
author or the instrument, to the terror that was inspired
by his name.’
“The effect of his [Attila’s] ravages in the north of
Italy could not better be described in the English
language than by the word wormwood. ‘And the name
of the star is called wormwood.’ Bitterness was the
result of his course wherever he went. Bitterness was
in the hearts of the people of the Alpine regions as they
saw their habitations burnt, their cattle made a prey, and
their fair fields entirely laid waste. Before he reached
the Alps, he devastated the land and burnt the Roman
cities. Aquileia, the most important city of northern
Italy, after a siege of three months, was reduced to ashes.
The plains around it were nothing but blackness and
ashes. …It being in the hot season many of the Huns
died of disease. On the part of both Romans and
barbarians many perished in consequence of the evil
effects of the invasion. ‘And many men died of the
waters, because they were made bitter.’”
“ ‘...“Total extirpation and erasure,” are terms
which best denote the calamities he inflicted....’ ‘It was
the boast of Attila that the grass never grew on the
spot which his horse had trod. “The scourge of God”
was a name that he appropriated to himself, and inserted
among his royal titles. He was “the scourge of his
enemies, and the terror of the world.”’ [Albert Barnes,
Notes on Revelation, p.239.]” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875,
TST, 38,39.

“Notice that Attila’s power was gone after making
a peace with Rome through the pope. By peace Rome
would destroy many. Dan. 8:25.” PJ

“Not merely the degenerate Romans, but the bold
and hardy warriors of Germany and Scandinavia, were
appalled at the numbers, the ferocity, the ghastly
appearance, and the lightning-like rapidity of the Huns…
His own warriors believed Attila to be the inspired
favorite of their deities and followed him with fanatic
zeal. His enemies looked on him as the preappointed
minister of Heaven’s wrath against themselves.”
Cooke, #12-UR, 30

It Fell Upon the Third part of the Rivers and the
Fountains of Waters.—
“‘Wherefore a result, humanly speaking, so
unlikely? Methinks we may see the reason. The

Waters Became Wormwood or Bitter.—
“And the Lord saith, Because they have forsaken
my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed
my voice, neither walked therein; But have walked after

208

REVELATION 8
the imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim,
which their fathers taught them: Therefore thus saith the
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will feed
them, even this people with wormwood, and give
them water of gall to drink. I will scatter them also
among the heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers
have known: and I will send a sword after them, till I
have consumed them.” Jeremiah 9:13-16.
“Wormwood. This word is used in Holy Writ for
rebellion against God and His commandments. Jer.
9:13-16. The devastation of the Huns was God’s
judgment on disobedient, persecuting Rome.” Burnside,
RWU, 102.
“Drinking bitter water is being used as a symbol for
the experience of being conquered militarily and having
your homeland thereby desolated.” Pickle, STR, Part
14.

THE FOURTH TRUMPET
REVELATION 8:12
And the fourth angel sounded, and the
third part of the sun was smitten, and the
third part of the moon, and the third part of
the stars; so as the third part of them was
darkened, and the day shone not for a third
part of it, and the night likewise.

uncertainty.” Straw, SR, 61.
“The ravages of the first three trumpets so
weakened Rome that there was little energy left. They
prepared the way for the final stroke when the sun,
moon, and stars, the government itself—emperors,
consuls, and senators, would be smitten. The invasion
of those tribes not only punished the church for its
apostasy, but also overthrew the civil government.”
Straw, SR, 61.
“The sun sends forth light of itself—the decree of
the emperor is law. The moon shines by a borrowed
light—the authority of the consul was dependent in
some measure on the will of another. The stars shine
when the night comes—the wants of the people
demanded attention, and then the senate acted.” SDA
Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 47.
The Sun Smitten.—
“The symbols sun, moon, and stars—for they are
undoubtedly here used as symbols—evidently denote the
great luminaries of the Roman government, its emperors,
senators, and consuls. The last emperor of Western
Rome was Romulus, who in derision was called
Augustulus, or the ‘diminutive Augustus.’” Smith, DR,
485.

Sun, Moon, and Stars Smitten.—
“And God made two great lights; the greater light
to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he
made the stars also.” Genesis 1:16.
“And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his
brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream
more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the
eleven stars made obeisance to me. And his father
rebuked him, and said unto him… Shall I and thy
mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down
ourselves to thee to the earth?” Gen. 37:9,10.
“‘The darkening of the heavenly luminaries is
everywhere an emblem of any great calamity—as if the
light of the sun, moon, and stars should be put out.’
Barnes’ Commentary on Rev., p. 326.
“ In Genesis 1:16 we are told that these luminaries
were created to rule the night and day. But that they
would also be used for signs as well. In Genesis
37:9,10, they were used to represent rulers with their
different stages of authority. As is the case upon the
earth when the light of these bodies no longer shine, the
earth is left in darkness, so in the affairs of men, when
those in authority are eliminated, the government no
longer functions and things are left in darkness and

Augustulus Romulus resigns before Odoacer, 476 AD
“Augustulus was a mere tool in the hands of the
numerous barbarians who were now in Italy and upon
her borders. The confederate tribes demanded one-third
of the land of Italy, and when the request was refused,
they united their forces under the leadership of
Odoacer, the son of a barbarian, who had himself
followed the great leader of the Huns, and then accepted
a position in the Roman army. He was noted among the
barbarians for his courage and ability.
By the
confederate tribes, he was saluted as the king of Italy.
Augustulus offered his resignation, which was
accepted by the Senate. This was its last act of
obedience to its prince. Zeno, ruler of the East, was
recognized as sole emperor, and he awarded to
Odoacer the title of ‘Patrician of the Diocese of Italy.’
“‘Odoacer was the first barbarian who reigned
in Italy over a people who had once asserted their
just superiority above the rest of mankind.’ He

209

GEMS FROM REVELATION
reigned fourteen years, from 476 to 490 AD, but the
Roman Empire of the West was a thing of the past. The
territory once held by the ruling kingdom of the world,
was divided among the barbarians who had assisted in its
overthrow.” Haskel, SSP, 158,159.
“When Odoacer led the Heruli into the city of
Rome and overthrew Augustulus, the last of the
emperors of the west, the pretended supreme ruler, the
sun, was smitten.” Straw, SR, 61.
The Moon Smitten.—
“As the moon shines on after the rays of the sun
have been withdrawn from the earth, so the consuls
continued to work on with the new ruler, Odoacer. Even
after the Heruli were driven out by the Goths in 493 AD,
-and Theodoric the ruler of the Goths had taken
possession, the office of consul still remained.” Straw,
SR, 61.
“The consulship and the senate [‘the moon and
the stars’] were not abolished by Theodoric. ‘A
Gothic historian applauds the consulship of Theodoric as
the height of all temporal power and greatness:’—as the
moon reigns by night, after the setting of the sun. And,
instead of abolishing that office, Theodoric himself
‘congratulates those annual favorites of fortune, who,
without the cares, enjoyed the splendor of the throne.’”
SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 52.
“These Goths who now were in charge of the city
of Rome and ruled the whole land of Italy were Arians,
bitterly opposed by the Catholic church. Yet Theodoric
was the civil ruler, and must be counseled even in
elections of the church. This greatly annoyed the church
officials. All this led Justinian, Emperor of the east, a
loyal Catholic, to send his army to Rome to drive out
those hated Arians. Belisarius at the head of the
Justinian’s army succeeded in driving the Goths from
Rome by 538 AD, but did not succeed in overthrowing
the work of the consuls until 541, when their work was
terminated—the moon was smitten.” Straw, SR, 61.
“‘ “The Roman Consulship Extinguished by
Justinian, AD 541,” is the title of the last paragraph of
the fortieth chapter of Gibbon’s History of the Decline
and Fall of Rome: “The succession of the consuls
finally ceased in the thirteenth year of Justinian, whose
despotic temper might be gratified by the silent
extinction of a title which admonished the Romans of
their ancient freedom.” ’ Alexander Keith, Signs of the
Times, Vol. I, pp. 280-283.” Smith, DR, 487.
The Stars Smitten.—
“Before the war against the Goths was finished
Belisarius was succeeded by Narses, who finished the
war. When the Goths were defeated and driven out of
Italy, the work of the senate was brought to a close in
553 AD, and the stars ceased to shine.” Straw, SR, 62.

So as The Third Part of Them was Darkened.—
“It is noteworthy that the century of disasters
(378-476)... befell Rome after she adopted
Christianity. The Roman Empire had become in a
sense an apostate people of God, ripe for experiencing
the judgment of God inflicted by her enemies.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 240.
“The overthrow of Rome was but the harvest of its
own sowing. It declined as it had arisen—by conquest.
It was the coming of a vacant night, spoken of by
historians as the Dark Ages.” Anderson, UR, 89.
“The final destruction of the Western Roman
Empire and the subsequent Dark Ages constitute a
striking fulfillment of the symbolisms of the fourth
trumpet. All came as the natural consequence of the
rejection of the Prince of Peace. Strife and darkness
are the fate of nations and peoples who refuse to walk
in the gospel light.” Bunch, TR, 85.
The Trumpets, a Consequence of Apostasy.—
“The Seven Trumpets prophesy the consequences
of the making of the Papacy, which grew out of the
great apostasy from Christianity. The Papacy was
made in the Roman Empire by the union of the apostate
Church with that republic which had degenerated into an
imperial despotism; and the result to the Roman
Empire, of the making of the Papacy, was the utter
ruin of that empire. This ruin was accomplished by the
mighty armies of the peoples of the north, which, in a
succession of mighty tides, overflowed the western
empire of Rome, in the time covered by the first four of
the Seven Trumpets.
“At that time, and for five hundred years before,
the Roman Empire, as a whole, had ‘filled the world.’
‘Coming last among what are called the great
monarchies of prophecy, it was the only one which
realized in perfection the idea of a monarchia, being
…strictly coincident with the civilized world.
Civilization and this empire were commensurate; they
were interchangeable ideas and coextensive.’—De
Quincey. And when that empire perished, to those
unenlightened by the word of God it really seemed, in
the violence of the times, that the world was at its
end.” Jones, GNOT, 7.
“The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her
power increased, the darkness deepened. Faith was
transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the pope
of Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God for
forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the people
looked to the pope, and to the priests and prelates to
whom he delegated authority. They were taught that the
pope was their earthly mediator and that none could
approach God except through him; and, further, that he
stood in the place of God to them and was therefore to
be implicitly obeyed. A deviation from his requirements
was sufficient cause for the severest punishment to be

210

REVELATION 8
visited upon the bodies and souls of the offenders. Thus
the minds of the people were turned away from God
to fallible, erring, and cruel men, nay, more, to the
prince of darkness himself, who exercised his power
through them. Sin was disguised in a garb of sanctity.
When the Scriptures are suppressed, and man comes to
regard himself as supreme, we need look only for fraud,
deception, and debasing iniquity. With the elevation of
human laws and traditions was manifest the
corruption that ever results from setting aside the
law of God.” Great Controversy, 55.
“The ninth chapter of Revelation [vs.20] reveals
that in spite of the judgment of the first six trumpets
upon the apostate people of the empire, they continued
in their downward course. [Rev. 9:20 quoted.] These
sins were exactly the ones that were perpetrated by
the apostate Christians of the Roman Empire. It is
understandable why the trumpets were sent as visitations
of divine judgment.
It is recognized that when
corruption is under the guise of religion, it is the
worst kind of corruption and this is of significance to
Christians today. Falsehood, hypocrisy and corruption
always receive the frown of heaven—even though they
may be under the guise of religion. In fact this makes
sin all the more offensive to God and He does not pass it
by. The following counsel is worthy of note:
“ ‘I have been shown that God here illustrates how
He regards sin among those who profess to be His
commandment-keeping people. Those whom He has
specially honored with witnessing the remarkable
exhibitions of His power, as did ancient Israel, and
who will even then venture to disregard His express
directions, will be subjects of His wrath. He would
teach His people that disobedience and sin are
exceedingly offensive to Him and are not to be lightly
regarded. He shows us that when His people are found
in sin they should at once take decided measures to
put that sin from them, that His frown may not rest
upon them all. But if the sins of the people are passed
over by those in responsible positions, His frown will be
upon them, and the people of God, as a body, will be
held responsible for those sins. In His dealings with His
people in the past the Lord shows the necessity of
purifying the church from wrongs. One sinner may
diffuse darkness that will exclude the light of God
from the entire congregation. When the people realize
that darkness is settling upon them, and they do not
know the cause, they should seek God earnestly, in great
humility and self-abasement, until the wrongs which
grieve His Spirit are searched out and put away.’
Testimonies to Church, Vol.3, p.265.” Cooke, #12-UR,
36,37.
“ ‘The extinction of the Roman Empire, from
which the Germans had already snatched one province
after another, only set the seal to the inward decay of the
Latin race and the ancient Roman traditions. Even the
Christian religion, which had everywhere replaced
the old faith in the gods, no longer awoke any life in

the people. The Gallic bishop Salvian casts a glance
over the moral condition of these effete but now
Christianized nations, and pronounces them all sunk
in indolence and vice; only in the Goths, Vandals, and
Franks, who had established themselves as conquerors in
the Roman provinces, does he find purity of morals,
vigor, and the energy of youth. “These,” said he, “wax
daily, we wane; they advance, we decay; they bloom, we
wither – and shall we therefore be surprised if God gives
all our provinces to the barbarians, in order that through
their virtues these lands may be purified from the crimes
of the Romans?” The great name of Roman, ay, evens
the title which was once the proudest among men,
namely “Roman citizen,” had already become
contemptible.
“ ‘The Empire, dying of the decrepitude of age,
was finally destroyed by the greatest conflict of races
recorded in history. Upon its ruins Teutonism
established itself, bringing fresh blood and spirit into the
Latin race, and reconstituting the Western world through
assertion of individual freedom. The overthrow of the
Roman Empire was in reality one of the greatest
benefits which mankind ever received.’ [Ferdinand
Gregorovius, … History of the City of Rome in the
Middle Ages, …1:248-254.]” Heiks, AD538, 47,48.
The Day Shone Not For the Third Part of It, and the
Night Likewise.—
“The concluding words of the fourth trumpet imply
the future restoration of the Western Empire.... By
conferring on the pope all authority over the churches,
Justinian laid his helping hand to the promotion of the
papal supremacy, which afterward assumed the power of
creating monarchs. In the year of our Lord 800, the
pope conferred on Charlemagne the title of Emperor
of the Romans. That title was again transferred from
the king of France to the emperor of Germany.” SDA
Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 53,54.

WOE, WOE, WOE!
REVELATION 8:13
And I beheld, and heard an angel flying
through the midst of heaven, saying with a
loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters
of the earth by reason of the other voices of
the trumpet of the three angels, which are
yet to sound!
An Angel Flying.—
“This angel is not one of the series of the seven
trumpet angels, but simply another heavenly
messenger.” Smith, DR, 491.
Woe, Woe, Woe!—
“The three remaining trumpets are woe trumpets,

211

GEMS FROM REVELATION
because of the more terrible events to take place under
their sounding. Thus the next, or fifth trumpet, is the
first woe; the sixth trumpet, the second woe; and the
seventh, the last one in this series of seven trumpets, is
the third woe.” Smith, DR, 491.

‘Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the earth,’
meaning the worshippers of this Papal beast, the
followers of this abomination.” Miller, Evidence, 116.

“It will be observed that the same wars that
punished the church for its sins, also overthrew the
Roman Empire of the West and established the ten
kingdoms. After the overthrow of the last of the rulers
of the West, the Eastern Empire took over the affairs in
Rome and later granted the Pope authority over all
the churches. As the first four trumpets witnessed the
overthrow of the Western Empire, it will be observed
that the part not yet punished by wars was the East. The
angel then cries, ‘Woe, woe, woe, because of the
trumpets which are yet to sound.’ This would imply
the next ones are to be more severe, and perhaps longer
in duration than those which had sounded.” Straw, SR,
62.
“The last three trumpets will claim our attention....
The first four having their accomplishment under Rome
Pagan; to the last three under Rome Papal. These three
trumpets and three woes are a description of the
judgments that God has sent and will send on this
Papal beast, the abomination of the whole earth.”
Miller, Evidence, 115,116.
“The false doctrines which crush the sons of
God, and the errors which hide the righteousness of
Christ, are especially designated as woes. To these
woes the student of prophecy is next introduced.”
Haskel, SSP, 160.
“Those who have been self-indulgent and ready to
yield to pride and fashion and display, will sneer at the
conscientious, truth-loving, God-fearing people, and
will, in this work sneer at the God of heaven Himself.
The Bible is disregarded, the wisdom of men exalted,
and Satan and the man of sin worshiped by the wisdom
of this age, while the angel is flying through the midst of
heaven crying ‘Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the
earth.’ (Rev. 8:13).” “1888”, 485.
“The ‘woe, woe, woe!’ was pronounced upon a
church who walked in the sparks of their own
kindling, who did not derive their light and power from
the great central Light, the Sun of Righteous-ness, and
diffuse that light and glory to those who were in
darkness. By absorbing and diffusing the light, they
cause their own light to burn brighter. The one who
receives light, but does not give it as God requires him to
do, will become a receptacle of darkness.” Pamphlet
PH028, 3.
The Inhabiters of the Earth.—
The wicked. (See comments on Rev. 11:10.)
“We see the propriety of the language of our text,

212

REVELATION 9

REVELATION 9
REVELATION 9:1-21
1 And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven
unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.
2 And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out
of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air
were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.
3 And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and
unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have
power.
4 And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the
grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but
only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads.
5 And to them was given that they should not kill them, but that
they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as
the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.
6 And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it;
and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.
7 And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared
unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold,
and their faces were as the faces of men.
8. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were
as the teeth of lions.
9 And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and
the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many
horses running to battle.
10 And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings
in the tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.
11 And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but
in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.
12 One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more
hereafter.
13 And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the
four horns of the golden altar which is before God,
14 Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the
four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates.
15 And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an
hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part
of men.
16 And the number of the army of the horsemen were two
hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them.
17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on
them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone:
and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of
their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone.
18 By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire,
and by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their
mouths.
19 For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their
tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do
hurt.
20 And the rest of the men which were not killed by these
plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they
should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass,
and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk:
21 Neither repented they of their murders, nor of the sorceries,
nor of their fornications, nor of their thefts.

THE FIFTH TRUMPET
REVELATION 9:1
And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw

a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and
to him was given the key of the bottomless
pit.
Introduction.—
“The barbarian hordes had spent their strength in
the overthrow of the Western Empire, and had, in the
course of a few years, laid aside their savage ways, and
assumed the manners of the conquered people with
whom they lived. But the Eastern Empire was as full
of weakness and pollution as the Western, and its
downfall was just as certain, although it came in an
entirely different way.” Haskel, SSP, 162.
“ ‘There is scarcely so uniform an agreement
among interpreters concerning any other part of the
Apocalypse as respecting the application of the fifth
and sixth trumpets, or the first and second woes, to
the Saracens and the Turks. It is so obvious that it can
scarcely be misunderstood. Instead of a verse or two
designating each, the whole of the ninth chapter of the
Revelation, in equal portions, is occupied with a
description of both.
“‘The Roman Empire declined, as it arose, by
conquest; but the Saracens and the Turks were the
instruments by which a false religion became the
scourge of an apostate church; and hence, instead of
the fifth and sixth trumpets, like the former, being
marked by that name alone, they are called woes. It was
because the laws were transgressed, the ordinance
changed, and the everlasting covenant broken, that the
curse came upon the earth or the land.’ (Alexander
Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol.I, pp. 289,291).” SDA
Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 55.
“The spiritual supremacy of the pope, it may be
remembered, was acknowledged and maintained, after
the fall of Rome, by the Emperor Justinian. And
whether in the character of a trumpet or a woe, the
previous steps of history raise us, as on a platform, to
behold in a political view the judgments that fell on
apostate Christendom, and finally led to the subversion
of the Eastern Empire.” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 56.
A Star (Meteorite).—
“How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son
of the morning! How art thou cut down to the ground,
which didst weaken the nations!” Isa. 14:12.
“And he [Jesus] said unto them, I beheld Satan as
lightning fall from heaven.” Luke 10:18.

213

“And no marvel; for Satan himself is trans-

GEMS FROM REVELATION
formed into an angel of light.” 2 Cor. 11:14. [Satan
works through human beings.]
I Saw a Star Fall From Heaven Unto the Earth.—
“In scripture, a star denotes a leader. Rev. 1:20;
Dan. 8:10; 12:4. In this prediction it is a falling star, and
a falling star represents an apostate religious leader.
Jude 1:13. Some claim that the falling star represents
Satan, but Satan fell centuries before this. Luke 10:13.
It is true that Jesus Christ saw Satan as lightning fall
from heaven, but Satan’s latest fall was at the crucifixion
of Christ. Rev. 12:9,10. The fourth trumpet that brought
the end to Western Rome was in 476 AD. In the third
trumpet there was also a falling star, a meteor—
representing Attila and his Huns. The falling star of the
fifth trumpet must be another earthly leader, an
apostate leader, who appears after the fourth
trumpet, 476 AD.
“…After the fall of Western Rome in 476 AD [i.e.
after the first four trumpets] did a falling star, a leader of
false religion, arise in Arabia and obscure the Christian
faith and bring torment to a significant proportion of
mankind? The answer is yes! Only one event fulfills it
and to the very letter. It was the rise of Mohamed and
the Islam or Moslem religion.” Cooke, #13-UR, 2,5.
“It was a fallen star that opened the bottomless pit
and released the smoke and swarms of locusts. In verse
11 this fallen star is called ‘the angel of the
bottomless pit,’ and is designated as Abaddon and
Apollyon, that is the great destroyer, Satan. ...Satan
always does his work on earth through human
agents, and therefore secondarily, this star represents
Mohammed and his caliph successors.” Bunch, TR,
86.
“[In 569 AD] there was born in Mecca, of the
princes of Arabia, a man who claimed direct descent
from Ishmael, the son of Abraham. This man was
Mohammed, the son of Abdallah, and the founder of a
faith, which, today has many thousand adherents....
“Mohammed was of a serious mind, and it was his
custom to retire one month each year to a cave, a few
miles from Mecca, where he gave himself to fasting and
prayer. On his return from one of these seasons of
seclusion he announced his belief in one God, and
that Mohammed was the prophet of God. This was
the beginning of Islamism.” Haskel, SSP, 162,163.
“In the latter part of this [6th] century he, claiming
he had visions from God, began to propagate his new
religion. He having been born of the Kareish tribe which
had charge of the sacred shrine of the Koaba of Mecca,
met with much opposition from this cult, and was
obliged to flee to Medina in 622. This was followed by
war between these two factions, and in 624 at Badr,
Mohammed was victorious, which led to the opponents
accepting Mohammedanism. Holy wars of aggression
followed, when those people went out to convert the
world to Islam by the sword. After the death of

Mohammed, 632, and the accession of Akubekr as
Caliph, the greatest success of the spread of
Mohammedism was attained.” Straw, SR, 63.
The Bottomless Pit.—
(PHYSICAL): “The meaning of this term may be
learned from the Greek, abyssos, which is defined ‘deep,
bottomless, profound,’ and may refer to any waste,
desolate, and uncultivated place.” Smith, DR, 496.
“If smoke out of this pit should arise to darken the
sun and our atmosphere, it is evidence that the pit itself
is located here on the earth.” Bible Readings, 243.
“And the earth was without form, and void.”
Genesis 1:2. “(Void: 922. bohuw, ...(mean. to be
empty);
a
vacuity,
i.e.
(superficially)
an
undistinguishable ruin:—emptiness, void.”
Strong,
DGT, #922.
“The earth in its chaotic and desolate condition in
the beginning and again during the millennium, is called
the abyss or bottomless pit. This term appropriately
represents the abode of Satan and also the desert wastes
of Arabia out of which came the Saracen hordes like
swarms of locusts to spread ruin and desolation over the
fairest portions of Asia and Europe.” Bunch, TR, 87.

The Arabian Desert: A Bottomless Pit
“‘But in the dreary waste of Arabia, a bound-less
level of sand is intersected by sharp and naked
mountains; and the face of the desert, without a shade or
shelter, is scorched by the direct and intense rays of a
tropical sun. Instead of refreshing breezes, the winds,
particularly from the southwest, diffuse a noxious and
even deadly vapor; the hillocks of sand which they
alternately raise and scatter, are compared to the billows
of the ocean, and whole caravans, whole armies, have
been lost and buried in the whirlwind.’ Gibbon’s
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. IV, p. 315,
Par. 2.” Straw, SR, 62,63.
“Was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the LORD:
yet I loved Jacob, And I hated Esau, and laid his
mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of

214

REVELATION 9
the wilderness.” Malachi 1:1,2.
“Modern Muslim writers use that very word [abyss,
from the Greek word, abyssos.] in describing the
Arabian society from which the power of Islam arose:
‘ARABIA—The Abyss of Darkness.
In that
benighted era, there was a territory where darkness
lay heavier and thicker…. Arabia… stood isolated, cut
off by the vast oceans of sand. Arab traders plodding
great distances …could hardly acquire any grain of
knowledge on their journeys. In their own country, they
did not have a single educational institution or library.
…They worshipped stones, trees, idols, stars, and
spirits, in short, everything conceivable except God.’
[Abul A’la Maududi, Toward Understanding Islam,
Nairobi: The Islamic Foundation, Quran House, 1973;
pp. 41,42.” Wieland, GIR, 60
(SPIRITUAL): “The figures used in this text are,
the bottomless pit, which denote the theories of men or
devils, that have no foundation in the word of God.”
Miller, Evidence, 117.
A Key.—
“The key is a symbol of power and authority.”
Bunch, TR, 87.
Example of a Good Key.—
“And I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou
shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”
Matthew 16:19.
“‘The keys of the kingdom of heaven’ are the
words of Christ. All the words of Holy Scripture are
His, and are here included. These words have power to
open and shut heaven. They declare the conditions
upon which men are received or rejected. Thus the work
of those who preach God’s word is a savor of life unto
life or of death unto death. Theirs is a mission weighed
with eternal results.” Desire of Ages, 413,414.
To Him Was Given The Key of the Bottomless Pit.—
“The key ‘was given’ to Mohammed and by it he
opened the abyss and released the smoke and symbolic
locusts. Mohammed claimed that he received the Koran
from the angel Gabriel by revelation. He had come in
contact with the Christians and Jews and had carefully
studied their religions. Since he claimed that the
Koran was given him by inspiration, it was doubtless
the ‘key’ of the prophecy. Through this pretended
revelation Mohammed claimed to be the prophet of God,
and it was because of the pretended divine leadership
that he was able to unite the roving and unorganized
bands of Saracens and pour them in an irresistible torrent
upon the tottering civilization of Eastern Rome.” Bunch,
TR, 87.
“ ‘The Koran [the Moslem Bible] continually

speaks of the key of God which opened to them the
gates of the world and of religion. So in the Koran:
“Did not God give to his legate [Mohammed] the power
of heaven which is above and fire which is beneath?
With the key, did he not give him the title and power
of a porter, that he may open to those whom he shall
have chosen?”’ Peyron’s Essais Sar l’Espagne. P.189.”
Cooke, #13-UR, 6.

REVELATION 9:2
And he opened the bottomless pit; and
there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the
smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and
the air were darkened by reason of the
smoke of the pit.
He Opened the Bottomless Pit.—
“After the downfall of Pagan Rome, and the rise of
the anti-Christian abomination, Mahomet [in the desert
of Arabia] promulgated a religion which evidently
came from the bottomless pit; for it fostered all the
wicked passions of the human heart, such as war,
murder, slavery, and lust.” Miller, Evidence, 117
(Note supplied).
A Smoke.—
“Adam Clark, commenting upon this verse says,
‘There arose a smoke —false doctrine, obscuring the
true light of heaven.’ It was out of the smoke that the
locusts came.” Straw, SR, 64.
“Such is a suitable symbol of the religion of
Mahomet, of itself, or as compared with the pure light
of the gospel of Jesus. It was not, like the latter, a
light from heaven, but a smoke out of the bottomless
pit.’ ...A false religion was set up, which, although the
scourge of transgressions and idolatry, filled the world
with darkness and delusion. (Alexander Keith, Signs of
the Times, Vol. I, p. 299.)” Smith, DR, 497.
“His [Mohammed’s] flight, from Mecca, called the
Hegira, [AD 622] is the era of his glory, and the date
from which the Mohammedans compute their time. In
opposition to the forms and ceremonies of the numerous
worshipers who congregated at Mecca, and to the
professed Christians who revered the images of saints
and martyrs, the simple principles of the new religious
leader called for prayer, fasting, and alms. Five times a
day, his followers all over the world turn their eyes
toward Mecca, and lift their hearts in prayer.
...Wherever the followers of Mohammed met the
foreigner, there was a single rule of action. ‘Confess,’
said the Mussulman, ‘that there is but one God, and that
Mohammed is His prophet; pay tribute, or choose death.’
The atoning blood of Christ was spurned. Jesus was a
prophet, they thought; but He, like Moses, was inferior
to Mohammed. The Bible of the Christians was replaced

215

GEMS FROM REVELATION
by the Koran. True, the simple faith and austere
practices of the Mohammedans were, to all outward
appearances, a reform over the apostasy of the Greek
Catholics; but in the rejection of Christ, the
Mohammedan had nothing in which to place his
faith, save in his own ability to obtain righteousness
by works. So while the papacy was exalting man in the
West, and perfecting its system of self-righteousness, the
new religion of the East was propagating, under another
name, the same device of the devil to destroy the souls
of men.
“...The doctrine which impelled their actions
was as a dense smoke, issuing out of a furnace.”
Haskel, SSP, 163,164,165.
“ ‘Mohomet was alike instructed to preach and to
fight, and the union of these opposite qualities…
contributed to his success: his voice invited the Arabs
to freedom and victory, to arms and rapine, to the
indulgence of their darling passions, in this world and
the next.’ Gibbon, Vol. V, p. 466.
“The more we learn concerning the Moslem
religion, the more we realize that it is a religion that
has a terrific appeal to the carnal heart. On this
ground the Moslem religion cannot be from above. It
must be from beneath. Gibbon continues:
‘From all sides the roving Arabs were allured to the
standard of religion and plunder, the apostle sanctified
the license of embracing the female captives as their
wives or concubines… ‘The sword [says Mahomet] is
the key of heaven and of hell; a drop of blood shed in
the cause of God, a night spent in arms, is of more
value and of more avail than two months of fasting or
prayer; whosoever falls in battle, his sins are forgiven:
at the day of judgment his wounds shall be resplendent
as vermillion, and odoriferous as musk; and the loss of
his limbs shall be supplied by the wings of angels and
cherubim....’
The first companions of Mahomet
advanced to battle with a fearless confidence; there is no
danger where there is no chance; they were ordained to
perish in their beds, or they were safe and invulnerable
amidst the darts of the enemy.’ Ibid. Vol.5: 425-426.
“The Moslem heaven that was promised to them
was a paradise of sexual and intellectual pleasure.
‘Seventy-two black eyed girls of resplendent beauty,
blooming youth, virgin purity, and exquisite sensibility,
will be created for the use of the meanest believer; a
moment of pleasure will be prolonged to a thousand
years, and his faculties will be increased an hundred
fold, to render him worthy of his felicity.’ This was the
carnal appeal …that inspired those savage Arabs to
burst forth in conquest of the Roman Empire.’” Cooke,
#13-UR, 8,9.
“Moslems on their part were denied the right to
change their religion.
To this day, the Koran
specifically requires Moslems to execute any of their
own people who are converted to Christianity. ‘If
they desert you [and become Jews or Christians], seize
them and put them to death.’ it says. (The Koran,

Penguin ed., p. 366.)” Maxwell, God Cares, 248.

Moslem Worshippers at Mecca
Inside the Kabah is a black stone, believed to be a
meteorite fallen from the sky, connecting this religion
with Rev. 9:1 where John sees “a star fall from
heaven unto the earth.”
“ ‘Mahomet, with the sword in one hand and the
Koran in the other, erected his throne on the ruins of
Christianity and of Rome. The genius of the Arabian
prophet, the manners of his nation, and the spirit of his
religion, involve the causes of the decline and fall of the
Eastern Empire; and our eyes are curiously intent on one
of the most memorable revolutions which have
impressed a new and most lasting character on the
nations of the globe.’
“…His doctrine, generated by the spirit of fraud
and enthusiasm, whose abode is not in the heavens, as
even an unbeliever could tell, arose out of the
bottomless pit, spread over the earth like the smoke
of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were
darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit. It spread
from Arabia over a great part of Asia, Africa, and
Europe. …The smoke that arose from the cave of
Hera was diffused from the Atlantic to the Indian
Ocean.’ (Alexander Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol. I.)”
SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 62,63.
“Smoke is a symbol of prayer. See Rev. 8:3,4.
One of the doctrines of Islam is ritualized prayer five
specific times a day. This darkens the world.
“Jesus said: ‘And when thou prayest, thou shalt
not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray
standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the
streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto
you, They have their reward.
‘But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet,
and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret
shall reward thee openly.
‘But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as
the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard
for their much speaking. Matthew 6:5-7.” PJ
The Sun (Symbol of Jesus).—
“Unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings.” Malachi

216

REVELATION 9
4:2.
The Air (Symbol of Holy Spirit).—
“The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou
hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell when it
cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is
born of the Spirit.” John 3:8.
The Sun and the Air Was Darkened.—
“The Saviour has said, ‘He that believeth on the
Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not
the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abideth on him.’ He says again, ‘And this is life
eternal, that they might know thee, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.’
Mohammedanism has its converts in many lands, and
its advocates deny the divinity of Christ. Shall this
faith be propagated, and the advocates of truth fail to
manifest intense zeal to overthrow the error and teach
men of the pre-existence of the only Saviour of the
world? O how we need men who will search and believe
the word of God, who will present Jesus to the world
in his divine and human nature, declaring with power
and in demonstration of the Spirit, that ‘there is none
other name under heaven given among men, whereby
we must be saved.’ O how we need believers who will
now present Christ in life and character, who will hold
up before the world as the brightness of the Father’s
glory, proclaiming that God is love!”
Home
Missionary, 9/1/1892.

upon the earth: and unto them was given
power, as the scorpions of the earth have
power.
Locusts.—
“In describing one of the plagues that smote Egypt
in the days of Moses, the scripture says, ‘…the east
wind brought the locusts.’ Ex. 10:13. The country
east of Egypt is Arabia and secular authorities are very
clear that Arabia is the home of the locusts.” Cooke,
#13-UR, 4.

Desert Locust Swarm

Emblem of Islam.—

Map of Locust Population Shows
Close Correspondence to Islamic World.

Flag of Turkey (Former Ottoman Empire)
“If the sun was darkened, we only have the
moon and the stars left, a popular symbol of Islam.
What do Algeria, Kelantan, Malaca, Mauritania,
Northern Cyprus, Pakistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Western
Sahara, and other countries and states, some of which
exist today, have in common? Their flags have a
crescent and a single five-pointed star on them. …It
definitely looks like the fifth trumpet represented some
sort of Islamic power.” Pickle, STR, Part 6.

REVELATION 9:3
And there came out of the smoke locusts

“Clark says of the locusts, they are ‘vast hordes
of military troops. The description which follows
certainly agrees better with the Saracens than with any
other people or nation.’
“ ‘The natural application of this symbol, then, is to
[a] numerous and destructive army, or to a great
multitude of people committing ravages, and sweeping
off everything in their march…. Vs. 12. These
considerations show with propriety the fifth trumpet—
the symbol of the locusts—is referred to the Arabian
hordes under the guidance of Mohammed and his
successors. On the supposition that it was the design of
John to symbolize these events, the symbol has been
chosen which of all others was best adapted to the end.’
(Barnes’ Commentary. Pp. 240,242, 255.)” Straw, SR,

217

GEMS FROM REVELATION
64.

of God in their foreheads.

“And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the
children of the east lay along in the valley like
grasshoppers [locusts] for multitude.” Judges 7:12.

It Was Commanded Them.—
“After the death of Mohammed, he was succeeded
in the command by Abubekr in AD 632, who as soon as
he had fairly established his authority and government
gathered the Arabian tribes for conquest. When the
army was assembled, he instructed his chiefs on
methods of conquest:
“‘When you fight the battles of the Lord, acquit
yourselves like men, without turning your backs, but let
not your victory be stained with the blood of women or
children. Destroy no palm trees, nor burn any fields
of corn. Cut down no fruit trees, nor do any mischief to
cattle, only such as you kill to eat. When you make any
covenant or article, stand to it, and be as good as your
word. As you go on, you will find some religious
persons living and retired in monasteries, and
propose to themselves to serve God that way; let
them alone, and neither kill them nor destroy their
monasteries, and you will find another sort of people
that belong to the synagogue of Satan, who have
shaven crowns; be sure you cleave their skulls, and
give them no quarter till they either turn to Mohammed
or pay tribute.’ Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire,
“‘The preceding are the only instructions recorded
by Gibbon, and given by Abubeker to the chiefs whose
duty it was to issue the commands to all the Saracen
hosts. The commands are alike discriminating with the
prediction, as if the caliph himself had been acting in
known as well as direct obedience to a higher mandate
than that of mortal man; and in the very act of going
forth to fight against the religion of Jesus, and to
propagate Mahometanism in its stead, he repeated the
words which it was foretold in the Revelation of Jesus
Christ that he would say.’ Alexander Keith, Signs of
the Times, p. 307.” Smith, DR, 498,499.

“By these locusts I understand armies. See Joel, 1st
and 2nd chapters. Therefore I should read this text thus:
And there came out from these Mahometan followers
large armies, which should have great power to execute
the judgments of God on this anti-Christian beast, which
had filled the earth with her abominations.” Miller,
Evidence, 117
Locusts—A Call to Repentance.—
“If I command the locusts to devour the land,
or if I send pestilence among My people; if My people,
which are called by My name, shall humble themselves,
and pray, and seek My face, and turn from their
wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will
forgive their sin, and will heal their land.” 2 Chronicles
7:13, 14.
Power As Scorpions Was Given Them.—
“The religion of Mohammed became the
motivating force that unlocked these dwellers of the
desert and sent them forth on their mission of
devastation.” Metcalf, GPDR, 97.
“A still more specific illustration may be given of
the power, like unto that of scorpions, which was given
them. Not only was their attack speedy and vigorous,
but ‘the nice sensibility of honor, which weighs the
insult rather than the injury, sheds its deadly venom on
the quarrels of the Arabs. An indecent action, a
contemptuous word, can be expiated only by the blood
of the offender; and such is their patient inveteracy that
they expect whole months and years the opportunity
of revenge.’ (A. Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol. I,
p.305.)” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 64.
Promise of Power Over Scorpions to the Obedient.—
“Thank God, we are not left alone. He ‘who loved
the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but
have everlasting life’ (Jn. 3:16), will not desert us in
the battle with the adversary of God and man. ‘Behold,’
He says, ‘I give unto you power to tread on serpents
and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy:
and nothing shall by any means hurt you.’ Luke
10:19.” Mount of Blessing, 119.

REVELATION 9:4
And it was commanded them that they
should not hurt the grass of the earth,
neither any green thing, neither any tree;
but only those men which have not the seal

Grass, Green Things, and Trees.—
“And they of the city shall flourish like grass of
the earth.” Ps. 72:16 last part.
“By grass, green things, and trees, Ps. 72:16,
Hosea 14:8, I understand the true church, or people of
God.” Miller, Evidence, 117,118.
Those Men Not Having Seal of God in Foreheads.—
“In remarks upon Revelation 7:1-3, we have shown
that the seal of God is the Sabbath of the fourth
commandment. History is not silent upon the fact that
there have been observers of the true seventh-day
Sabbath all through the gospel age. But the question has
here arisen with many, Who were those men who at this
time had the seal of God in their foreheads, and who
thereby became exempt from Mohammedan oppression?
Let the reader bear in mind the fact already alluded to,
that there have been those all through the Christian
Era who have had the seal of God in their foreheads,

218

REVELATION 9
that is, have been intelligent observers of the true
Sabbath. Let him consider further that what the
prophecy asserts is that the attacks of this desolating
Turkish power are not directed against them, but against
another class. The subject is thus freed from all
difficulty, for this is all that the prophecy really asserts.
One class of persons is directly brought to view in the
text, namely, those who have not the seal of God in
their foreheads. The preservation of those who have
the seal of God is brought in only by implication.
Accordingly, we do not learn from history that any of
these were involved in any of the calamities inflicted by
the Saracens upon the objects of their hate.
“They were commissioned against another class of
men. The destruction to come upon this class is not put
in contrast with the preservation of other men, but only
with that of the fruits and verdure of the earth; thus, Hurt
not the grass, trees, nor any green thing, but only a
certain class of men. In fulfillment, we have the strange
spectacle of an army of invaders sparing those things
which such armies usually destroy, the face and
productions of nature.
In pursuance of their
permission to hurt those men who had not the seal of
God in their foreheads, they cleaved the skulls of a
class of religionists with shaven crowns, who
belonged to the synagogue of Satan. It would seem
that these were monks, or some other order of the
Roman Catholic Church.” Smith, DR, 499,500.
“By those men having not the seal of God, etc., I
understand the anti-Christian church, or Papal Rome.
Then this would be the sense: And it was commanded
them that they should not hurt the true church, or
people of God, but only the anti-Christian beast, or
powers subject to her.” Miller, Evidence, 118.
“Since Satan was the real inspiration of the
Saracenic movement, we could hardly expect him to
spare those against whom he has waged his fiercest
warfare. It is a fact, however, that the Abyssinians,
who were Sabbath keepers, were providentially
preserved from destruction by the Moslems. In the
seventh and eighth centuries the apostasy of the church
was at its height and the counterfeit Sabbath had
supplanted the true. The Christian church had largely
lost the seal of God, and therefore the command could
apply to most of the inhabitants of the world and
especially the subjects of Eastern Rome who were
mostly Catholics. Of the apostate state of the church of
this period Philip Mauro quotes Isaac Taylor as saying:
‘What Mahomet and his caliphs found in all
directions whither their scimitars cut a path for
them, was a superstition so abject, an idolatry so
gross and shameless, church doctrines so arrogant,
church practices so dissolute and puerile, that the
strong-minded Arabians felt themselves inspired as
God’s messengers to reprove the errors of the world
and authorized as God’s avengers to punish apostate
Christendom.’” Bunch, TR, 92.

“The Saracen forces had crossed from Africa into
Spain, at the Strait of Gibraltar, and were pushing
through France, intent on the conquest of Europe. But
they were turned back by Charles Martel and his army
on the field of Tours (726 AD). They were restrained
on the borders of those districts where lived the
Waldenses, the Vaudois, and other peoples who were
holding to truth..” Burnside, RWU, 105.

REVELATION 9:5
And to them was given that they should
not kill them, but that they should be
tormented five months: and their torment
was as the torment of a scorpion, when he
striketh a man.
Men Tormented.—
“The question arises, What men were they to hurt
five months?—Undoubtedly the same they were
afterward to slay (see verse 15), ‘the third part of men,’
or third of the Roman Empire—the Greek division of
it.” Smith, DR, 502.
Tormented.—
“‘Their constant incursions into the Roman
territory, and frequent assaults on Constantinople itself,
were an unceasing torment throughout the empire,
which yet they were not able effectually to subdue,
notwithstanding the long period, afterward more directly
alluded to, during which they continued, by unremitting
attacks, grievously to afflict an idolatrous church, of
which the pope was the head.... Their charge was to
torment, and then to hurt, but not to kill, or utterly
destroy. The marvel was that they did not. To repeat
the words of Gibbon: “The calm historian of the present
hour must study to explain by what means the church
and State were saved from this impending, and, as it
would seem, from this inevitable danger.” SDA Pub.
Ass., 1875, TST, 67.
Five Months.—
(See comments under vs. 10).

REVELATION 9:6
And in those days shall men seek death,
and shall not find it; and shall desire to die,
and death shall flee from them.
Weary of Life.—
“The ‘hurt’ or ‘torment’ would be so terrible that
death would be preferable to life. Verse 6. See also Job.
3:20-22; Jer. 8:3. Under some conditions death is far
better than life. ...The Saracens offered their victims the
choice between the sword, the Koran, or heavy tribute.
There were millions whose real choice was death, but
such wholesale slaughter was unthinkable even to the

219

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Moslems, so they condemned all captives to perpetual
slavery which was often worse than death. History
tells us that they took 180,000 prisoners from Northern
Africa alone and sold them as slaves.” Bunch, TR,
90,91.

world; and skill in horsemanship is the art and science
of Arabia. And the barbed Arabs, swift as locusts and
armed like scorpions, ready to dart away in a moment,
were ever prepared unto battle.’ Alexander Keith, Signs
of the Times, Vol. 1, p. 311.” Smith, DR, 500,501.

“‘Men were weary of life, when life was spared
only for a renewal of woe, and when all that they
accounted sacred was violated, and all that they held
dear constantly endangered; and when the savage
Saracens domineered over them, or left them only to a
momentary repose, ever liable to be suddenly or
violently interrupted, as if by the sting of a scorpion.’ A.
Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol.1, p.309.” Smith, DR,
500.

Faces of Men.—
“ ‘The gravity and firmness of the mind [of the
Arab] is conspicuous in his outward demeanor; ...his
only gesture is that of stroking his beard, the venerable
symbol of manhood.... The honor ...of their beards is
most easily wounded.’ Edward Gibbon, The Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. V, chap. 50, pp. 8688.” Smith, DR, 501.

REVELATION 9:7

REVELATION 9:8
And they had hair as the hair of women,
and their teeth were as the teeth of lions.

And the shapes of the locusts were like unto
horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads
were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces
were as the faces of men.

“ ‘The Arabs, unlike to other men, had their hair as
the hair of women, or uncut, as their practice is
recorded by Pliny and others. But there was nothing
effeminate in their character; for, as denoting their
ferocity and strength to devour, their teeth were as
the teeth of lions.’ Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol. 1, p.
312.” Smith, DR, 501.
“Though they wore long hair, which to the
European has the appearance of effeminacy, yet from the
days of Ishmael, a tenderness mingled with the savage
nature of the lion seems to have characterized the men
of the desert.” Haskel, SSP, 170.

Desert Locust
Shapes of Locusts Like Horses Prepared to Battle.—
“Vincent said: ‘The likeness of a locust to a horse,
especially a horse equipped with armour, is so striking
that the insect is named in German heupferd (hayhorse), and in Italian cavelett, “a little horse.”’”
Bunch, TR, 89.

REVELATION 9:9
And they had breastplates, as it were
breastplates of iron; and the sound of their
wings was as the sound of chariots of many
horses running to battle.
Breastplates of Iron.—
“‘The cuirass (or breastplate) was in use among
the Arabs in the days of Mahomet. In the battle of Ohud
(the second which Mahomet fought) with the Koreish of
Mecca (AD 624), “seven hundred of them were armed
with cuirasses.” ’ A. Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol.I, p.
312.” Smith, DR, 501.
Sound of Chariots of Many Horses Running.—
“The charge of the Arab cavalry, who were armed
with scimitars, protected by cuirasses, and seated on
horses swift as the wind.” Haskel, SSP, 171.

Muslim warriors on horseback.
“‘The Arabian horse takes the lead throughout the

“ ‘The charge of the Arabs was ...chiefly formed of
cavalry and archers.... With a touch of the hand, the
Arab horses dart away with the swiftness of the wind.
‘The sound of their wings was as the sound of

220

REVELATION 9
chariots of many horses running to battle.’ Their
conquests were marvelous both in rapidity and extent,
and their attack was instantaneous. Nor was it less
successful against the Romans than the Persians. ‘A
religion of peace was incapable of withstanding the
fanatical cry of “Fight, fight! Paradise, paradise!” that
re-echoed in the ranks of the Saracens.’ (Alexander
Keith, Signs of the Times, Vol. I, p. 313.)” SDA Pub.
Ass., 1875, TST, 70,71.
Chariots of Many Horses Running to Battle.—
“[See also vs.7: ‘The shapes of the locusts were
like unto horses prepared unto battle.’] Clearly we
have depicted an invading army.” Pickle, STR, Prt 5.

REVELATION 9:10,11
And they had tails like unto scorpions,
and there were stings in the tails: and their
power was to hurt men five months.
And they had a king over them, which is
the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name
in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the
Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.
Stings In Their Tails.—

Muslim horseman.
“The Saracen weapons consisted of a sword, lance,
and bow and arrows. With these they fought as skillfully
while retreating as while charging.
They fought
something like the American Indians on the plains of the
middle west. With unerring aim and deadly results the
Saracen archers discharged their arrows backward
over the horses’ tails.” Bunch, TR, 90.
(Spiritual:)—“ ‘The prophet that teacheth lies,
he is the tail.’ Isaiah 9:15. ...In other words, the false
religion of Mahomet is the tail which tormented men.
The sting was in the false religion and by it men were
tormented for five months.” Cooke, #13-UR, 14.
“The Koran contains many prophecies about the
end time. On the last day—which is spoken of as likely
to come very soon—the Koran says that God will raise
the dead and summon everyone to final judgment. At

the judgment, Allah will consign the wicked to hell, to
drink blood and boiling water and burn in agony for
ever. But Allah will be very compassionate to the
righteous. He will invite them all into heaven, to dine at
sumptuous banquets with gazelle-eyed virgins.
“The Koran speaks unquestionably in favor of
holy war, or jihad. It says that although all believers
will find pleasure in heaven, those believers who risk
their lives in holy war will find far richer pleasures.
Allah, says the Koran, ‘has promised all a good reward;
but far richer is the recompense of those who fight for
Him.’ Allah loves those who fight for His cause.’ ‘He
will lodge you in pleasant mansions in the gardens of
Eden. That is the supreme triumph.’ (The Koran,
Penguin ed., p.367,104,105.)” Maxwell, God Cares,
247.
They Had a King Over Them.—
“When were they to begin their work of
torment? The eleventh verse answers the question.
“‘They had a king over them.’ From the death of
Mohammed until near the close of the thirteenth century,
the Mohammedans were divided into various factions
under several leaders, with no general civil government
extending over them all. Near the close of the
thirteenth century, Othman founded a government,
or empire, which grew until it extended over all the
principal Mohammedan tribes, consolidating them into
one grand monarchy.” Smith, DR, 502.
“The fifth trumpet alludes to the rise of the Turkish
empire under Ottoman, at the downfall of the Saracens.
Ottoman uniting under his government the four
contending nations of Mahometans, which had long
contended for the power during the reign of the Saracen
empire, viz., the Saracens, Tartars, Arabs, and Turks.
These, all being by profession Mahometans, were ready
to follow any daring leader to conquer and drive out
from Asia (and even make excursion into Europe) all
who professed the Christian faith. They, having
embraced the errors of that fallen star, Mahomet,
whose principles were promulgated by conquest and
the sword, became one and perhaps the only barrier
to the spread of the Papal doctrine and power in the
eastern world. Here the Roman Church had long held a
powerful sway over the minds and consciences of the
Christian or Greek church in the east, by the aid of the
eastern emperor at Constantinople. But the Turks or
Ottomans, whom the Lord suffered to rise up in
Bithynia, on or near the head waters of the Euphrates, as
a scourge against this Papal abomination, now
became a check to the Roman power; and from this
time we may reason-ably date the declension of Papal
authority. There-fore on the sounding of the fifth
trumpet, Rome Papal began to show a weakness which
in every succeeding age has been more and more
manifested, until her civil power has crumbled to ruin,
and her ecclesiastical assumptions must sink, at the
sounding of the seventh trump, to rise no more
forever.” Miller, Evidence, 116.

221

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Says Perkins: [The Ottoman sultan] ‘has
unlimited power over the lives and property of his
subjects, especially of the high officers of State whom he
can remove, plunder, or put to death at pleasure. They
are required submissively to kiss the bow-string which
he sends them, wherewith they are to be strangled.”
SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 73.
Angel of the Bottomless Pit.—
“Their king is called ‘the angel of the bottomless
pit.’ An angel signifies a messenger, a minister, either
good or bad, and not always a spiritual being. ‘The
angel of the bottomless pit’ would be the chief
minister of the religion which came from thence when it
was opened. That religion is Mohammedanism, and the
sultan was its chief minister.” Smith, DR, 502.
Whose Name is Abaddon and Apollyon.—
“His name in the Hebrew tongue is ‘Abad-don,’
the destroyer; in Greek, ‘Apollyon,’ one that
exterminates, or destroys. Having two different names
in two languages, it is evident that the character rather
than the name of the power is intended to be represented.
If so, as expressed in both languages, he is a destroyer.
Such has always been the character of the Ottoman
government.” Smith, DR, 503.
“For more than six hundred years the
Mohammedans had no regularly organized government,
and recognized no such dignitary as that which answers
to the title of king. ‘The authority of the companions of
Mahomet expired with their lives; and the chiefs or
emirs of the Arabian tribes left behind, in the desert, the
spirit of equality and independence.’—Gibbon, Id. Each
tribe, under its own chief, was independent of all the
others, and came and went as it pleased. While this was
the case, it is evident, as it is the truth, that their
character as ‘a destroyer’ was not, and could not be, such
as it was after they were solidly united in one
government under the sway of a ruler recognized by all.
This is made more apparent when it is seen what was to
be destroyed by this ‘destroyer.’
“The first four trumpets show the ruin of the
Western Empire of Rome; and the fifth relates to the
destruction of the Eastern Empire. And it is in the
character of the destroyer of the last remains of the
Roman Empire that this power acts. It was not as a
destroyer of men as such, for of them it is said ‘that they
should not kill them, but that they should be tormented
five months,’ ‘and their power was to hurt men five
months.’ It is evident, then, that this character and
work as ‘a destroyer,’ relates to the final destruction
of the Roman Empire, which was then represented in
the Eastern Empire, with the capital at New Rome—
Constantinople.
“Othman was the caliph who established the
organized government of the Mohammedans; and thus it
is from him that there has descended the name and title
of the Ottoman Empire. It was under the organized

power of Othman that the work of the destroyer began.”
Jones, GNOT, 40.
“Great has been the destruction which this
government has executed upon the world; and well may
this empire be styled Destroyer, in prophecy the
signification of Abaddon or Apollyon.” Miller,
Evidence, 119.
“This character might in truth be imputed to the
Arab caliphs, who directed the armies for so many years
after the death of Mohammed; but it is especially
applicable to Othman, the founder of the Ottoman
Empire. This, the first attempted centralization of
government was the outgrowth of the doctrines of
Mohammed.” Haskel, SSP, 171.
Hurting Men Five Months-First Attack on Eastern
Rome.—
“When did Othman make his first assault on the
Greek empire?—According to Gibbon ‘it was on the
twenty-seventh of July, in the year twelve hundred
and ninety-nine of the Christian Era, that Othman first
invaded the territory of Nicomaedia; and the singular
accuracy of the date seems to disclose some foresight
of the rapid and destructive growth of the monster.’
Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire, Vol. VI, chap. 64, p. 226.
“‘The calculations of some writers have gone upon
the supposition that the period should begin with the
foundation of the Ottoman Empire; but this is evidently
an error; for they not only were to have a king over
them, but were to torment men five months. But the
period of torment could not begin before the first
attack of the tormentors, which was, as above
[stated], July 27, 1299.’ Josiah Litch, Prophetic
Expositions, Vol. II, p. 180.
“The calculation which follows, founded on this
starting point, was made and first published in a work
entitled, Christ’s Second Coming, by Josiah Litch, in
1838.
“‘ “And their power was to hurt men five
months.” Thus far their commission extended, to
torment by constant depredations, but not politically to
kill them. “Five months” [thirty days to a month, one
hundred and fifty days], that is, one hundred and fifty
years. Commencing July 27, 1299, the one hundred
and fifty years reach to 1449. During that whole
period the Turks were engaged in an almost
perpetual war with the Greek Empire, but yet
without conquering it.’ (Ibid., p. 181.)” Smith, DR, 503505.
“...The successors of Othman, the founder of the
Ottoman Empire, each pushed his conquests nearer to
the coveted seat of power. A regular standing army of
twenty-five thousand Moslems was organized by the son
of Othman. Asia Minor was completely in his hands,
and the seven churches referred to in the first
chapter of Revelation were desecrated by the religion

222

REVELATION 9
of Mohammed. …Between 1360 and 1389, the third
sovereign of the Turks, conquered Thrace, and fixed the
capital of his empire and his religion at Adrianople,
almost within the shadow of Constantinople. Never
before had the Greek Empire been surrounded on all
sides by the foe. The forth king, Bajazet by name, was
surnamed Ilderim, or ‘the lightning,’ because of the
fiery energy of his soul, and the rapidity of his
destructive marches. Constantinople was sorely pressed,
and were not the hand of God recognized, the fact that
the downfall was delayed for another fifty years might
seem a mere accident. Called to contend with a Scythian
force from the East, the Turks were obliged to postpone
activities in Greece for a number of years. …The one
hundred and fifty years of torment, not destruction, was
about to close.” Haskel, SSP, 172-174.

empire. Islam was undoubtedly inspired by Satan, but so
also was the apostasy in the Christian church. However
while Islam destroyed much of the apostasy, it did
permit true Christianity—those with the seal of God—to
continue to spread their faith and influence. According
to Benjamin Wilkinson, true Christianity in that period
spread amazingly throughout the eastern world. The
gospel was taken even to China, and other distant lands.
Maybe the rise of Islam was to protect the true
church. Had not the Papal apostasy been hindered in
its early development, the church of the East may not
have survived.” Cooke, #13-UR, 28.

“Since the exact day for the beginning of this
power is given, the expiration of the five months may
be reckoned to the day. It closed July 27, 1449. It is
these dates which enable the student of the trumpets, to
locate the events which take place under each trumpet.
These dates are ‘nails in a sure place’ for both the first
and second woe.” Haskel, SSP, 172.
Five Months.—
1-Gen. 7:11: The flood began
the 17th day of the 2nd month.
2-Gen. 8:3,4: Waters abated
the 17th day of the 7th month, five months later.
3-Gen. 7:24: The flood continued 150 days,
hence 150 days = 5 months. Thus, 30 days/month.
4-Num. 14:34: Each day for a year.
Thus, five prophetic months X thirty days/month =
150 prophetic days = 150 literal years.
After the 150 Days (Years).—
“And after the end of the hundred and fifty days
the waters were abated.” Gen. 8:3. It is interesting
that the only place in the Bible where a “150 day” period
is mentioned is in the record of the Flood. There is a
parallel. After the 150 years of Saracen torment, the
waters of the Papacy began to abate, that is, the power
of the Papacy began to decline from this point (1449)
onward with the rise of the Ottoman Empire, the
sixth trumpet.” PJ from Unknown Source.
The Purpose of the Fifth Trumpet.—
“What was the purpose behind this trumpet? It was
God’s judgment on apostasy. This reveals the attitude of
God toward apostasy. Heaven hates it. Apostasy is
repulsive to Jesus Christ. The fact that heaven
permitted the rise of Islam in order to punish
apostasy indicates how serious and offensive apostate
Christianity must be in the sight of heaven. For 1200
years Islam has dominated the lives of millions of people
throughout the Middle East and beyond. While it is a
false religion it is opposed to idolatry and religious
corruption and maybe is preferable in the sight of heaven
than the apostate Christian religion was of the Roman

Portion of 1843 chart showing 5th & 6th trumpets.

REVELATION 9:12
One woe is past; and, behold, there
come two woes more hereafter.
“The first woe was to continue from the rise of
Mohammedanism until the end of the five months. Then
the first woe was to end, and the second begin.”
Smith, DR, 505.
“The restraining hand of God had held contending
forces in check, waiting, waiting, until the extreme limit
of time, for men to acknowledge the righteousness of
Jehovah.” Haskel, SSP, 174.
“We cannot, I think, hesitate for a moment to apply
the fulfillment of this trumpet and woe, to these events,
time, and place; and must be led to admire the agreement
between the prophecy and fulfillment, and to believe this
book of Revelation to be indicted by the unerring
wisdom of the Divine Spirit; for no human
forethought could have so exactly described these
events, dress, manners, customs, and mode of
warfare 1200 years beforehand, except the wisdom of
God had assisted him. And if these things are revealed
by God himself unto us, surely no one will dare to say
that it is non-essential whether we believe this part of the

223

GEMS FROM REVELATION
revealed will of God or not. Shall God speak and man
disregard it? Forbid it, O Father; and let us have ‘ears to
hear what the Spirit saith to the churches.’” Miller,
Evidence, 119,120.

THE SIXTH TRUMPET
REVELATION 9:13,14
And the sixth angel sounded, and I
heard a voice from the four horns of the
golden altar which is before God,
Saying to the sixth angel which had the
trumpet, Loose the four angels which are
bound in the great river Euphrates.
The Sixth Angel Sounded.—
“By the sounding of the trumpet, I understand the
commencing of those judgments which were to be
poured out upon the earth under this trumpet.” Miller,
Evidence, 120.
A Voice From The Four Horns of Golden Altar.—
“‘The golden altar’ is the altar of incense
mentioned at the beginning of this vision (8:2,3). In the
typical sanctuary it stood before the vail or en-trance into
the holy of holies which represented the presence of
God. See Ex. 30:1-6. The altar of incense was the place
where the priests ministered the blood of the victims
slain at the altar of burnt offering in the court. The horns
of the golden altar received the blood that atoned for the
sins of Israel. This was a part of the ‘daily’ service. The
golden altar was symbolic of the mediatorial work of
Christ in the heavenly sanctuary. The voice from the
golden altar is there-fore the voice of Christ. This is
the only one of the seven trumpet-angels given specific
instruction by Christ.” Bunch, TR, 97.
Significance of the Voice at the Golden Altar.—
TIMING OF SIXTH TRUMPET: “First, it locates
the timing of this trumpet. The ministration in the
heavenly sanctuary from 31 to 1844 AD was in the first
apartment of that temple. There Jesus ministered at the
incense altar. The fact that the voice is heard from the
altar indicates that the priestly ministry is still
located there, thus the period in which the sixth
trumpet must be prior to 1844.
AREA WHERE SIN PREVAILS. “The second
significance of the voice from the altar is that sometimes
in Scripture, the location where the voice is heard,
represents the area where transgression prevails.
[See Gen. 4:10; Hab. 2:11.] …The altar of incense that
is brought to view under the sixth trumpet represents the
intercession of Christ. That was the area where the
professed church of the day had become so apostate.
God’s professed people had become deeply involved
in the intercession of saints and martyrs. This voice
was from the place of true intercession which they had

so seriously neglected or rejected.
“…The sixth trumpet is a judgment upon apostate
Christians of that day who had given themselves over to
a false form of intercession, and as a result the command
is issued: ‘loose the four angels that are bound in the
great river Euphrates.’ vs. 14.” Cooke, #14-UR, 2,3.
“[vs.13] proves that His [Christ’s] priestly
ministry was still in progress during the sounding of
the trumpets and that they therefore cannot be
identified with the seven last plagues. It also shows
that during the first six trumpets the ‘daily’
ministration of Christ was in progress and that He
had not yet entered upon the last phase of His
ministry represented by the yearly service in the most
holy place. It was the failure of the church to recognize
the priestly ministry of Christ in the heavenly sanctuary
that brought the trumpet-woes upon the professed
Christian world. The heavenly service was trampled
underfoot by Papal Rome through the institution of
an earthly and counterfeit system, therefore the
Turks were loosed against them.” Bunch, TR, 97.
The Four Angels Which are Bound.—
“An angel signifies a messenger, a minister, either
good or bad, and not always a spiritual being. ‘The
angel of the bottomless pit’ would be the chief
minister of the religion which came from thence
when it was opened.
That religion is
Mohammedanism, and the sultan was its chief
minister.
“...These are the four principal sultanies of which
the Ottoman Empire was composed, located in the
country watered by the Euphrates. These sultanies were
situated at Aleppo, Iconium, Damascus, and Bagdad.
Previously they had been restrained; but God
commanded, and they were loosed.” Smith, DR,
502,506.
“ ‘They were, as it were, restrained and kept back
for a long time in that vicinity. It would have been
natural to suppose that that vast power would at once
move on toward the West to conquer the capital of the
Eastern Empire. Such had been the case with the Huns,
the Goths, and Vandals. But these Turkish hordes had
been long restrained in the East. They had subdued
Persia. They had then achieved the conquest of India.
They had conquered Bagdad, and the entire East was
under their control. Yet for a long time they had now
been inactive, and it would seem as if they had been
bound or restrained by some mighty power from
moving in the conquests to the West.’
Barnes’
Commentary, p. 264.” Straw, SR, 68.
When Loosed?—
“Late in the year 1448, as the close of the 150-year
period approached, [the emperor at Constantinople] John
Palaeologus died without leaving a son to follow him on
the throne of the Eastern Empire.
His brother
Constantine, the lawful successor, would not venture

224

REVELATION 9
to ascend the throne without the consent of the
Turkish sultan.
Ambassadors there-fore went to
Adrianople, received the approbation of the sultan, and
returned with gifts for the new sovereign. Early in the
year 1449, under these ominous circumstances,
Constantine, the last of the Greek emperors, was
crowned.
“The historian tells the story: ‘...The gracious
approbation of the Turkish sultan announced his
supremacy, and the approaching downfall of the Eastern
empire....’
“ ‘Let this historical fact be carefully examined in
connection with the prediction [given] above. This was
not a violent assault made on the Greeks, by which their
empire was overthrown and their independence taken
away, but simply a voluntary surrender of that
independence into the hands of the Turks, by saying,
“I cannot reign unless you permit.” ...The four angels
were thus loosed by the voluntary submission of the
Greeks....’ Josiah Litch, Prophetic Expositions, Vol.II,
pp.182,183.” Smith, DR, 506,507.

literal years; a prophetic month, thirty prophetic days, is
thirty literal years; one prophetic day is one literal year;
and an hour, or the twenty-fourth part of a prophetic day,
would be a twenty-fourth part of a literal year, or fifteen
days; the whole amounting to three hundred and
ninety-one years and fifteen days.” Smith, DR, 507.

The Great River Euphrates.—
“The actual river Euphrates is referred to as
representing the Assyrians when they invaded Israel.
[See Isa. 8:7,8.] The prophet likens the Assyrian power
to the overflowing of the Euphrates in flood. Thus,
…the Euphrates represents a rushing, invading,
destroying power.” Cooke, #14-UR, 5,6.

Loosed to Slay Third Part of Men, Constantinople
Falls.—
“When the sixth angel sounded, it was commanded
to take off the restraints which had been imposed on the
nation, by which they were restricted to the work of
tormenting men, and their commission extended to slay
the third part of men.” Smith, DR, 505.

REVELATION 9:15
And the four angels were loosed, which
were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a
month, and a year, for to slay the third part
of men.
Which Were Prepared.—
“‘That is, arranged; made ready as if by
previous discipline—for some mighty enterprise.
Applied to the Turkmans, this would mean that the
preparation for the ultimate work which they executed,
had been making as that power increased and became
consolidated under Tontul, Alp Arslan, and Malek Shah.
In its successful strides, Persia and the East had been
established—embracing together all the countries of the
East, and constituting thus, by far, the most mighty
nation on the globe. All this would seem to be a work
of preparation to do what was afterwards done as seen in
the vision of John.’ Barnes’ Commentary on Rev., p.
264.” Straw, SR, 67,68.
For an Hour, a Day, a Month, and a Year.—
“The four angels were loosed for an hour, a day, a
month, and a year, to slay the third part of men. This
period, during which Ottoman supremacy was to exist,
amounts to three hundred ninety-one years and
fifteen days. Thus: A prophetic year is three hundred
and sixty prophetic days, or three hundred and sixty

1 yr. = 360 prophetic days = 360 literal yrs.
+ 1 mo. = 30 prophetic days = 30 literal yrs.
+ 1 day = 1 prophetic day = 1 literal yr.
+ 1 hr. = 1/24 prophetic day = 15 literal days
TOTAL 391 1/24 days = 391 yrs.,15 dys.
The Third Part of Men.—
“The third part of the Roman Empire—the Greek
division of it.” Smith, DR, 502.
“ ‘To slay the third part of men,’ is to destroy
and conquer one third part of the governments or
kingdoms of which the Papal beast had the control,
which was true in the end.” Miller, Evidence, 121.

“‘The four angels were thus loosed by the
voluntary submission of the Greeks, yet another doom
awaited the seat of empire. Amurath, the sultan to
whom the submission of Deacozes was made, and by
whose permission he reigned in Constantinople, soon
after died, and was succeeded in the empire, in 1451, by
Mahomet II, who set his heart on Constantinople, and
determined to make it a prey.’
“ ‘He accordingly made preparations for be-sieging
and taking the city. The siege commenced on the 6th
of April, 1453, and ended in the taking of the city,
and death of the last of the Constantines, on the 16th
day of May following. And the eastern city of the
Caesars became the seat of the Ottoman Empire.’ Josiah
Litch, Prophetic Expositions, Vol. II, p.183.” Smith,
DR, 507.
“[Mohammed II] engaged the services of a founder
of cannon, who promised weapons that could batter
down the walls of the city. In April, 1453, the
memorable siege was formed. At the sound of the war
trumpet, the forces of Mohammed II were increased by
swarms of fearless fanatics until, as Phranza has said,
the besieging army numbered two hundred and fiftyeight thousand. Constantinople fell; the last vestige of
Roman greatness was gone, and the Moslem conquerors
trampled the religion of Rome in the dust. This
memorable event affected all future history. The fall
shocked Europe.” Haskel, SSP, 176.

225

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Constantinople had stood for 1123 years since its
foundation in 330 AD.” PJ
“Constantinople, the Eastern capital of the Roman
Empire, had been a kind of protecting wall for all of
Europe. The city had been able to resist the Islamic
power by the eastern banc for eight centuries. Her
fall produced—as all historians agreed—a panic of
great proportions to the rest of all the European
nations. The dam that had stopped the Muslim hordes
was no longer there. Their flood easily reached Austria
and even Germany, threatening to destroy the Western
civilization.” Treiyer, Apocalypse, 325.

Map of Byzantine Empire at Fall of
Constantinople, 1453 AD. Constantinople was situated
in the heart of Ottoman territories, which the Sultan
Mehmet II finally removed on 29 May, 1453.
“As the founding of Constantinople is a guidepost
in history, so the capture of that city in 1453 is another
landmark. One of the greatest checks received by the
papacy was due to the influx into Italy of Greek
scholars, driven from Constantinople by the
incoming Mohammedans. The discovery of America
was due to the closing to the eastern passage to the rich
island of the Indian Ocean by the Mohammedans in
Constantinople and Asia Minor, and so in more ways
than is usually thought, God worked to advance truth
through those who were ignorant of His truth.”
Haskell, SDP, 246,247.
The Ottoman Empire Checks Papal Rome and Helps
the Protestant Reformation.—
“While memory of the epochal fall of
Constantinople was still fresh, the Ottoman Turks—
amazing as it may seem—played a vital role in the
success of the Protestant Reformation! Mohammed
the Conqueror’s most illustrious successor was
Suleiman the Magnificent, whose reign (1520-1566)
over the Ottoman Empire coincided closely with the
reign (1519-1556) of Charles V, the emperor of
Germany when the Reformation began.
“Charles V was …a devout Roman Catholic. …He
was deeply disturbed by the Reformation that Martin
Luther began in 1517….
“The territory which Charles V ruled included

Spain, parts of eastern Europe, and Spain’s vast new
colonies in North and South America. It also included
what in those days was called the Holy Roman Empire
but which today we call Holland, Switzerland, most of
Germany, and parts of Italy. He deserved to be called
Emperor! Inasmuch as Charles V sat at the head of so
very much power and wealth, why did he not stamp out
Protestantism, seeing he wanted to so badly? Partly
because of the Ottoman Turks and the fall of
Constantinople.
“The King of France (named Francis I), some of
the German princes, and even the pope himself were
fearful of Charles V and thought that he had too much
power. Neither Francis, nor any of the German princes,
nor the pope was strong enough alone to withstand
Charles V; but each of them was strong enough to
withstand him with the support of Suleiman the
Magnificent, the head of the Ottoman Empire.
“Thus it came about that Moslem armies and
navies and financial subsidies frequently came to the
aid of Christians in their battles against Charles V.
“…In 1529, the very year that the word Protestant
was first used to describe the new religious movement
[the Protest of the Princes], Charles V thought for a
moment that circumstances were right for an attack on
the ‘heretics.’ But just
then—at the personal
request
of
the
Catholic
king
of
France—Suleiman
the Magnificent sent
an Islamic army to
attack the Catholic
city of Vienna [1529].
Charles V couldn’t
possibly fight both
Protestants and Moslems at the same time. In fact, he
had to have the help of the Protestants if he was going to
beat back the Moslems. Once more he overlooked
religious differences.
“ ‘Ottoman pressure on the Habsburgs [that is, on
Charles V and his relatives] ...was an important factor in
the consolidation of the forces of the Reformation and in
their final recognition,’ observes a typical modern
scholar. ‘In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
support and encouragement for Protestants and
Calvinist were ...one of the fundamental principles of
Ottoman policy.’
“...The heyday of the Ottoman Empire continued
only from around the fall of Constantinople until around
1600. By 1699 ‘the Ottoman empire, which had terrified
Christendom for over three hundred years, ceased to be
an aggressive power.’ In the providence of God, its
supremacy had peaked at the precise moment when
its influence was needed to preserve the existence of
Protestantism.” Maxwell, God Cares, 254,255.
“Often were his [Soliman’s] hordes seen hovering,
like a cloud charged with lightning, on the frontier of
Christendom. When a crisis arose in the affairs of the

226

REVELATION 9
Reformation, and the kings obedient to the Roman See
had united their swords to strike, and with blow so
decisive that they should not need to strike a second
time, the Turk, obeying One Whom he knew not,
would straightway present himself on the eastern
limits of Europe, and in so menacing an attitude, that
the swords unsheathed against the poor Protestants
had to be turned in another quarter. The Turk was
the lightning-rod that drew off the tempest. Thus did
Christ cover His little flock with the shield of the
Moslem.” Wiley, HOP, Vol.1, 473.
“Soliman the Magnificent, setting out from
Constantinople on the 23rd of April, 1526, at the head of
a mighty army, which, receiving accessions as it
marched onward, was swollen at last to 300,000 Turks,
was coming nearer and nearer Hungary, like the ‘wasting
Levin.’ The land now shook with terror. …Having
trampled down the king and his army, the victorious
Soliman held on his way into Hungary, and slaughtered
200,000 of its inhabitants. This calamity, which
thrilled all Europe, brought rest to the Protestants
[because the papal forces had to fight the Turks].
“Traversing Hungary, the Ottoman host had sat
down before the walls of Vienna [1529].… The
besiegers were opening trenches, were digging mines,
and were thundering with their cannon, and already a
breach had been made in the walls. A few days and
Vienna must succumb to the numbers, the impetuosity,
and valor of the Ottoman warriors, and a desolate and
blood-besprinkled heap would alone remain to mark
where it had stood. The door of Germany burst open,
the conquerors would pour along the valley of the
Danube, and plant the crescent amid the sacked cities
and devastated provinces of the Empire. The prospect
was a terrible one. A common ruin, like an avalanche
on brow of Alp, hung suspended above all parties and
ranks in Germany, and might at any moment sweep
down upon them with resistless fury.
“ ‘It is you’, said the adherents of the old [papal]
creed addressing the Lutherans, ‘who have brought
this scourge upon us. It is you who have unloosed
these angels of evil; they come to chastise you for your
heresy. You have cast off the yoke of the Pope, and now
you must bear the yoke of the Turk.’
“‘Not so,’ said Luther, ‘it is God who has
unloosed this army, whose king is Abaddon the
destroyer. They have been sent to punish us for our
sins, our ingratitude for the Gospel, our blasphemies,
and above all, our shedding of the blood of the
righteous.’” Wiley, HOP, Vol. 1, 566,567.
“In the early 600’s AD, Mahometanism, with their
local bases positioned throughout the Mediterranean,
came into existence. Although loosely-knit till the end
of the 13th century, these Arabian factions still provided
a bulwark against Papal advancement activities. In
1299 AD, under Othman, the Islamic hordes unitedly
advanced against the eastern division of the formerly
dominated Roman Empire (Greek Division). Their

plundering and harassment activities within Papal
territories for ‘150 years’ (5th trumpet), not only caused
extremely aggravating conditions, but more so, provided
serious hindering factors pertaining to Papal
advancement activities in their goal toward world
domination.
“From 1449 AD, the devastations of the Islamic
scourge continued within Eastern Rome for numbers of
centuries with greater desolation and slaughter. Via the
Moslem faction, the Papacy was confined to a goodly
degree from overrunning the lower Mediterranean
territories. Islam erected a definite barrier against antiChrist activities. The ‘6th Trumpet’ time period of
‘391 years and 15 days’ relative to the Ottoman
Empire was a providential pitting of a ‘2nd evil
power’ against the ‘1st evil power’. Not only were the
God-stimulated 16th century reformation activities, and
the satanically-stimulated French Revolution of the
1790’s, formidable hindering factors to the papal power,
but the ‘Ottoman Empire’ was one which spanned over
the time period allotted to the Papacy. In God’s
providences, the ‘Ottoman Empire’ would run its course
for a period of ‘391 years and 15 days’, terminating on
August 11, 1840. Throughout most of the Papal
reign, the Papal anti-Christ was under quarantine.
After its fall in 1798, the Islamic bulwark was no
longer needed, and was terminated 42 years later.”
Michaelson, Write the Vision, Vol. 1, 266,267.

REVELATION 9:16
And the number of the army of the
horsemen were two hundred thousand
thousand: and I heard the number of them.
Number of the Army of Horsemen.—
“And if we should understand the prophet to mean,
as some suppose he does, 200,000, multiplied by a 1000,
then the sum total would be 200,000,000, which would
be more men than were ever on our earth at one time
capable of bearing arms; therefore I believe this is not
the meaning of the prophet. Neither do I think that it
was a succession of armies during the whole period of
391 years, making the sum total of 200,000,000, for this,
too, would be incredible; for allowing a standing army of
15,385,000 to be recruited every 30 years, it would only
make the two hundred millions; and this sum would be
more than five times the number of all the standing
armies in the known world.
And from these
considerations I have for myself given this construction,
that the prophet John heard the number of 200,000
repeated, or twice told, which would make an army
of 400,000 horsemen; and this would not be
incredible. And what is to me strong proof of the fact
is, that the history informs us that Mahomet II came
against Constantinople about the year AD 1450, with
an army of 400,000 horsemen, and after a long siege
took the city in the year 1453, and destroyed the Eastern
Empire, which had stood more than ten centuries from

227

GEMS FROM REVELATION
its foundation by Constantine.”
121,122.

Miller, Evidence,

“The number of horsemen were two hundred
thousand thousand; what this means, expositors have
been at a loss to determine. But I am inclined to believe
with Mr. Miller, that it means two hundred thousand
twice-told, making 400,000, in all. What makes this
probable is the fact that the Turks usually had from three
to four hundred thousand horsemen in their army. They
had, when Constantinople was taken, three hundred
thousand, and some say, four hundred thousand
horsemen, beside many foot and a fleet.” Litch, Signs,
2/1/1841.
Army of Horsemen.—
“This is a clear reference to an invading army.”
Pickle, STR, Part 7.
Thousand Thousand.—
“In the Greek it reads, ‘myriads of myriads.’
…What is the significance of this in the sixth trumpet?
It was the Turkish method of numbering! They
numbered by ‘tomens.’ A tomen is ten thousand people
or the number ten thousand, or myriad.” Cooke, #14UR, 13,14.

REVELATION 9:17,18
And thus I saw the horses in the vision,
and them that sat on them, having
breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and
brimstone: and the heads of the horses were
as the heads of lions; and out of their
mouths issued fire and smoke and
brimstone.
By these three was the third part of men
killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by
the brimstone, which issued out of their
mouths.
Breastplates of Fire, Jacinth, and Brimstone.—
“The Cambridge Bible declares that the uniforms
were ‘fiery red, smoky blue, and sulphurous yellow.’
It is a well-known fact that these were the prominent
colors in the uniforms of the Turkish soldiers of that
period.” Bunch, TR, 100.
“Could language more accurately describe the
Turkish horsemen as they rode to battle clad in uniforms
of red and blue and yellow?” Anderson, UR, 92.
Horses’ Heads Like Lions.—
“The heads of the horses were in appearance as the
heads of lions, to denote their strength, courage, and
fierceness.” Smith, DR, 509.

Out of Their Mouths: Fire, Smoke, & Brimstone.—
“The last part of the verse undoubtedly has
reference to the use of gunpowder and firearms for
purposes of war, which were then but recently
introduced. As the Turks discharged their firearms
on horseback, it would appear to the distant beholder
that the fire, smoke, and brimstone issued out of the
horses’ mouths.
“Quite an agreement exists among commentators in
applying the prophecy concerning the fire, smoke, and
brimstone to the use of gunpowder by the Turks in their
warfare against the Eastern Empire. But they generally
allude simply to the heavy ordinance, the large cannon,
employed by that power; whereas the prophecy mentions
especially the ‘horses,’ and the fire ‘issuing from their
mouths,’ as though smaller arms were used, and used
on horseback. ...A statement from Gibbon confirms
this view. He says: ‘The incessant volleys of lances and
arrows were accompanied with the smoke, the sound,
and the fire of the musketry and cannon.’ (Gibbon, Vol.
VI, chap. 68, p. 388). Here is good historical evidence
that muskets were used by the Turks; and, secondly, it is
undisputed that in their general warfare they fought
principally on horseback. The inference is therefore
well supported that they used firearms on horseback, accurately fulfilling the prophecy, according to the
illustration above referred to.
“Respecting the use of firearms by the Turks in
their campaign against Constantinople, Elliott thus
speaks:
“ ‘It was to “the fire and the smoke and the
sulphur,” to the artillery and firearms of Mahomet, that
the killing of the third part of men, i.e., the capture of
Constantinople, and by consequence the destruction of
the Greek Empire, was owing. Eleven hundred years
and more had now elapsed since her foundation by
Constantine. In the course of them, Goths, Huns,
Avars, Persians, Bulgarians, Saracens, Russians, and
indeed the Ottoman Turks themselves, had made their
hostile assaults, or laid siege against it. But the
fortifications were impregnable by them. Constantinople
survived, and with it the Greek Empire. Hence the
anxiety of the sultan Mahomet to find that which would
remove the obstacle. “Canst thou cast a cannon,” was
his question to the founder of cannon that deserted to
him, “of size sufficient to batter down the wall of
Constantinople?” Then the foundry was established at
Adrianople, the cannon cast, the artillery prepared, and
the siege began.’
“ ‘…Gibbon, always the unconscious commentator
on the Apocalyptic prophecy, puts this new
instrumentality of war into the foreground of his picture,
in his eloquent and striking narrative of the final
catastrophe of the Greek Empire. In preparation for it,
he gives the history of the recent invention of
gunpowder, “that mixture of saltpeter, sulphur, and
charcoal;” tells how... “the long order of Turkish
artillery was pointed against the walls, fourteen batteries
thundering at once on the most accessible places;” how
“the fortifications which had stood for ages against

228

REVELATION 9
hostile violence were dismantled on all sides by the
Ottoman cannon, many breaches opened, and near the
gate of St. Romanus, four towers leveled with the
ground;” how, “as from the lines, the galleys, and the
bridge, the Ottoman artillery thundered on all sides, the
camp and city, the Greeks and the Turks, were involved
in a cloud of smoke, which could only be dispelled by
the final deliverance or destruction of the Roman
Empire;” and how the besiegers at length “rushing
though the breaches,” “Constantinople was irretrievably
subdued, her empire subverted, and her religion trampled
in the dust by the Moslem conquerors.” I say it well
deserves observation how markedly and strikingly
Gibbon attributes the capture of the city, and so the
destruction of the empire, to the Ottoman artillery. For
what is it but a comment on the words of the prophecy?
“By these three was the third part of men killed, by
the fire, and by the smoke, and by the sulphur, which
issued out of their mouths.”’
(Elliott, Horae
Apocalyticae, Vol.I, pp. 478,479.)” Smith, DR, 509-511.
“Out of his [Leviathan’s] mouth go burning
lamps, and sparks of fire leap out. Out of his nostrils
goeth smoke, as out of a seething pot or caldron. His
breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his
mouth.” Job. 41:19-21.

scimitars. Now the scene is changed, and they are
prepared with breastplates of fire, and of jacinth and
brimstone. And out of the mouths of the horses,
proceeded fire, smoke, and brimstone. Their power was
in their mouth and tail; their tails were like serpents;
long, cylindrical instruments like serpents with heads
in them (bullets) with which they did hurt. This
description has long been considered by expositors as a
description of firearms and gunpowder. And, indeed,
I do not know how anyone who knew nothing of such
instruments could describe them more clearly.” Litch,
Signs, 2/1/1841.
(Spiritual:) “The power was also in their tail.
Isaiah says, ‘The ancient and honorable, he is the
head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the
tail.’ (Is. 9:15.) Their military valor was one thing in
favor of the Turks; the unity of the faith in Mohammed
and the zeal inspired by that prophet to kill the ‘infidels’
(Christians), was a factor equally as potent.” Haskel,
SSP, 176.

“As the Turks discharged their firearms on
horseback, it would appear to the distant beholder
that the fire, smoke, and brimstone issued out of the
horses’ mouths.” Smith, DR, 509.

The End of the Time Prophecies of the Fifth and Sixth
Trumpet Predicted by Josiah Litch.—
“The supremacy of the Mohammedans over the
Greeks was to continue, as already noticed, three
hundred and ninety-one years and fifteen days.
‘Commencing when the one hundred and fifty years
ended in 1449, the period would end August 11, 1840.
Judging from the manner of the commence-ment of the
Ottoman supremacy, that it was by a voluntary
acknowledgment on the part of the Greek emperor that
he only reigned by permission of the Turkish sultan, we
should naturally conclude that the fall or departure of the
Ottoman independence would be brought about in the
same way; that the end of the specified period [that is, on
the 11th of August, 1840] the sultan would voluntarily
surrender his independence into the hands of the
Christian powers,’ just as he had, three hundred ninetyone years and fifteen days before, received it from the
hands of the Christian emperor, Constantine XIII.
(Josiah Litch, Prophetic Expositions, Vol. II, p. 189.)
“…This application of the prophecy was made by
Josiah Litch in 1838, two years before the expected
event was to occur. In that year he predicted that the
Turkish power would be overthrown ‘in AD 1840,
sometime in the month of August;’ (Josiah Litch, The
Probability of the Second Coming of Christ About AD
1843, p. 157.) but a few days before the fulfillment of
the prophecy he concluded more definitely from his
study that the period allotted to the Turks would come to
an end on August 11, 1840. It was then purely a matter
of calculation on the prophetic periods of Scripture. It is
proper to inquire whether such events did take place
according to the calculation.” Smith, DR, 512,513.

Power In Their Tails Like Unto Serpents.—(Physical:)
“Since the fifth trumpet sounded there has been an
astonishing change in the arms of the Turks. They then
had breastplates or iron, and were armed with dirks and

How the Prediction was Fulfilled!—
“In 1838, ...the sultan of Turkey and Mehemet Ali,
pasha of Egypt, were at war, the pasha refusing an
indemnity demanded by the ruler of Turkey. In 1839 the

REVELATION 9:19
For their power is in their mouth, and in
their tails: for their tails were like unto
serpents, and had heads, and with them they
do hurt.
Their Power Is In Their Mouth.—

Depiction on 1843 Chart
Showing Use of Firearms by the Turks.

229

GEMS FROM REVELATION
pasha was victorious in battle over the Turkish army,
and he sent another force under command of his son into
Syria and Asia Minor, and threatened to carry his
victorious arms against Constantinople. At this juncture,
England, Austria, Prussia, and Russia, combined in the
demand that the pasha should confine himself to Syria
and Egypt. A council of these four powers was held July
15, 1840. The ruler of Turkey agreed to abide by their
decision, and was only too glad to have his life saved by
their intervention. He thereby voluntarily surrendered
all rights into the hands of the combined forces of
Western Europe. In the official document drawn up by
the representatives of the nations concerned, are these
words: ‘It having been felt that all the zealous labors of
the conferences of London in the settlement of the
pasha’s pretensions were useless, and that the only
public way was to have recourse to coercive measures to
reduce him to obedience in case he persisted in not
listening to pacific overtures, the powers have, together
with the Ottoman plenipotentiary, drawn up and signed a
treaty whereby the sultan offers the pasha the hereditary
government of Egypt, ...the pasha, on his part,
evacuating all other parts of the sultan’s dominions now
occupied by him and returning the Ottoman fleet. ...If
the pasha refuses to accede to them, it is evident that the
evil consequences to fall upon him will be attributable
solely to his own fault.’
“This treaty was signed, and the ultimatum was
officially put in the power of Mehemet Ali on August
11, 1840. Since that time Turkey has been known
everywhere as the ‘Sick Man of the East.’” Haskel, SSP,
178,179. (For further details see Smith, DR, 513-517
and SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 82-92.)

British delegation putting treaty into the hands of
Muhammad Ali, August 11, 1840.
“On August 11, 1840, the period of three
hundred ninety-one years and fifteen days allotted to
the continuance of the Ottoman power, ended; and
where was the sultan’s independence?—GONE! Who
had the supremacy of the Ottoman empire in their
hands?—the four great powers; and that empire has
existed ever since only by the sufferance of these
Christian powers. Thus was the prophecy fulfilled to the
very letter.” Smith, DR, 517.

“When on August 11, 1840, the London Morning
Herald announced, ‘The Sultan has been reduced to the
rank of a puppet,’ the news quickly flashed to the
unbelieving world.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 89.
“The following is from Rev. Mr. Goodell,
missionary of the American Board at Constantinople,
addressed to the Board, and by them published in the
Missionary Herald, for April, 1841, p. 160.
“‘The power of Islamism is broken forever; and
there is no concealing the fact even from them-selves.
They exist now by mere sufferance. And though there
is a mighty effort made by the Christian governments to
sustain them, yet at every step they sink lower and lower
with fearful velocity. And though there is a great
endeavor made to graft the institutions of civilized and
Christian countries upon the decayed trunk, yet the very
root itself is fast wasting away by the venom of its own
poison. How wonderful it is, that, when all Christendom
combined together to check the progress of
Mohammedan power, it waxed exceedingly great in
spite of every opposition; and now when all the mighty
potentates of Christian Europe, who feel fully
competent to settle all the quarrels, and arrange the
affairs of the whole world, are leagued together for
its protection and defense, down it comes, in spite of
all their fostering care.’” Bates, Autobiography, 172.
The Effect of the Fulfillment of this Prophecy.—
“The prophecy of the sounding of the sixth angel
for three hundred and ninety-one years and fifteen days,
ended on the 11th day of August, 1840, and at the same
time the second woe passed, and behold the third woe
cometh quickly.
“Mark, this short space of time called ‘quickly,’ is
the whole period of time from the passing of the second
woe and sixth angel, to the commencing of the third
woe, and sounding of the seventh angel. This space of
time called ‘quickly’, defines the time to announce to
every nation and kindred and tongue and people that
Christ is coming, by the proclamation of the angel’s
message in Rev. 14: 6, 7. This is in accordance with the
testimony of the Saviour. Matt. 24: 3, 14.
“No marvel, then, that those who had been looking
with intense anxiety for the passing away of the Ottoman
Supremacy, saw with such clearness that the time had
come for a body of people to proclaim the message in
question from thence down to the ending of the
prophetic periods of Daniel’s vision. And that the time
had then come for this message to go to every nation,
was still further demonstrated by a call for a Secondadvent Conference to be held in Boston about the
time the Ottoman empire lost its supremacy, and
many weeks before the news of its fall reached the
United States. At the close of this Conference, which
was convened a few weeks after the call, in October,
1840, an address of the Conference setting forth their
views respecting the second advent of our Lord, was sent
forth to the world, and from thence the work continued

230

REVELATION 9
until the message ended in the autumn of 1844.” Bates,
Autobiography, 172,173.
“Two years prior to this time, Josiah Litch of
Philadelphia published his interpretation of this
prophecy, in which he took the unqualified position
that the Ottoman Empire would fall in August 11,
1840. It seemed a bold thing to do, especially in the face
of a growing infidelity and rationalism....
“His views on the Ottoman question were noted in
public journals, and various infidel clubs discussed his
views, ridiculing the man for having the audacity to
make such a claim. …When the news of the collapse of
the sultans empire was flashed to the unbelieving world,
it was startling. Moreover, some of the very ones who
had ridiculed now renounced their rationalism. Within
a few months, it is reported, Litch ‘received letter
from more than one thousand prominent infidels,
some of them leaders of infidel clubs, in which they
stated they had given up the battle against the Bible
and had accepted it as God’s revelation to man.’
Some expressed themselves in such words as these: ‘We
have said that expositors of prophecy quote from the
musty pages of history to substantiate their claims of
prophetic fulfillments, but in this case we have the living
facts before our eyes.’” Anderson, UR, 93,94.
“When the event verified the truthfulness of this
calculation, the way was prepared for the advent
message to go with mighty power. The prophecies
were not only unsealed, but, in the providence of God, a
demonstration of the truthfulness of the mode of
calculation respecting the prophetic times was given to
the world. Thus, at the very time when the mighty angel
of God was to come down with the little book open in
his hand, and to cry with a loud voice, the advent
message began to be proclaimed with great power. It
was the good news of the everlasting kingdom, and of
the advent of our glorious King.” Andrews, TAM, 28.
“In the year 1840 another remarkable
fulfillment of prophecy excited widespread interest.
Two years before, Josiah Litch, one of the leading
ministers preaching the second advent, published an
exposition of Revelation 9, predicting the fall of the
Ottoman Empire. According to his calculations, this
power was to be overthrown ‘in AD 1840, sometime in
the month of August;’ and only a few days previous to
its accomplishment he wrote: ‘Allowing the first period,
150 years, to have been exactly fulfilled before Deacozes
ascended the throne by permission of the Turks, and that
the 391 years, fifteen days, commenced at the close of
the first period, it will end on the 11th of August, 1840,
when the Ottoman power in Constantinople may be
expected to be broken. And this, I believe, will be found
to be the case.’—Josiah Litch, in Signs of the Times, and
Expositor of Prophecy, Aug. 1, 1840.”
“At the very time specified, Turkey, through her
ambassadors, accepted the protection of the allied
powers of Europe, and thus placed herself under the

control of Christian nations. The event exactly fulfilled
the prediction. When it became known, multitudes
were convinced of the correctness of the principles of
prophetic interpretation adopted by Miller and his
associates, and a wonderful impetus was given to the
advent movement. Men of learning and position united
with Miller, both in preaching and in publishing his
views, and from 1840 to 1844 the work rapidly
extended.” Great Controversy, 334,335.

REVELATION 9:20,21
And the rest of the men which were not
killed by these plagues yet repented not of
the works of their hands, that they should
not worship devils, and idols of gold, and
silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood:
which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk:
Neither repented they of their murders,
nor of the sorceries, nor of their
fornications, nor of their thefts.
By These Plagues.—
“When the work of probation is closed, and the
intercession of Christ in heaven, and the voice of
warning upon earth, are ended, then men drink from the
cup of his indignation the wine of God’s wrath without
any mixture. That which constitutes this wrath is the
seven last plagues. They are by this term distinguished
from those plagues inflicted under the six trumpets.
Rev.9:20,21.” Andrews, JEO, 89,90.
The Rest of the Men Repented Not.—
“In these verses, we have the character of the
persons or government on whose account these plagues
were sent. In the first place, they are represented as
idolaters, as worshipping devils, idols of gold, etc., full
of murder, sorceries, fornication, and theft. This exactly
agrees with the description John has given of the
‘woman sitting on the scarlet-colored beast, full of
names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten
horns. And the woman was arrayed in purple and
scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious
stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand
full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication.
And upon her fore-head was a name written, Mystery,
Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and the
abominations of the earth.’ So we see that the fifth and
sixth trumpets, and the two first woes, were sent as the
judgments of God upon this anti-Christian beast, and
clearly shows the decline of the power which she had
exercised over the kings of the earth and the people of
God for more than eight centuries, to the commencing of
the sixth trumpet, when the Turks were let loose upon
those kingdoms under the control of Papacy, conquered
all Asia and about one third part of Europe, and were in
the end the means of opening the eyes of many of the
inhabitants of the world to see that the Pope’s

231

GEMS FROM REVELATION
pretension of being the vice-gerent of God was not
well founded; for, if he could not foresee and resist
the inroads of the Turks—that infidel nation—surely
he could not perform those great miracles which he
pretended to perform in order to support his
ecclesiastical and civil power: and individuals, and
afterwards nations, began to disregard his authority,
excommunications, and bulls, until his power is now but
a little more than a bishop of Rome.” Miller, Evidence,
123.

Sorceries.—
“Prayers to the dead.” Burnside, RWU, 110.

Plagues.—
“ ‘Plagues’ as used here has the meaning of
‘strokes’ or ‘judgments’ and furnishes no proof that they
are identical or even closely related to the seven last
plagues.
The very fact that there was still
opportunity for repentance shows that probation had
not yet closed during the sixth trumpet. With the
majority of mankind, including the members of the
apostate church, the judgments of God failed in their
mission. ‘For the people turneth not unto Him that
smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.’
Isa. 9:13. Only the righteous ‘learn righteousness’
when the judgments of God are in the land. Isa. 26:9,
10.” Bunch, TR, 104.

Aftermath of the Fifth and Sixth Trumpets.—
“The events that occurred under the sixth trumpet
constituted the second woe, yet these judgments led to
no improvement in the manners and morals of men.
…The hordes of Saracens and Turks were let loose as
a scourge and punishment upon apostate
Christendom.
Men suffered the punishment, but
learned no lesson form it.” Smith, DR, 517.

Devil or Idol Worship.—
“Idolatry in both the Old and New Testaments is
identified with devil or demon worship. See Deut.
32:17; Ps. 96:5; 106:37; 1 Cor. 10:31.” Bunch, TR, 104.
“The worship of devils (demons, the dead deified)
and idols of gold, silver, brass, stone, and wood, may
find a fulfillment in the saint worship and image
worship of the Roman Catholic church; while
murders, sorceries (pretended miracles through the
agency of departed saints), fornications, and thefts, in
countries where the Roman religion has prevailed, there
has been no lack.” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 93.
“The vow of Mahomet II, published Aug. 2, 1469,
in all the mosques of his empire, has an interesting
application on this point: ‘I Mahomet, son of Amurath,
...emperor of emperors and prince of princes, from the
rising to the setting sun, promise to the only God,
Creator of all things, by my vow and by my oath, that I
will not give sleep to my eyes, that I will eat no
delicates, that I will not seek out what is pleasant, that I
will not touch what is beautiful, nor turn my face from
the west to the east, till I over-throw, and trample
under the feet of my horses, the gods of the nations,
those gods of wood, of brass, of silver, of gold, or of
painting, which the disciples of Christ, have made
with their hands.’—Sismondi Hist. Of Italian Republics,
vii. 397. Cited by Mr. Birks in his “Mystery of
Providence,” p. 429.” SDA Pub. Ass., 1875, TST, 93,94.

Fornication.—
“Union with the world.” Burnside, RWU, 110.
Thefts.—
“Confiscated the property of the martyrs.”
Burnside, RWU, 110.

“The closing words of the ninth chapter are a sad
commentary on the condition of the world. ...As the end
draws near iniquity waxes greater. The fall of nations
has ever been used as a symbol of the final
destruction of the earth. Men see these things and yet
continue in their idolatry, their theft, and their
fornication. How precious in the sight of the Lord is that
little company who by faith see Jesus, and following
Him in His work above, reflect his character to the
world!” Haskel, SSP, 179.
“In spite of all the woes brought upon Europe by
the Turks, mankind did not repent, and, with few
exceptions, Christianity has been losing ground in
Europe since the Renaissance, as men turned to
humanism, rationalism, the worship of money, science,
and power.” Thiele, OSIR, 181.
A Final Warning Before Seventh Trumpet.—
“The final effort to bring repentance to mankind
would be in the heralding of a final world message
which is pictured in the parenthetical prophecy between
the sixth and seventh trumpets. Before the last and
most terrible of the seven war scourges visits the
nations of earth, a last and mighty appeal will be
made through the gospel under the latter rain.”
Bunch, TR, 104.

Murders.—
“Murdered the Saints.” Burnside, RWU, 110.

232

REVELATION 10

REVELATION 10
REVELATION 10:1-11
1 And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven,
clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his
face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire.
2 And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right
foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth.
3 And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when
he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.
4 And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was
about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me,
Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write
them not.
5 And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the
earth lifted up his hand to heaven,
6 And sware by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created
heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the
things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are
therein, that there should be time no longer.
7 But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall
begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath
declared to his servants the prophets.
8 And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again,
and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of
the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.
9 And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the
little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up: and it shall
make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.
10 And I took the little book out of the angel’s hand, and ate it
up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had
eaten it, my belly was bitter.
11 And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many
peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.

sixth and seventh trumpets, Rev. chapters 10 and 11,
which show the rise of two great movements. The
Advent Movement with its saving truths and the
atheistic power of Revolutionary France which God
used to break the temporal power of the Papacy.
This prophecy also shows the rise of Communism.”
Burnside, RWU, 120,121.
“The prophet John watched the sounding of the
sixth trumpet, and saw the woes and terrors of national
strife, and the darkening of the earth by the smoke from
the ‘bottomless pit.’ He saw men buried beneath the
weight of their own sins, and although the Son of God
was waiting, like the father of the prodigal son, for the
return of the sinful, yet they repented not of their
murders and sorceries, their fornications and thefts.
Justice and mercy are inseparably mingled in the
dealings of God with man, and great woes call forth from
Jehovah a great overflowing of His love. So when the
world lay in darkness, unmindful of the voice of God
which they might have heard in the very din of battle or
the councils of nations, there came to the world a most
thrilling message. John heard this message before
seeing the further events of the third woe.” Haskel,
SSP, 180.
“Revelation 10 reveals the workings of God’s
kingdom and Revelation 11:1-13 reveals the workings of
Satan’s kingdom—since 1798. This corresponds to the
6th head period of Revelation 17.” PJ

JESUS, THE CAPTAIN OF THE
LORD’S HOSTS
Introduction.—
“In this scripture we have another instance in which
the consecutive line of thought is for a time interrupted.
Revelation 9 closed with the events of the sixth trumpet.
The sounding of the seventh trumpet is not introduced
until we reach Revelation 11:15. All of chapter 10 and
a part of chapter 11, therefore, come in
parenthetically between the sixth and seventh
trumpets.” Smith, DR, 519.
“Rev. 10 and 11:1-13 constitute a parenthetical
prophecy between the sixth and seventh trumpets. It is
closely related to the parenthetical prophecy between
the sixth and seventh seals. This is further proof that
the seals and trumpets are parallel and not
successive.” Bunch, TR, 105.
“In the prophecy of the ‘Seven Trumpets,’ we have
two parenthetical prophecies placed in here between the

REVELATION 10:1
And I saw another mighty angel come
down from heaven, clothed with a cloud:
and a rainbow was upon his head, and his
face was as it were the sun, and his feet as
pillars of fire.
A Mighty Angel.—
“The similarity of the description of Christ in
chapter 1:13-16 leads many to believe that this angel
must be Christ. … He is called ‘the Messenger [angel]
of the covenant’ (Malachi 3:1), and ‘the Angel which
redeemed me’ (Gen. 48:16). Anderson, UR, 97.
“And the angel of God, which went before the
camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the
pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood
behind them.” Exodus 14:19.

233

GEMS FROM REVELATION
they feared as they entered into the cloud and there
came a voice out of the cloud saying, This is my
beloved Son hear him.’ Luke 9:34-35.
“At Jesus’ ascension, ‘…he was taken up, and a
cloud received him out of their sight.’ Acts 1:9.
“At the second advent, ‘…he cometh with clouds,
and every eye shall see him.’ Rev. 1:7. ‘I looked and
behold a white cloud and upon the cloud one sat like
unto the Son of man.’ Rev. 14:14.
“Seeing that clouds are associated with the Deity, it
suggests that this angel must be a member of the
Godhead.” Cooke, #15-UR, 3.
“For I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy
seat.” Leviticus 16:2.
“And the LORD went before them by day in a
pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a
pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night:
He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the
pillar of fire by night, from before the people.” Exodus
13:21,22.

“The mighty angel who instructed John was no less a
personage than Jesus Christ.” 7BC, 971.
Come Down From Heaven.—
“The termination of the hour, day, month and year
of the sixth angel marks the conclusion of the second
woe, August 11, 1840. Rev.9:15. At the close of the
sixth angel’s voice a mighty angel descends from
heaven to herald the sounding of the seventh
trumpet.” Andrews, JEO, 55,56.
“This denotes that the message is from God, and
is of great importance. In Revelation, God inspired
movements are pictured as coming from above, from
heaven, whereas movements inspired by Satan are
symbolized as emerging from beneath, from the abyss,
the sea and the earth.
“ ‘The wisdom that is from above is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without
hypocrisy.’ James 3:15-17.” Cooke, #15-UR, 2.
Clothed With a Cloud.—
“Clouds are associated with the Deity in scripture.
When the Deity descended on Mount Sinai, [there was]
‘…a thick cloud upon the mount and the voice of the
trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people
trembled.’ Ex. 19:16.
“ ‘These words the Lord spake to all the
assembly in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, of
the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great
voice.’ Deut. 5:22.
“When Jesus was transfigured on the mountain,
‘…there came a cloud and overshadowed them and

“Members of the Godhead must veil their glory
when they appear to men. While leading ancient Israel
through the wilderness Christ veiled His presence in a
pillar of cloud by day. In a cloud He came down on
Mount Sinai to proclaim His law, and in a cloud the Lord
visited the holy of holies in the tabernacle.” Bunch, TR,
106.
“With clouds he covereth the light; and
commandeth it not to shine by the cloud that cometh
betwixt.” Job 36:32.
“The clouds surrounding the form of Jesus
represented the fact that there was something about
Jesus that was not understood. What was it? The
daily (continual) ministry had been taken away. The
knowledge of Christ’s continual ministry in the
heavenly sanctuary had been hidden from the minds
of men by the work of the papacy. Indeed, the fact that
Jesus was about to enter the Most Holy Place was not
understood until after the great and bitter
disappointment. Then the sanctuary would be restored to
God’s people.” PJ
A Rainbow Upon His Head.—
“A rainbow is represented in Heaven round about
the throne, also above the head of Christ, as a symbol of
God’s mercy encompassing the earth. When man by
his great wickedness provokes the wrath of God, Christ,
man’s intercessor, pleads for him, and points to the
rainbow in the cloud, as evidence of God’s great mercy
and compassion for erring man; also the rainbow above
the throne and upon his head emblematical of the glory
and mercy from God resting there for the benefit of
repentant man.” Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 3, 75.

234

“The bow like that above the throne of God forms a

REVELATION 10
complete circle. See Rev. 4:3. It is the emblem of
divinity and eternity. It indicates that the message
comes directly from the throne of God and is
therefore of divine origin. It also shows that it is a
message of grace and mercy in the midst of wrath
manifested in judgments.” Bunch, TR, 105,106.
His Face As the Sun.—
“This expression denotes His [Christ’s] divinity.”
Cooke, #15-UR, 4.
“And I turned to see the voice that spake with me.
And being turned, I saw ...one like unto the Son of
man, clothed with a garment down to the foot. . . . His
countenance was as the sun shineth in His strength.”
Rev. 1:12,13,15.
“His face as the appearance of lightning, ...and
his feet like in color to polished brass, and the voice of
His words like the voice of a multitude.” Daniel 10:6.
“And his [Christ’s] face did shine as the sun, and
his raiment was white as the light.” Matt. 17:2.
His Feet as Pillars of Fire.—
“This coincides with Rev. 1:15: ‘His feet like unto
fine brass as if they burned in a furnace.’ This refers
to Christ’s power to judge and punish evil and to tread
down in destruction, all who rebel against God.” Cooke,
#15-UR, 4.
Jesus, Like the Pillar of Cloud and Pillar of Fire.—
“And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar
of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar
of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night.”
Exodus 13:21. “And the angel of God, which went
before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind
them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their
face, and stood behind them” Exodus 14:19.
The Appearance of the Angel and the Sanctuary.—
“There was a particular aspect of the sanctuary
service that took place evening and morning. In the
evening the priest burned incense and lighted the lamps;
in the morning he trimmed the lamps and burned incense
again. These activities were to be carried out ‘evening
to morning before the Lord continually [tamid]’ (Lev.
24:3).
“Through the use of His pillar of cloud and pillar of
fire, God Himself marked off just the time when these
activities were to be performed. One changed to the
other at sunset and sunrise, thus marking the time when
the priest was to carry out these activities in the
tabernacle. This was the way the Lord led, guided, and
watched over His people and His sanctuary evening and
morning for the 40 years of their wandering in the
wilderness (Num. 9:15,21).
“Given this special sanctuary significance for the
evening and the morning sequence, it may be suggested
that the evenings and the mornings in the prophecy of

Daniel 8 take on added significance. An eveningmorning is not just a 24-hour period—it is a
‘sanctuary day.’
“Returning again to Revelation 10, we should note
again the symbolism of the dress and appearance of the
mighty angel.... It can be related to the cloud God
wrapped around Himself when He led the children of
Israel in the wilderness. The feet of this mighty angel
appeared like pillars of fire. The pillar of fire that is
known best in the Bible is the pillar of fire which led the
children of Israel in the wilderness. Thus, in terms of
imagery, the mighty angel of Revelation 10 presents the
two main elements that demonstrated the presence of
the God of Israel over His sanctuary and over His
people: the pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire.
“That same pillar of cloud and pillar of fire is
referred to indirectly in Daniel 8, if the eveningmornings of verse 14 are indeed sanctuary days. Since
the angel who appears in this manner is dealing with
prophetic time, and since this specific element of the
sanctuary day is used in one particular time prophecy, a
connection between that language in Daniel 8:14 and this
imagery in Revelation 10 can be suggested.
“Such a potential connection with the prophecy of
Daniel 8:14 should also be taken into account when one
considers what the mighty angel of Revelation 10
means when he says that ‘there should be time no
longer.’
...Those evening-mornings extended—in
historical fulfillment—from 457 BC to AD 1844.
“Thus, this line of time prophecy also presents the
date of 1844 as the juncture before which the angel could
not have made his statement about time, but after which
he could justifiably have done so.” Biblical Research
Inst., 1SOR, 311,312.
Why Jesus is Called an Angel!—
“If this angel is Jesus Christ in His glorified state,
then this tenth chapter must be important. Why is Jesus
designated as an angel?
“Before his birth in Bethlehem, in the Old
Testament, the Son of God was alluded to as an angel.
He was called Michael the Archangel. Michael means
‘who is like God?’ The word archangel means, the
‘chief angel.’ This is still one of Christ’s titles. The
term angel, means ‘messenger,’ and is applied to Jesus
Christ in the Old Testament, in the setting of the
covenant, as the judge and protector of his people.
“ ‘Behold I send an angel before thee to keep
thee in the way, and bring thee into the place which I
have prepared. Beware of him and obey his voice,
provoke him not for he will not pardon your
transgressions for my name is in him. But if thou shalt
indeed obey his voice and do all that I speak, then I will
be an enemy to thy enemies and an adversary to thy
adversaries. For mine angel shall go before thee and
bring thee unto the Amorites, the Hittites, …and I will
cut them off.’ Ex. 23:20-25.
“The prophet Malachi also refers to Christ as the
angel: ‘Behold I will send my messenger [John the
Baptist] and he shall prepare the way before me. And

235

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
temple, even the messenger [or, the angel] of the
covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come,
saith the Lord of hosts. But who may abide the day of
his coming and who shall stand when he appears? For he
is like a refiner’s fire and like fuller’s soap.’ Malachi
3:1,2.
This is a prediction of Christ’s first advent. It also
applies to Christ’s coming to his temple, to the Most
Holy Place, for judgment. It is a judgment scene!
“ ‘…He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of
silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi [believers],
and purge them as gold and silver, that they may
offer to the Lord an offering in righteousness…. And
I will come near to you in judgment and I will be a
swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and false swearers, and against those that
oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right,
and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts.’ Mal. 3:3-6.
“REVELATION 10 IS IN A JUDGMENT
SETTING. Christ is here presented as ‘the angel of the
covenant’ in the setting of the pre-advent judgment. In
the light of these Old Testament portrayals, undoubtedly
Revelation 10 is also in the setting of the covenant and of
judgment.” Cooke, #15-UR, 4-6.

Daniel had directions to close and seal had reference to
time: ‘How long shall it be to the end of these
wonders?’ Daniel 12:6. When the angel of this chapter
comes down with the little book open, on which he bases
his proclamation, he gives a message in relation to time,
as will be seen in verse 6. Nothing more is required to
show that both expressions refer to one book, and to
prove that the little book which the angel had in his hand,
open, was the book referred to in the prophecy of
Daniel.” Smith, DR, 519,520.

“God’s covenant is the ten promises of the ten
commandments. Jesus is here depicted as the ‘angel of
the covenant’ to alert God’s people that they were not
keeping all of God’s commandments, specifically the
fourth commandment, by the power of the Holy Spirit.
They needed to know this because the hour of God’s
judgment was come.” PJ.

The Little Book Open In the Angel’s Hand
Was the Book of Daniel that Had Been Sealed.

REVELATION 10:2
And he had in his hand a little book
open: and he set his right foot upon the sea,
and his left foot on the earth.
A Little Book OPEN.—
“We may infer from this language that this book
was at some time closed. We read in Daniel of a book
which was closed and sealed to a certain time: ‘Thou, O
Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to
the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased.’ Daniel 12:4. Since this
book was closed only until the time of the end, it follows
that at the time of the end the book would be opened.
As this closing was mentioned in prophecy, it would be
but reasonable to expect that in the predictions of events
to take place at the time of the end, the opening of this
book would also be mentioned. There is no book
spoken of as closed and sealed except the book of
Daniel’s prophecy, and there is no account of the
opening of that book unless it be here in Revelation
10. We see, furthermore, that in both places the contents
ascribed to the book are the same. The book which

“He has a little book open in his hand, a fact which
indicates that its contents form the subject of his
proclamation. When he has finished his announcement
he confirms it with a solemn oath. The words of this
oath give a definite idea of the nature of his
proclamation.
“1. That it relates to the definite time of some grand
event.
“2. That this event is the sounding of the seventh
angel.
“3. That this proclamation is based upon the
prophets.
“The book of Daniel contains the prophetic
periods which mark the very events of the seventh
angel’s voice. Among the earliest of these events are the
opening of the second apartment of the heavenly temple
(Rev.11:19), the judgment of the righteous dead
(Rev.11:18), the finishing of the mystery of God
(Rev.10:7), and the coronation of Christ for the
destruction of his enemies (Rev.11:15-19; Ps.2:6-9). The
prophecy of Daniel reveals this very session of the
investigative judgment, at which Christ is crowned king
upon his own throne (Dan.7:9-14), and the final work in
the sanctuary of God for the closing up of human
probation (Dan.8:14), and marks the very time for the
beginning of this grand work.
“The book of Daniel must therefore be that book
out of which the angel makes his proclamation of
definite time; for this book alone contains the prophetic
periods, unless, indeed, we add the book of Revelation,

236

REVELATION 10
which is but a second edition of the prophecy of Daniel.
Now it is a remarkable fact that the book of Daniel
was by divine direction closed up and sealed till the
time of the end, when the wise were to understand.
Dan.12:4-10. The same power which placed the seal
upon it must be employed to take it off. It was by the
agency of the angel of God that this book was closed
up; and it is by the same means that the seal is
removed. And hence when the angel descends to herald
the work under the seventh trumpet, that prophecy which
reveals the very events of that trumpet, and marks the
time of their commencement, is open in his hand.
Having made his announcement therefrom, he swears
that time shall be no longer, i.e., that the events
predicted shall occur where he then stands—at the
end of the periods contained in the little book.”
Andrews, JEO, 56-58.
“And the vision of the evening and the morning
which was told is true: wherefore shut thou up the
vision; for it shall be for many days.” Dan. 8:26.
“It is evident that the book of Daniel would play an
important part in the message that would herald the
second advent of Christ and prepare a people to meet
Him. The book of Daniel was closed and sealed by order
of the angel Gabriel. It is unsealed and opened by a
mighty angel from heaven at ‘the time of the end’ when
its revelations would be needed by the church.”
Bunch, TR, 107.
“The book that was sealed was not the book of
Revelation, but that portion of the prophecy of Daniel
which related to the last days. The Scripture says, ‘But
thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book,
even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased’ (Dan. 12:4). When
the book was opened, the proclamation was made, ‘Time
shall be no longer.’ (See Rev. 10:6.) The book of Daniel
is now unsealed, and the revelation made by Christ to
John is to come to all the inhabitants of the earth. By the
increase of knowledge a people is to be prepared to stand
in the latter days.” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 105.
“The unsealing of the little book was the message
in relation to time.” (MS 59, 1900). 7BC, 971.
How the Little Book Was Opened.—
“The arrest of Pope Pius [in 1798] made dramatic
news. Many Protestants recognizing in the arrest the
fulfillment of prophecies of Daniel and Revelation,
felt that the event both confirmed the truths they had
proclaimed and inspired an intensive study of the
prophecies. Especially they studied the eschatological
prophecies—those relating to the second advent of our
Lord. The result was a great spiritual awakening in
Europe, in the Middle East, in India, in North and
South America, even as far away as the new land of
Australia.” Anderson, UDP, 95.

“Until the second half of the eighteenth century, it
was not clear how to interpret the 2300-day prophecy.
Then Johann P. Petri, a reform pastor in Germany,
concluded that the seventy weeks and the 2300 days
had the same starting point. All that remained was to
find the exact date for ‘the going forth of the
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem.’
(Dan. 9:25). …Artaxerxes I authorized the rebuilding in
457 BC. Consequently, the year 1844 ends the prophecy
of the 2300 evenings and mornings.” Zurcher, COR, 76.
“The study of the prophecies and especially those
of the book of Daniel, convinced Bible students in the
early part of the 19th century that the long delay was
about over and that Christ would soon return. This
conviction was greatly strengthened by the study of the
2300 year prophecy. In fact it was this prophecy that
furnished much of the zeal and inspiration for the giving
of the message foretold in Revelation 10.” Bunch, TR,
109.
“The one prophet, who, before Christ, gave the
date of His first advent, and who also gave the time of
His second coming and of the end, was Daniel.”
Haskel, SSP, 183.
“The unsealing [opening] of the little book was
the message in relation to time.” 7BC, 971.
When the Little Book Was Opened.—
“The prophecy, especially the prophetic periods of
Daniel, were not to be opened until the time of the
end. If this is the book which the angel had in his hand
open, it follows that he proclaims his message after the
time when the book should be opened, or somewhere this
side of the beginning of the time of the end. All that
now remains on this point is to ascertain when the time
of the end began, and the book of Daniel itself furnishes
data from which this can be done. In Daniel 11:30, the
papal power is brought to view. In verse 35 we read,
‘Some of them of understanding shall fall, to try
them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to
the time of the end.’ Here is the period of the supremacy
of the little horn, during which time the saints, times, and
laws were to be given into his hand, and from him suffer
fearful persecutions. This is declared to reach to the time
of the end. This period ended AD 1798, when the 1260
years of papal supremacy expired. There the time of
the end began, and the book was opened. Since that
time, many have run to and fro, and knowledge on these
prophetic subjects has marvelously increased.
“...In 1798, therefore, the restriction against
proclaiming the day of Christ at hand ceased. In 1798
the time of the end began, and the seal was taken
from the little book.” Smith, DR, 520,521.
“In Daniel 12:4 we are told that the little book was
sealed until the time of the end and then he sees a man
clothed in linen who raises his hand to swear by the
Creator that the book will remain sealed for 3½ times

237

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and then all will be fulfilled. Notice that the book is
opened first (Rev. 10:1, 2), then seven thunders utter
their voices, then the angel declares that time will be
no longer. Thus there is a difference between the
opening of the little book in 1798 and the declaration
that time will be no longer which happens after the
book is opened, in 1844. Then when the message from
the book is finished, the mystery of God comes to an end
and probation closes.” Bohr, NR10, 10,11.
Little Book is Daniel—Proved By Revelation!—
“As soon as the little book of Revelation 10 is
opened we find a virtual explosion of material coming
from Daniel in the Apocalypse of John. Take the 1260
days, for example. Immediately after Revelation 10 the
1260 days become a central feature:
x “11:2—The court of the temple ‘is given over to
the nations, and they will trample over the holy city for
forty-two months.’
x “11:3—‘And I will grant my two witnesses
power to prophecy for one thousand two hundred and
sixty days.’
x “12:6—‘The woman fled into the wilderness . . .
for one thousand two hundred and sixty days.’
x “12:14—The woman flees from the serpent
‘into the wilderness . . . for a time, and times, and half a
time.’
x “13:5—The beast exercised ‘authority for fortytwo months.’
“It is significant that not once does Revelation
mention that time period until the little book is
opened. And at that point it shows up everywhere.
That conclusion led me back to the book of Daniel and
the first mention of the 1260 day prophecy: The little
horn power ‘[1] shall speak words against the Most
High, and [2] shall wear out the saints of the Most High,
and [3] shall think to change the times and the law; for
they shall be [4] given into his hand for a time, two
times, and half a time’ (Daniel 7:25).
“Each of the four parts of that verse forms a piece
of the drama in Revelation 11-14.
1. “The speaking of “words against the Most
High” turns up in Revelation 13:5, in which ‘the beast
was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous
words’ for 42 months (cf. verse 6).
2. “The wearing out of the saints is reflected in
Revelation 13:7, in which the beast “was allowed to
make war on the saints and to conquer them.”
3. “The part about the attempt to change times and
laws is answered in Revelation 12:17, 14:12, and 14:7, in
which God predicted a restoration of the commandments,
including the one dealing with time, at the end of history.
4. “And we have already noted the centrality of the
1260 days (or ‘a time, two times, and half a time’) in
Revelation.
“Truly when the little book of Revelation 10
opens we find an explosion of Daniel in John’s
Apocalypse, indicating that the sealed prophecies of
the little book of Daniel had indeed been opened. But

we are not finished yet with ideas related to the unsealing
of the 1260 days. For the sake or brevity I will just list
some of them.
1. “The restoring of dominion to Christ and the
saints at the end of the judgment of Daniel 7:14, 27
surfaces in Revelation 11:15.
2. “The 10 horns of Daniel 7:7 are resurrected in
Revelation 12:3 and 13:1.
3. “The sea beast of Revelation 13:1, 2 represents
a composite of the beasts in Daniel 7:3-6.
4. “The victorious Son of Man picture of Daniel
7:13, 14 comes up again in Revelation 14:14.
5. “The problem of who to worship treated in
Daniel 3 is a central feature of Revelation 13 and 14, in
which we find the choice between worshipping the beast
and its image or the Creator God alluded to eight times.
“There is probably more that can be said, but the
point has been made. Immediately following the
opening of the little book of Revelation 10 the symbols
of Daniel related to the sealed 1260 days become
omnipresent in Revelation 11-14, whereas that
symbolism was absent before the unsealing.
“At that point in my study I had no doubt
concerning the opening of the 1260 days that had been
sealed in Daniel 12:9. But what about the unsealing of
the 2300 day prophecy of Daniel 8:26, 14? …That
prophecy deals with the cleansing, restoration, or
justification of the sanctuary. …Early Seventh-day
Adventists viewed that passage in terms of Day of
Atonement symbolism in relation to the second
apartment of the heavenly sanctuary.
“With those thoughts in mind, it is of interest that
Revelation 11:1, 2 presents a judgment scene in which
the temple, the altar, and the saints are ‘measured.’
…Ken Strand points out, the only adequate Old
Testament passage is the Day of Atonement description
of Leviticus 16. ‘In that chapter,’ he writes, ‘there are
four basic entities noted as having atonement made for
them—the priests themselves, the sanctuary, the altar,
and the congregation (see vss. 6, 11, 16-18). The
priesthood would obviously be omitted in any NT
parallel, for Christ as High Priest... would need no
atonement for himself. It is striking, then, that the
three other exact entities to be atoned for in Leviticus
16 are precisely those three elements to be ‘measured’
in Revelation 11:1.
“ ‘A commonality in the order or sequence of the
three items is also noteworthy. In both cases, the
movement is from sanctuary/temple to altar to
worshippers.’
“Strand adds that ‘the ancient Day of Atonement
was a sort of final day of “measuring” within the Israelite
cultic year. It had an aura of final judgment about it, for
on that day separation was to take place.’ [Kenneth A.
Strand, “An Overlooked Old-Testament Background to
Revelation 11:1,” Andrews University Seminary Studies
(Autumn 1984), vol. 22, pp. 320-325.]
“In addition to the Day of Atonement/
measuring/judgment implications of Revelation 11 is the
fact that the second apartment of the heavenly sanctuary

238

REVELATION 10
is first opened in Revelation 11:19. Whereas, the
sanctuary is central to the book of Revelation, its first
half features first apartment symbolism, with the action
shifting to the second apartment in Revelation 11:19.
“Also interesting as we think of the implications of
Daniel 8:14 is the fact that the judgment scenes regarding
the saints and the little horn in Daniel 7 and 8 and
Revelation 11:15-18 are fleshed out in Revelation 14-20.
Along that line, it is significant that Revelation 14:7
signals the fact that the ‘hour of [God’s] judgment has
come.’” Knight, AVNA, 59-62.
Jesus Leads the Advent Movement.—
“While he gives them warnings, reproofs, and
encouragement through his delegated servant [the
minister of the church], Christ, the angel of the
covenant, who in the pillar of cloud and of fire went
before the Hebrew host, is the leader of his people
today. Provoke him not with your murmurings, by your
selfish withholding from his cause, by cherishing
iniquity; for in the face of great light he will not pardon
your continual transgressions." RH, 11/2/1886.
“‘And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho,
that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there
stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in
his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him,
Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? And he said,
Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now
come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did
worship, and said unto him, What saith my Lord unto his
servant? And the captain of the Lord’s host said unto
Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place
whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so.’
Josh. 5:13-15.
“[What a wonderful scene.!] …This was no
accidental occurrence, neither for Joshua, nor for us.
This was none other than Jesus Christ. He had appeared
years earlier to Moses:
“‘And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him
[Moses] in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and
he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and
the bush was not consumed. And Moses said, I will now
turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not
burnt. And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to
see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush,
and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I. And
he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from
off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is
holy ground.’ Ex. 3:2-5. The appearance of the angel
of the Lord to Joshua, and His request to take off his
shoes, was to remind him of Moses’ experience.
Because it was there that He promised Moses not only to
take the Israelites out of Egypt, but also to lead them into
the Promised Land: ‘I am come down to deliver them
out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a
land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.’ Ex. 3:8.

“How did Jesus, the Captain of the Lord’s hosts
lead the Israelites? ‘And the Lord went before them by
day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by
night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day
and night.’ Ex. 13:21. ‘And the angel of God, which
went before the camp of Israel, removed and went
behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from
before their face, and stood behind them.’ Ex. 14:19.
Notice that Jesus led Israel for forty years in the
wilderness veiled as a pillar of fire and a pillar of cloud.
And when He appeared to Joshua, what was in His hand?
A ‘sword drawn.’ Remember those descriptions.
“Now we come to the Advent movement. Who is
leading God’s people today? It is the same Jesus: ‘And
I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven,
clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head,
and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars
of fire. And he had in his hand a little book open. And
he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the
earth.’ Rev. 10:1,2. This “little book open” was the
book of Daniel, which had been sealed, or closed up.
Now it was open. ‘The sword of the Spirit... is the
word of God.’ Eph. 6:17. The ‘sword drawn’ of Jos.
5 is the same as the “book open” of Rev. 10. It is the
Word of God. In Revelation 10 Jesus comes down with
feet as pillar of fire, clothed with a cloud, reminding us
of His previous leading of ancient Israel to an earthly
Promised Land! Now He is leading spiritual Israel to the
real Promised land.”
Jones, Patrick, Our Firm
Foundation, 9/2004.

Jesus, the Captain of the Lord’s Host, with Joshua

239

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“In one of the most beautiful and comforting
passages of Isaiah’s prophecy, reference is made to the
pillar of cloud and of fire to represent God’s care for
His people in the great final struggle with the powers
of evil: ‘The Lord will create upon every dwelling
place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a
cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night: for above all the glory shall be a
covering. And there shall be a tabernacle for a
shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place
of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from
rain.’ Isaiah 4:5, 6, margin.” Patriarchs & Prophets,
283.
“The Bible is an unerring guide. It demands perfect
purity in word, in thought, and in action. Only virtuous
and spotless characters will be permitted to enter the
presence of a pure and holy God. The word of God, if
studied and obeyed, would lead the children of men,
as the Israelites were led by a pillar of fire by night
and a pillar of cloud by day.” 4 Testimonies, 312.
“So, at this time, there is a people whom God has
made the depositaries of His law. To those who obey
them, the commandments of God are as a pillar of
fire, lighting and leading the way to eternal salvation.” 4
Testimonies, 27.
His Right Foot on the Sea, His Left on the Earth.—
“The position of this angel, one foot upon the sea
and the other on the land, denotes the wide extent of his
proclamation by sea and by land. Had this message
been designed for only one country, it would have been
sufficient for the angel to take his position on the land
only. But he has one foot upon the sea, from which we
may infer that his message would cross the ocean, and
extend to the various nations and divisions of the globe.
This inference is strengthened by the fact that the advent
proclamation above referred to, did go to every
missionary station in the world.” Smith, DR, 522.
“It was at the close of the second woe, in 1840, that
this angel with the open book of Daniel, set one foot on
the land and one on the sea. Men were busy with their
idolatry, they were heaping gold together, rushing to and
fro, neither seeing nor hearing anything, save that which
ministered to their earthly desires. Nations were busy
with their own schemes, unmindful of the overruling
hand of Providence.
But the angel’s message
embraced the whole earth.” Haskel, SSP, 184.
“Setting His right foot on the sea, and His left upon
the dry land, shows the part which He is acting in the
closing scenes of the great controversy with Satan. This
position denotes His supreme power and authority
over the whole earth. The controversy had waxed
stronger and more determined from age to age, and will
continue to do so, to the concluding scenes when the
masterly working of the powers of darkness shall reach
their height. Satan united with evil men, will deceive the

whole world and the churches who receive not the love
of the truth. But the mighty angel demands attention.
He cries with a loud voice. He is to show the power and
authority of His voice to those who have united with
Satan to oppose the truth.
“…The angel’s position, with one foot on the sea,
the other on the land, signifies the wide extent of the
proclamation of the message. It will cross the broad
waters and be proclaimed in other countries, even to
all the world.” (Manuscript 58, 1900). 7BC, 971.
“The angel of Rev. 10 is represented as having one
foot on the sea and one foot on the land, showing that the
message will be carried to distant lands, the ocean will
be crossed, and the islands of the sea will hear the
proclamation of the last message of warning to our
world.” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 107-108.
“Jesus’ feet were on both the land and the sea
shows that He has power over both the papal beast
comes from the sea and the two-horned beast comes
from the earth. These powers will join together to
attack true Israel at the very end by condemning them to
death for not accepting the mark of the beast. But Jesus
is in control.
“Jesus showed that he has power over the sea, and
over the power of the papal beast from the sea, when He
shortened the time the papacy had to persecute God‟s
people. He said: „And except those days should be
shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the
elect's sake those days shall be shortened.‟ Matthew
24:22.” PJ.
“The expression could also mean that the message
is given in the old world from where the four beasts
arose (the sea) and the new world where the beast from
the earth arose.” Bohr, NR10, 3.
His Feet.—
“The Angel’s feet are like pillars of fire, and He is a
pillar of cloud, thus indicating that, as He did for the
children of Israel of old, Jesus will lead His people
through the waters and over the wilderness to the
Promised land.” PJ

REVELATION 10:3,4
And cried with a loud voice, as when a
lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven
thunders uttered their voices.
And when the seven thunders had
uttered their voices, I was about to write:
and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto
me, Seal up those things which the seven
thunders uttered, and write them not.
Cried With a Loud Voice.—
“And I saw another angel fly in the midst of

240

REVELATION 10
heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto the
them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people, Saying with a loud
voice, Fear God, and give glory to Him for the hour of
His judgment is come: and worship Him that made
heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of
waters.” Revelation 14:6,7.
“The message is heralded with ‘a loud voice’
because its importance demands that all must hear it.
It involves the eternal destiny of all mankind.... Christ is
the ‘Lion of the Tribe of Judah’ and He always speaks
His messages with power.” Bunch, TR, 106.
“Like the roar of a lion in the forest, ...this cry
awoke men from their slumber, and startled nations. No
man was too humble, no place too secluded; that voice
penetrated everywhere. It echoed, and re-echoed through
the world. Men might think them-selves secure, but the
sound shook the very earth, causing many a heart to
quake with fear. Though the voice was so penetrating,
those who turned their faces toward the divine
messenger, saw on his brow, the rainbow of promise.”
Haskel, SSP, 184.
“But the mighty angel demands attention. He
cries with a loud voice. He is to show the power and
authority of His voice to those who have united with
Satan to oppose the truth.” (Manuscript 59, 1900). 7BC,
971.
The Seven Thunders.—
“After these seven thunders uttered their voices, the
injunction comes to John as to Daniel in regard to the
little book: ‘Seal up those things which the seven
thunders uttered.’ These relate to future events which
will be disclosed in their order. Daniel shall stand in his
lot at the end of the days. John sees the little book
unsealed. Then Daniel’s prophecies have their proper
place in the first, second, and third angels’ messages to
be given to the world. The unsealing of the little book
was the message in relation to time.
“The books of Daniel and the Revelation are one.
One is a prophecy, the other a revelation; one a book
sealed, the other a book opened. John heard the
mysteries which the thunders uttered, but he was
commanded not to write them.
“The special light given to John which was
expressed in the seven thunders was a delineation of
events which would transpire under the first and
second angels’ messages. It was not best for the
people to know these things, for their faith must
necessarily be tested. In the order of God most
wonderful and advanced truths would be proclaimed.
The first and second angels’ messages were to be
proclaimed, but no further light was to be revealed
before these messages had done their specific work.
This is represented by the angel standing with one foot
on the sea, proclaiming with a most solemn oath that
time should be no longer.” (Manuscript 59, 1900). 7BC,

971.
Why Were The Seven Thunders Sealed Up?—
“Why did God hush up the seven thunders? Why
did He permit His people to be so bitterly disappointed?
We suggest two main reasons:
“1. To test His people. He had tested the apostles
at the first advent when Jesus was crucified. They also
were tested by great disappointment.
“2. To warn the world that a special event had
transpired. And the world certainly was warned. The
message went to every mission station on the globe, and
that period was a great era of foreign missions.
Christendom was certainly warned of the Second Advent
of Christ. Had the believers known all the facts
concerning the prediction, they probably would never
have proclaimed it as they did.” Cooke, #15-UR,
22,23.

REVELATION 10:5,6
And the angel which I saw stand upon
the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand
to heaven,
And sware by him that liveth for ever
and ever, who created heaven, and the things
that therein are, and the earth, and the
things that therein are, and the sea, and the
things which are therein, that there should
be time no longer.
Lifted Up His Hand to Heaven and Sware.—
“When he has finished his announcement he
confirms it with a solemn oath. The words of this oath
give a definite idea of the nature of his proclamation.
“1. That it relates to the definite time of some grand
event.
“2. That this event is the sounding of the seventh
angel.
“3. That this proclamation is based upon the
prophets.” Andrews, JEO, 56.
“And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was
upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right
hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by
Him that liveth for ever and ever....” Daniel 12:7.
“And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In
the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand
unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself
known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up
mine hand unto them, saying, I am the LORD your
God; 6 In the day that I lifted up mine hand unto
them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a
land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk
and honey, which is the glory of all lands: 7 Then said
I unto them, Cast ye away every man the abominations
of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of

241

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Egypt: I am the LORD your God. Ezekiel 20:5-7.
“In Moses‟ day, the Lord lifted up His hand and
swore to deliver His people from the Egyptians and
bring them to the Promised Land. In the time of
Daniel, [a time when God‟s people would be leaving
Babylon to return to the earthly Promised Land to rebuild
Jerusalem], He lifted up His hands and swore that He
would deliver His people from Papal oppression and
would bring them to the heavenly Promised Land at the
end of the 1260 days in 1798. When this time
occurred, Revelation 10 portrays Christ swearing
again—His people will come out of Babylon and
return to heavenly Promised Land.” PJ
Who Created Heaven, and the Earth, and the Sea.—
“Worship Him that made heaven, and earth, and
the sea, and the fountains of waters.” Rev.14:7.
“In Revelation, the Angel’s oath appears to be
based on the language of the Sabbath commandment,
‘Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.... For in
six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day:
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
hallowed it.” Exodus 20:8-11. When Revelation deals
with the end time, it often uses language that calls
attention to the Sabbath.” Maxwell, God Cares, 274,275.
“The recognition of the Creator and the power of
creation is an essential part of all heaven-sent messages.
The power to create is always coupled with the power
to save or re-create. See Rev. 14:6,7. Only the Creator
can redeem or re-create.” Bunch, TR, 108.
Time No Longer.—
“What is the meaning of this most solemn
declaration? It cannot mean that with the message of this
angel, time, as computed in this world, in comparison
with eternity, should end. The next verse speaks of the
days of the voice of the seventh angel, and Revelation
11:15-19 gives us some of the events to take place under
this trumpet in the present state. It cannot mean
probationary time, for that does not cease until Christ
closes His work as priest, which is not until after the
seventh angel has begun to sound. (Rev. 11:15,19; 15:58.) It must therefore mean prophetic time, for there is
no other to which it can refer.
“...Since it [the word chronos] is used in a
prediction connected with a very important prophecy, we
are justified in understanding it to mean prophetic time.
In other words, prophetic time shall be no more—not
that time should never be used in a prophetic sense, for
the ‘days of the voice of the seventh angel’ spoken of
immediately after, doubtless mean the years of the
seventh angel. It means, rather, that no prophetic
period should extend beyond the time of this message.
Arguments on the prophetic periods, showing that the
longest ones did not extend beyond the autumn of
1844, will be found in remarks on Daniel 8:14.” Smith,
DR, 522-525.

“The time to the finishing of the mystery of God
must be the burden of the proclamation of this mighty
angel; for the oath which he utters to confirm his
proclamation plainly indicates its nature. He swears
that time should be no longer, but that the mystery of
God should be finished in the days at the beginning of
the seventh angel’s voice. The time, therefore, to which
he swears must be the time contained in the little
book, which reaches to the events of the seventh angel’s
voice.
“That this oath uttered by the angel with the open
book relates to prophetic time, is further evident from the
record of the oath which was uttered at the time when
that book was sealed up; for the man clothed in linen,
standing at a time when the prophetic periods all lay in
the future solemnly attests with an oath the time
contained in the sealed book. Dan.12:6,7. But the angel
of Revelation 10, having the book open in his hand, first
proclaims their termination and then swears to the truth
of his announcement. His oath marks the end of the
time in question. It certainly does not mark the end of
time considered as duration, measured by days, or years,
for the closing words of the oath speak of days yet future
under the seventh angel; nor does it mark the end of
human probation, for the words of the oath place this
also yet future under the sounding of the seventh angel.
Verse 7.
“Moreover, after the eating of the book by John,
who in this personates the church at the time of the
fulfillment of this prophecy, he was bidden to prophecy
again before many peoples and nations—a clear proof
that there is a message of mercy and of warning to men
after the oath of the angel that time shall be no longer.
Verses 7-11. We must therefore conclude that this
oath has reference to the time which the angel had
announced from the book open in his hand. This oath
is the complement of that in Daniel 12. In that, the man
clothed in linen swears to prophetic time yet to be; in
this, the angel having made solemn proclamation from
the open book, lifts his hand to heaven and swears to the
accomplishment of the time.” Andrews, JEO, 58,59.
“The dates which cluster about the life of Christ are
a part of the time prophecy to which the mighty angel
pointed the world; they are a part of the same two
thousand three hundred days which Daniel sought to
understand, but which were sealed until the time of the
end. A few years previous to 1840, men began the
study of the prophecies of Daniel, and came to the
conclusion that the two thousand three hundred days
of the eighth chapter must end in 1844.
“In 1838 the termination of the second woe of Rev.
9:13-21 was interpreted to end in 1840. Said those who
were proclaiming the second advent: ‘If the Turkish
power ceases in 1840, that may be considered a sign that
the correct interpretation has been placed upon the
prophetic periods of Daniel, and we may look for the
Lord in 1844.’ Therefore, in 1840, when the world
realized that the Turks had fulfilled the prophecy to the
very day, men of wealth, education, and position, were

242

REVELATION 10
startled to find that they were nearing events which
seemed to foretell the immediate closing up of earth’s
history. It was at this time, 1840, that the voice of the
mighty angel awoke the earth with the message, ‘Fear
God and give glory to Him, for the hour of His
judgment is come.’ This was a message from the
Creator of the heavens and the earth, the sea and all
living creatures. And he swore ‘that there shall be time
no longer.’ The close of the long prophetic period was
near at hand ” Haskel, SSP, 185,186.
“The plainest meaning of chronos in Revelation
10:6 is simply ‘time.’ The translation ‘no more delay’
obscures the direct linkage that exists between
Revelation 10 and the book of Daniel. In Daniel 12, the
‘man’ swore that the book would be closed until the
time of the end, that is, until the time when the 1260
days and the 2300 days would come to an end. In
Revelation 10 the ‘angel’ holds the book open and
swears that time—that is, prophetic time—has come to
an end.” Maxwell, God Cares, 305.
“This time, which the angel declares with a solemn
oath, is not the end of this world’s history, neither of
probationary time, but of prophetic time, which should
precede the advent of our Lord. That is, the people will
not have another message upon definite time.”
(Manuscript 58, 1900). 7BC, 971.
“This time, which the angel declares with a solemn
oath, is not the end of this world's history, neither of
probationary time, but of prophetic time, which should
precede the advent of our Lord. That is, the people will
not have another message upon definite time. After this
period of time, reaching from 1842 to 1844, there can be
no definite tracing of the prophetic time. The longest
reckoning reaches to the autumn of 1844.” 7BC 971
“Actually those who were interpreting the 2300year prophecy were declaring that time would be no
longer. They fully expected the Lord to come in 1844 or
near that time. The central theme of their message was
the imminent return of Christ. The announcement of the
angel in Revelation 10, however, was not concerning the
end of literal time.
The year 1844 marks the
termination of the 2300-day prophecy, since which
time the world has been living in what might be called
‘borrowed time.’ There is no chronological prophecy
in the Bible which extends beyond 1844.” Anderson,
UR, 102.
Time-Setting After 1844.—
“The period designated as the hour of God’s
judgment, or the days when the mystery of God is to be
finished, is not therefore ushered in by the advent of
Christ, for its work is preparatory to that event. But it is
announced to the inhabitants of the earth by solemn
proclamation, based on definite time and confirmed
by an immutable oath. The time must therefore be
given rightly. Whenever, in fulfillment of Rev.14:6,7,

the announcement is made, ‘The hour of his judgment is
come,’ the time must be truthfully given. And certainly
when the angel of Revelation 10 swears to the fulfillment
of time, that time must there expire. Yet in each case
there is a further work of prophesying or proclaiming
truth to the children of men.
“These scriptures can never have their
fulfillment by a succession of time messages, each
disproving the truth of its predecessor, and each
being in turn disproved by the one which succeeds it.
When God gives these announcements they will be
rightly given, though they are to be followed by the
proclamation of other truths before the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.
“Those time movements which follow the genuine,
and which repeat themselves again and again in the
persistent effort to fix the time of Christ’s advent, never
can be in fulfillment of the solemn announcement, ‘The
hour of his judgment is come,’ or of the solemn oath that
time should be no longer; for these later time movements
are but a succession of efforts made to fix the definite
time or Christ’s advent, though that is not revealed in the
Bible, and though each movement is based upon the
failure of all which have preceded it. But the genuine is
given for the purpose of announcing the investigative
judgment, and its truthfulness being attested by the
oath of the angel, it will never be retracted to make
way for successive announcements of the time of
Christ’s revelation.” Andrews, JEO, 60,61.
“The people will not have another message upon
definite time. After this period of time, reaching from
1842 to 1844, there can be no definite tracing of the
prophetic time. The longest reckoning reaches to the
autumn of 1844.” 7BC, 971.
“This time which the angel declares with a solemn
oath, is not the end of this world's history, neither of
probationary time, but of prophetic time, which should
precede the advent of our Lord. That is, the people will
not have another message upon definite time. After this
period of time, reaching from 1842 to 1844, there can
be no definite tracing of the prophetic time. The
longest reckoning reaches to the autumn of 1844.”
Manuscript 59, 1900, pp. 8,9.
“Time has not been a test since 1844, and it will
never again be a test.” Early Writings, 74.
“Again and again have I been warned in regard to
time-setting. There will never again be a message for
the people of God that will be based on time. We are
not to know the definite time either for the outpouring of
the Holy Spirit or for the coming of Christ.” (Review &
Herald, 3/22/1892). 6BC, 1052.
“Ever since 1844 I have borne my testimony that
we were now in a period of time in which we are to
take heed to ourselves lest our hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this

243

GEMS FROM REVELATION
life, and so that day come upon us unawares. Our
position has been one of waiting and watching, with no
time-proclamation to intervene between the close of the
prophetic periods in 1844 and the time of our Lord’s
coming. We do not know the day nor the hour, or when
the definite time is, and yet the prophetic reckoning
shows us that Christ is at the door.” (Letter 38, 1888).
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 10, 269,270.
Similarity of This Angel with Man of Daniel 12.—
“With his feet planted firmly on both ‘sea’ and
‘land’ with a ‘little scroll’ held ‘open’ in one hand, and
with his other hand raised reverently to swear an oath,
this majestic being reminds us immediately of someone
we read about in Daniel’s final vision. See Daniel
12:5-9. The person whom Daniel saw stood ‘above the
waters of the stream’ while an honor guard flanked him
on the stream’s banks. (Here is a parallel reference to
water and land.) He raised his hands to swear an oath
‘by him who lives for ever.’ John’s angel too, swore ‘by
him who lives for ever and ever’—‘who created
heaven and what is in it, the earth and what is in it,
and the sea and what is in it.’ Rev. 10:6.
“Daniel’s ‘man’ swore his oath just after Daniel
was told to ‘shut up the words, and seal the book, until
the time of the end.’ When someone asked, ‘How long
shall it be till the end of these wonders?’ the man swore
an oath that ‘it would be for a time, two times, and half a
time.’ And when Daniel gasped at such a prospect, the
man replied, ‘Go your way, Daniel, for the words are
shut up and sealed until the time of the end.’
“John’s angel also had a scroll, an open one; and
he, too, swore an oath about time. He swore that ‘there
should be time no longer,’ (KJV) ‘but that in the days
of the trumpet call to be sounded by the seventh angel,
the mystery of God, as he announced to his servants the
prophets, should be fulfilled.’
“Quite plainly, Daniel and John saw the same
person. When we studied Daniel 12, we found that the
person Daniel saw was Michael, who really is Jesus, the
Son of God. ...Now we notice that John’s angel had a
face ‘like the sun, and his legs like pillars of fire’—just
as Jesus does in revelation 1:13-16. His voice (in 10:3)
is ‘like a lion roaring’; Christ’s voice (in 1:15) is like
the roar of rushing waters. The ‘rain-bow over his
head’ recalls the rainbow around God’s throne (in 4:3).
So we conclude that the ‘man’ whom Daniel saw and
the ‘angel’ whom John saw were indeed Jesus—who
appears elsewhere in their books as the Son of man,
as a lion, as a rider on a white horse, as our High
Priest, as the Lamb, and also, in Daniel 12:1 and in
Revelation 12:7, as Michael the Archangel.” Maxwell,
God Cares, 274.
Similarity of This Angel with Angel of Rev. 14:6.—
“What has been said is quite sufficient to show that
the work of the mighty angel of Revelation 10 is of the
same nature with that of the angel in Rev.14:6,7. His
message is uttered while the living are yet in probation.
It is termed the everlasting gospel, because it is that

which contains the good news of the coming kingdom of
God. Like the mighty proclamation of the angel of
Revelation 10, which pertains to all the dwellers upon
the globe, this also is addressed to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people. As the angel of
Revelation 10 proclaims definite time connected with the
seventh angel's voice, so this angel says with a loud
voice, ‘Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of
his judgment is come.’ There must be definite time to
mark the proclamation of this angel; and as men are
addressed while yet in probation, that time must be the
prophetic periods of the Bible. And herein have we a
parallel to the case of the angel of Revelation 10 with the
open book in his hand, swearing to the fulfillment of
time. That relates to the sounding of the seventh angel
and the finishing of the mystery of God; this relates to
the session of the investigative judgment, which, as we
have seen, is the same work. As a further work of
prophesying remains after the angel of Revelation 10
swears that time shall be no longer, so in Revelation 14,
after the angel has announced that the hour of God’s
judgment is come, the like work remains to be
performed.” Andrews, JEO, 59.
“The chronology of the events of Revelation 10 is
further ascertained from the fact that this angel appears
to be identical with the first angel of Revelation 14.
The points of identity between them are easily seen:
They both have a special message to proclaim. They
both utter their proclamation with a loud voice. They
both use similar language, referring to the Creator as
the maker of heaven and earth, the sea, and the
things that are therein. And they both proclaim time,
one swearing that time should be no more, and the
other proclaiming that the hour of God’s judgment
has come.
“But the message of Revelation 14:6 is located this
side of the beginning of the time of the end. It is a
proclamation of the hour of God’s judgment come, and
hence must have its application in the last generation.
Paul did not preach the hour of judgment come. Martin
Luther and his coadjutors did not preach it. Paul
reasoned of a judgment to come, indefinitely future, and
Luther placed it at least three hundred years beyond his
day. Moreover, Paul warns the church against preaching
that the hour of God’s judgment has come, until a certain
time. He says: ‘Now we beseech you, brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering together unto Him, that ye be not soon
shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor
by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of
Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any
means: for that day shall not come, except there
come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed.’ 2 Thessalonians 2:1-3. Here Paul introduces
to our view the man of sin, the little horn, or the papacy,
and covers with a caution the whole period of his
supremacy, which, as already noticed, continued 1260
years, ending in 1798.
“In 1798, therefore, the restriction against

244

REVELATION 10
proclaiming the day of Christ at hand ceased. In 1798
the time of the end began, and the seal was taken from
the little book. Since that time, therefore, the angel of
Revelation 14 has gone forth proclaiming that the
hour of God’s judgment is come. It is since that time,
too, that the angel of chapter 10 has taken his stand
on sea and land, and sworn that time shall be no
more. Of their identity there can now be no question.
All the arguments which go to locate the one are equally
effective in the case of the other.
“…The present generation is witnessing the
fulfillment of these two prophecies. In the preaching of
the second advent, more especially from 1840-1844,
began their full and circumstantial accomplish-ment.”
Smith, DR, 520-522.

designated by the word ‘quickly’ in Rev. 11:14, and it is
in this interval that the loud cry of the mighty angel was
given. The close of the prophetic period was 1844, so
that the ‘quickly’ would be the time between 1840
and 1844, and the seventh trumpet began to sound
when the prophetic time was at an end, that is, in
1844.” Haskel, SSP, 187.

“The sixth and seventh verses of the tenth chapter
of Revelation are parallel with the sixth and seventh
verses of the fourteenth chapter.” Haskel, SSP, 188.

“It is not stated that the mystery of God shall be
finished when the seventh angel begins to sound; for this
would denote instantaneous completion. But it is said,
‘In the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he
shall begin to sound,‟ etc. This shows beyond dispute
that a period of time is devoted to this work. The days
of this prophecy are prophetic days, i.e., years, as are
those of the fifth and sixth angels. Revelation 9. These
years which are devoted to this finishing of human
probation begin with the sounding of the seventh
angel. They are the earliest years of his voice. The
sounding of the seventh angel begins, therefore, with the
opening of that investigative judgment that finishes
human probation, that determines the blotting out of the
sins of the overcomers, that accounts them worthy of the
world to come, that terminates the priesthood of Christ,
and that witnesses the completion of the preaching of the
gospel of the grace of God.” Andrews, JEO, 51,52.

REVELATION 10:7
But in the days of the voice of the
seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound,
the mystery of God should be finished, as he
hath declared to his servants the prophets.
The Voice of the Seventh Angel.—
“And the seventh angel sounded; and there were
great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.
“…And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is
come, and the time of the dead, that they should be
judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy
servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that
fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy
them which destroy the earth.
“And the temple of God was opened in heaven,
and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament:
and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings,
and an earthquake, and great hail.”
Revelation
11:15,18,19.
“This seventh trumpet is not that which is spoken of
in 1 Corinthians 15:52 as the last trump, which awakes
the sleeping dead; but it is the seventh in the series of
the seven trumpets, and like the others of this series,
occupies prophetic days (years) in sounding. In the days
when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God shall
be finished.
“From the events to take place under the sounding
of the seventh trumpet, its beginning may be located with
sufficient definiteness at the close of the prophetic
periods in 1844. Subsequent to that date the mystery
of God is to be finished.” Smith, DR, 525.
“The sixth trumpet ended in 1840. Between the
sixth and the seventh trumpets is a short interval,

In the Days When He Shall Begin to Sound.—
“In the days, i.e., years, of the beginning of the
voice of the seventh angel, the work of human probation
is finished. Rev.10:7. This, as we have seen, involves
the closing up of the immense work of our High Priest.
It also requires the proclamation of the final warnings to
mankind.” Andrews, JEO, 36.

“The Mystery of God.”—
[Paul asks that prayers be made], “that I may open
my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the
gospel.” Eph. 6:19.
“The mystery of God is defined in the following
passages:
“ „How that by revelation he made known unto me
the mystery (as I wrote afore in few words, whereby,
when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ); which in other ages was not made
known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto
his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; that the
Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body,
and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel.’
Eph.3:3-6.
“ „Even the mystery which hath been hid from
ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to
his saints; to whom God would make known what is the
riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles;
which is Christ in you, the hope of glory; whom we
preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in
all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus." Col.1:26-28.
“The mystery of God is therefore seen to be the

245

GEMS FROM REVELATION
work of salvation for fallen man through the gospel of
Christ. It is that which unites Jews and Gentiles in one
body as fellow-heirs, having Christ in them the hope of
glory.” Andrews, JEO, 50,51.
Finishing the Mystery of God.—
“…The finishing of the mystery of God is the
accomplishment of the work of the gospel. This must
have a twofold bearing: 1. Upon the priesthood of our
Lord, to bring it to a close by completing all its immense
work. 2. Upon the preaching of the gospel to the
inhabitants of the earth, in causing the proclamation of
its final closing messages of warning.
“This work is not closed instantaneously, for a
space of time is devoted to its completion. And the
finishing of this work pertains both to heaven and to
earth; to the priesthood of Christ, and the proclamation
of his gospel to men. But the priesthood of Christ, as we
have seen, is finished at the time when the Ancient of
Days sits in judgment; and it is while that judgment is in
session that the latest messages of warning are addressed
to men. Rev.14:6-14. We do therefore understand that
the period of time devoted to the finishing of the
mystery of God is precisely that space occupied by the
Father in the work of the investigative judgment.”
Andrews, JEO, 51.
“Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord.” Act 3:19.
“And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three
hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.”
Daniel 8:14.
“For on that day shall the priest make an atonement
for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all
your sins before the LORD.” Lev 16:30.
“Few will be disposed to deny that the mystery of
God is the gospel. It is the same, then, as if the angel
had declared, In the days of the voice of the seventh
angel, when he shall begin to sound, the gospel shall be
finished. But what is the finishing of the gospel? It was
given to take out from the nations a people for God’s
name. (Acts 15:14.) Its finishing must, as a matter of
course, be the close of this work. It will be finished
when the number of God’s people is made up, when
mercy ceases to be offered, and probation closes.
“The subject is now before us in all its magnitude.
Such is the momentous work to be accomplished in the
days of the voice of the seventh angel, whose trumpet
notes have been reverberating through the world since
the memorable epoch of 1844. God is not slack. His
work is not uncertain. Are we ready for the issue?”
Smith, DR, 526,527.
“Why introduce the sounding of the seventh angel
thus, unless his sounding commenced with the
termination of the prophetic time? ...The finishing of
the mystery of God is the completion of the great plan
of salvation in connection with Christ’s ministry in

the heavenly sanctuary. In the type the yearly round of
service was finished on the tenth day of the seventh
month. In the antitype Christ entered the most holy place
of the heavenly sanctuary at the end of the 2300 days, to
finish the great plan of salvation. The mystery of God
was to be finished, as He had declared by His servants,
the prophets; and the cleansing of the sanctuary spoken
of by Daniel, is only another expression signifying the
same thing as the finishing of the mystery of God.
Hence the seventh angel began to sound at the close of
the 2300 days, in 1844, when the cleansing of the
sanctuary, or the finishing of the mystery of God,
commenced.” White, James, Life, 211,212.
He Hath Declared to His Servants the Prophets.—
“In past ages the Lord God of heaven revealed
His secrets to His prophets, and this he does still. The
present and the future are equally clear to Him, and
He shows to His servants the future history of what
shall be. The Omniscient looked down the ages, and
predicted through His prophets the rise and fall of
kingdoms, hundreds of years before the events foretold
took place. The voice of God echoes down the ages,
telling man what is to take place. Kings and princes take
their places at their appointed time. They think they are
carrying out their own purposes, but in reality they are
fulfilling the word God has given through His
prophets. They act their part in carrying out God’s great
purposes. Events fall into line, fulfilling the word God
has spoken.” Upward Look, 96.
“Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he
revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.”
Amos 3:7.

REVELATION 10:8,9
And the voice which I heard from
heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go
and take the little book which is open in the
hand of the angel which standeth upon the
sea and upon the earth.
And I went unto the angel, and said unto
him, Give me the little book. And he said
unto me, Take it, and eat it up: and it shall
make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy
mouth sweet as honey.
The Voice Spake Unto Me.—
“John is here brought in to act a part as a
representative of the church, probably on account of
the succeeding peculiar experience of the church, which
the Lord of the prophecy would cause to be put on
record, but which could not well be presented under the
symbol of an angel. When only a straight-forward
proclamation is brought to view, angels may be used as
symbols to represent the religious teachers who proclaim

246

REVELATION 10
that message, as in Revelation 14. But when some
particular experience of the church is to be presented,
it could most appropriately be set forth in the person
of some member of the human family. Hence John is
himself called upon to act a part in this symbolic
representation.” Smith, DR, 527.
Take the Little Book.—
“The angel of this chapter has in his hand ‘a little
book open.’ In comments on verse 2 we have shown
this ‘little book’ to be the book of Daniel which was
‘sealed to the time of the end.’ Daniel 12:9. It would
be opened when the prophecies of the book were to be
understood.” Smith, DR, 528.
“This experience came to God’s people as a
result of the French Revolution. At that time there was
a tremendous attack upon Christianity and the Bible.
This onslaught produced a marvelous reaction among
Protestant nations, a reaction that led to a remarkable
revival of interest in Bible prophecy. Many godly
scholars were led, independently, to investigate the
prophecies of Daniel and Revelation. This was a
fulfillment of Daniel 12:4 that ‘many would run to and
fro and knowledge would be increased.’ As L.E.
Froom declared: ‘The French Revolution was like the
explosion of the long pent-up forces of a volcano. The
Papal church and state were suddenly torn from their
foundation and overwhelmed in the common ruin. The
sudden and violent shock sent the Protestant church
back to the prophecies.’ Prophetic Faith of Our
Fathers, Vol.3, p.263.
“In their investigation of these prophecies of Daniel
and Revelation, these godly searchers were led to study
in particular, the 3 1/2 prophetic years, or 1260 year
period of Papal supremacy.
They came to the
conclusion that this period ended about 1798. The
attack on the Papacy had recently rocked the world
of their day—it was a landmark in history. As a result
of their discovery of the fulfillment of this prophetic time
period in 1798, these Bible students were then led to
investigate the next great time period, the 2300 days of
Daniel 8:14. It became the center of study. Finally,
most concluded that the 2300 days ended between the
years 1843 and 1847 AD.” Cooke, #15-UR, 18,19.

“But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee;
Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open
thy mouth, and eat that I give thee. And when I
looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll
of a book was therein; And he spread it before me; and it
was written within and without: and there was written
therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe. Moreover
he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat
this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel. So I
opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll.
And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat,
and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then
did I eat it: and it was in my mouth as honey for
sweetness.” Ezekiel 2:8–3:3
Notice the chiastic structure of Rev. 10:9-11:
A. The angel tells John to take the scroll and eat it (9a)
B. It will be bitter in your stomach (9b)
C. In your mouth it will be sweet as honey (9c)
C. It tasted sweet as honey in my mouth (10a)
B. It was bitter in my stomach (10b)
A. You must prophesy again (11)
“This chiastic structure is important because it
shows that John eating the scroll in verse 9a is the same
as uttering a prophecy from it in verse 11. Thus when
John ate the scroll a message came out from it the first
time. But it became necessary for the message to be
preached again from the same scroll.
“That eating the scroll means to assimilate the
message to then share it with God’s people is
corroborated by the closest Biblical parallel in Ezekiel
3:1-4 where the prophet is told to eat the scroll and then
he is told to go share the message with Israel.
“It is very clear that the episode that deals with the
eating of the book precedes Revelation 10:7 in time. It
actually should be understood as occurring between
verse 6 and verse 7. How do we know that? The reason is
obvious. After John eats the little book and it is sweet in
his mouth and bitter in his stomach he is told to prophecy
again and to measure the temple. If the mystery of God
(the preaching of the gospel) had already been finished
and probation had closed, what good would it do to
prophesy again about the contents of the book and to talk
about the investigative judgment? Clearly verses 8-11
take us back to events that occurred between verses 6
and 7.” Bohr, NR10, 13,14.

“Basing their conclusions on the prophecy of the
2300 days, hundreds of preachers in Europe, America,
and many other lands predicted the literal return of
Christ in or about the year 1844. Among these
preachers were many leaders of the Congregationalists,
Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, etc.”
Anderson, UR, 102.

“The comprehension of truth, the glad reception
of the message, is represented in the eating of the little
book. The truth in regard to the time of the advent of
our Lord was a precious message to our souls.”
(Manuscript 58, 1900). 7BC, 971.

Eat It Up.—
“Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and
thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine
heart: for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of
hosts.” Jeremiah 15:16.

“Eating the Word of God implies a careful study
until the meaning is fully comprehended. Jesus often
used the figure in a spiritual sense, refer-ring to His body
and the ‘bread of life.’ Now was the time to penetrate
deeper into the cloud that over-shadowed the
message. As the time for what was supposed to be the
second advent, but which in reality meant the beginning

247

GEMS FROM REVELATION
of the investigative judgment, drew near, there was a
searching of the prophecies such as had never been
before.” Haskel, SSP, 188,189.

REVELATION 10:10
And I took the little book out of the
angel’s hand, and ate it up; and it was in my
mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had
eaten it, my belly was bitter.
Sweet as Honey (Looking for Jesus, 1840-44).—
“How sweet are thy words unto my taste! Yea,
sweeter than honey to my mouth.” Psalm 119:103.
“O taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is
the man that trusteth in Him.” Psalm 34:8.
“In the symbol, the little book in the mouth of John
was as sweet as honey. ‘What is sweeter than honey?’
And what could feast the consecrated soul, imbued with
the love of Jesus, as the news of His soon return in
glory, with all the holy angels, to redeem those who
loved and looked for His appearing.” White, James,
Life, 214.
“Those who sincerely love Jesus can appreciate the
feelings of those who watched with the most intense
longing for the coming of their Saviour. The point of
expectation was nearing. The time when we hoped to
meet Him was close at hand. We approached this hour
with a calm solemnity. The true believers rested in a
sweet communion with God—an earnest of the peace
that was to be theirs in the bright hereafter. None
who experienced this hope and trust can ever forget those
precious hours of waiting.” Life Sketches, 56.
“Of all the great religious movements since the
days of the apostles, none have been more free from
human imperfections and the wiles of Satan than was
that of the autumn of 1844. Even now, after the lapse
of many years, all who shared in that movement and who
have stood firm upon the platform of truth, still feel the
holy influence of that blessed work, and bear witness that
it was of God. ...Those who expected soon to stand face
to face with their Redeemer, felt a solemn joy that was
unutterable. The softening, subduing power of the Holy
Spirit melted the heart, as His blessing was bestowed in
rich measure upon the faithful, believing ones.” Great
Controversy, 401-403.
Personal Testimonies.—
James White: “Although a quarter of a century has
passed since that memorable period, yet that work has
not lost its interest and force upon the minds of those
who participated in it. Even now, when one who shared
in that blessed work, and who feels its hallowed
influence rekindling upon his mind—if in obedience to
the injunction of the apostle when he says, ‘Call to

remembrance the former days in which, after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions,
partly whilst ye were made a gazing stock, both by
reproaches and
afflictions, and
partly whilst ye
became
companions of
them that were
so used.’—shall
speak of that
solemn work, of
that
consecration of
all, made in full
view of eternal
scenes, and of
that sweet peace
and holy joy
which filled the
minds of the
waiting ones, his words will not fail to touch the feelings
of all who shared the blessings of that work and have
held fast.
“And those who participated in that movement are
not the only ones who can now go back in their
experience, and feast upon the faith-reviving, soulinspiring realities of the past. Those who have since
embraced the Advent faith and hope, and who have seen
in the three messages of Revelation 14, the past
consecration and blessedness, the present work of
preparation, and the future glory, may go back with us
to the autumn of 1844, and with us share the
rekindling of the heavenly illumination. Was that our
Jerusalem, where we waited for, and enjoyed, the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit? Then as all Christians, as
well as Christ’s first disciples who were present on the
occasion, have looked back to the day of Pentecost
with pleasure and profit, so may those who have
embraced the doctrine of the Second Advent since the
memorable seventh-month movement, look back to
that period with all that interest those can who
participated in it.” White, James, Life, 180,181.
William Miller: “There is no great expression of
joy: that is, as it were, suppressed for a future occasion,
when all heaven and earth will rejoice together with joy
unspeakable and full of glory. There is no shouting:
that, too, is reserved for the shout from heaven. The
singers are silent: they are waiting to join the angelic
hosts, the choir from heaven.... There is no clashing of
sentiments: all are of one heart and of one mind.”
Great Controversy, 401.
Sylvester Bliss: “It produced everywhere the
most deep searching of heart and humiliation of soul
before the God of high heaven. It caused a weaning
of affections from the things of this world, a healing
of controversies and animosities, a confession of
wrongs, a breaking down before God, and penitent,

248

REVELATION 10
broken-hearted supplications to Him for pardon and
acceptance. It caused self-abasement and prostration of
soul, such as we never before witnessed. As God by Joel
commanded, when the
great day of God should
be at hand, it produced a
rending of hearts and not
of garments, and a turning
unto the Lord with
fasting, and weeping, and
mourning. As God said
by Zechariah, a spirit of
grace and supplication
was poured out upon His
children; they looked to
Him whom they had
pierced, there was a great
mourning in the land,
...and those who were looking for the Lord afflicted their
souls before Him.” Great Controversy, 401.
Luther Boutelle: “As we fell, one after another
into the current belief that the fall would witness the
coming of our Lord, it became in faith a certainty—we
believed it with our whole souls. Thus the cry, ‘Behold,
the Bridegroom cometh!’ was, by the ‘time argument,’
made to end in the fall of 1844, Jewish time, the tenth
day of the seventh month, supposed to be October 20,21,
or 22. This brought us to a definite time, and in coming
up to it, the works of Adventists demonstrated their faith
and honesty, not to be questioned. As they moved on
with the point of time before them, all grew more
enthusiastic. Crops were left unharvested, their owners
expecting never to want what they had raised. Men paid
up their debts. Many sold their property to help others to
pay their debts, who could not have done it themselves.
Beef cattle were slaughtered and distributed among the
poor. At no time since ‘the day of Pentecost was fully
come’ had there been the like—a day when that
Pentecost was so completely duplicated as in 1844,
when Adventism prevailed and reigned.
“…As the time to which all looked drew near, the
Bible was studied even more, and a fuller consecration
made. There was a harmony that made us a unit at
this time, and the representatives of Adventism and the
flock were all one. (Sketch of Life & Religious
Experience of Eld. Luther Boutelle, 1891.)” Ferrell,
WayMarks Tract #758, May, 1997.
Thy Belly Bitter (Great Disappointment, 1844).—
“In comments on Daniel 8:14 it has been shown
that the work of cleansing the heavenly sanctuary began
in 1844. Students of prophecy who made this discovery
understood the sanctuary to mean the earth, and
mistakenly regarded this prediction to mean that the
Lord would come to cleanse the earth of its pollution
and sin at that time.” Smith, DR, 528.
“This message of the coming of the Lord in the
autumn of 1844 spread rapidly throughout America and

other parts of the world. It greatly moved the hearts of
men and stirred the Protestant churches of that time.
Tens of thousands looked for the coming of the Lord
at the close of the great prophetic period of 2300 days
in 1844. (See Daniel 8:14; 9:25-27.) Every preparation
was made to greet Him with great joy and gladness, and
then came the bitterness of disappointment, for the Lord
did not come.
Their mistake was in their
misunderstanding of the event to take place at the end of
this prophetic period, and not in their reckoning of the
time.
“Accordingly, we read in verse 10, ‘The little book
...was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I
had eaten it, my belly was bitter.’
“The disappointment, however, was no evidence
that the Lord was not in the movement, for in this tenth
chapter of Revelation He anticipates this very
experience.” Smith, DR, 528.
“I was shown the grievous disappointment of the
people of God that they did not see Jesus at the expected
time. They knew not why their Saviour did not come;
for they could see no evidence that prophetic time had
not ended. Said the angel, ‘Has God’s word failed? Has
God failed to fulfill His promises? No; He has fulfilled
all that He promised. Jesus has risen up and shut the
door of the holy place of the heavenly sanctuary and has
opened a door into the most holy place and entered in to
cleanse the sanctuary. All who wait patiently shall
understand the mystery. Man has erred; but there has
been no failure on the part of God.
All was
accomplished that God promised; but man erroneously
believed the earth to be the sanctuary to be cleansed
at the end of the prophetic periods. It is man’s
expectation, not the promise of God, that has failed.
“Jesus sent His angels to direct the minds of the
disappointed ones to the most holy place, where He
had gone to cleanse the sanctuary and make a special
atonement for Israel. Jesus told the angels that all who
found Him would understand the work which He was to
perform.” Early Writings, 250,251.
“But Christ did not return in 1844 as so many had
confidently expected. A mistake had been made, not in
regard to the time, but in regard to the event. That the
2300 years ended in 1844 none can success-fully
gainsay. The angel Gabriel had declared to Daniel that at
the end of the 2300 prophetic days, ‘then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed.’ Those who studied these
prophecies in the early part of the 19th century were
ignorant of the heavenly sanctuary and its services.
Or if they knew anything about it, they could not
conceive of anything in heaven needing cleansing. They
were not yet aware of the fact that the Papal abomination
with its false priestly mediatorial system had polluted the
heavenly sanctuary and its services. Through this
counterfeit system the Papacy trampled underfoot and
polluted ‘the sanctuary of strength,’ and took away
the daily or continual ministration of Christ. Also
these men did not seem to know that the books of record

249

GEMS FROM REVELATION
must be cleansed by an investigative judgment before
Christ could return. See Dan. 8:10-17; 11:31. The only
place in the universe that they knew of that needed
cleansing was this sin-cursed earth which is to be
cleansed by fire. They therefore came to the conclusion
that Christ would return in 1844 and cleanse the earth by
fire. The message was given with great power and
brought the greatest revival since Pentecost.” Bunch,
TR, 110.
“While the disappointment resulting from the
mistake was very bitter, it led to the discovery of one of
the greatest truths of the Bible which was covered up
and hidden from the church by the Papal apostasy.
The disappointment was His appointment and therefore a
blessing in disguise.” Bunch, TR, 111.
Personal Testimonies.—
Hiram Edson: “Our
fondest
hopes
and
expectations were blasted,
and such a spirit of
weeping came over us as I
never experienced before.
It seemed that the loss of
all earthly friends could
have been no comparison.
We wept and wept, till
the day dawn.
“I mused in my own
heart, saying, ‘My Advent
experience has been the
richest and brightest of all my Christian experience.
If this had proved a failure, what was the rest of my
Christian experience worth? Has the Bible proved a
failure? Is there no God, no heaven, no golden home
city, no Paradise? Is all this but a cunningly devised
fable? Is there no reality to our fondest hope and
expectation of these things? And thus we had something
to grieve and weep over, if all our fondest hopes were
lost. And as I said, we wept, till the day dawn.” Edson,
Document File, 588.
James White: “The disappointment at the passing
of the time was a bitter one. True believers had given up
all for Christ, and had shared his presence as never
before. They had, as they supposed, given their last
warning to the world, and had separated themselves,
more or less, from the unbelieving, scoffing multitude.
And with the divine blessing upon them, they felt more
like associating with their soon-expected Master and the
holy angels, than with those from whom they had
separated themselves. The love of Jesus filled every
soul, and beamed from every face, and with
inexpressible desires they prayed, ‘Come Lord Jesus, and
come quickly.’ But he did not come. And now to turn
again to the cares, perplexities, and dangers of life, in
full view of the jeers and revilings of unbelievers who
now scoffed as never before, was a terrible trial of
faith and patience. When Elder Himes visited Portland,

Me., a few days after the passing of the time, and stated
that the brethren should prepare for another cold winter,
my feelings were almost uncontrollable. I left the
place of meeting and wept like a child.” White, James,
Life, 182.
William Miller: “It passed. And the next day it
seemed as though all the demons from the bottomless
pit were let loose upon us. The same ones and many
more who were crying for mercy two days before, were
not mixed with the rabble and mocking, scoffing, and
threatening in a most blasphemous manner.” Words of
William Miller in a letter to I.O. Orr, M.D. dated
December 13, 1844.” Bohr, NR10, 15.
Luther Boutelle: “The end of October passed,
making unspeakably sad the faithful and longing ones;
but causing the unbelieving and wicked to rejoice. All
was still. No Advent Herald; no meetings as formerly.
Everyone felt lonely, with hardly a desire to speak to
anyone. Still in the cold world! No deliverance—the
Lord did not come! No words can express the
feelings of disappointment of a true Adventist then.
Those only who experienced it can enter into the subject
as it was. It was a humiliating thing, and we all felt it
alike. All were silent, save to inquire, ‘Where are we?’
and ‘What next?’ All were housed and searching their
Bibles to learn what to do. In some few places they soon
began to come together to watch for some development
of light, relative to our disappointment.” (Sketch of the
life and Religious Experience of Elder Luther Boutelle,
1891.)” Ferrell, WayMarks Tract 758, May, 1997.

REVELATION 10:11
And he said unto me, Thou must
prophesy again before many peoples, and
nations, and tongues, and kings.
Thou.—
“The prophet should be taken here, and previously,
as symbolizing the human beings who would make up
the movement giving this final message. John lived at
the beginning of the Christian Era when he received this
vision. But the prophetic scene itself looks down toward
the end of time, long after John’s death. He should,
therefore, be taken as representative of those who will
bear this final message, the part he was acting out under
those circumstances.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR,
321.
Thou Must Prophesy.—
“But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to
edification, and exhortation, and comfort.” 1 Cor.
14:3.
“To prophesy sometimes means simply to teach.”
White, James, Life, 216.

250

REVELATION 10
Thou Must Prophesy Again.—
“How could they prophesy (preach) again, when
they were so mistaken? How could they go to the world
again, when they had been proved wrong? The solution
to this is given in the next verse. (Originally there was
no break between Rev. 10:11 and Rev. 11:1.) [Rev.
11:1,2 quoted.] ‘Rise and measure the temple!’ What
temple?” Cooke, #15-UR, 23.
“[He] points His people to a task of world-wide
extent He had yet for them to perform prior to His
glorious appearing, for their work had not yet been
finished. This work is brought to view quite fully in
the three angels’ messages of the fourteenth chapter.
“John, standing as the representative of the church,
here receives from the angel another commission.
Another message joining the first and second angels’
messages, is to go forth to the world. In other words,
we have here a prophecy of the third angel’s message,
now, as we believe, in process of fulfillment.” Smith,
DR, 528,529.
“Blessed are the eyes which saw the things that
were seen in 1843 and 1844. The message was given.
And there should be no delay in repeating the message,
for the signs of the times are fulfilling; the closing work
must be done. A great work will be done in a short time.
A message will soon be given by God’s appointment
that will swell into a loud cry.” Manuscript Releases,
Vol. 2, 20.
“The natural heart is not to bring its own tainted,
corrupting principles into the work of God. There must
be no concealing of the principles of our faith. The
third angel’s message is to be sounded by God’s
people. It is to swell to the loud cry. The Lord has a
time appointed when he will bind off the work; but when
is that time? When the truth to be proclaimed for these
last days shall go forth as a witness to all nations, then
shall the end come. If the power of Satan can come
into the very temple of God, and manipulate things as
he pleases, the time of preparation will be prolonged.”
“1888”, 1525.
Before Many Peoples, Nations, Tongues, & Kings.—
“They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute
you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into
prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my
name’s sake.” Luke 21:12.

closing conflict, many will be imprisoned, many will
flee for their lives from cities and towns, and many
will be martyrs for Christ’s sake in standing in
defense of the truth. They will be brought before
kings and rulers, and before councils to meet the
false, absurd, and lying accusations brought against
them, but they must stand firm as a rock to principle, and
the promise is, ‘As thy days so shall thy strength be.’
(Deut. 33:25). You will not be tempted above what
you are able to bear. Jesus bore all this and far more.
The express command of God must be obeyed, for God
has been working. Luke 21:8-19.” “1888”, 484.
“This foretells the third message of Rev. 14: 9-12,
which will go to all the world, increasing as it goes, until
it swells into a loud cry. Many peoples, the nations of
earth, representatives from every tongue, rich and
poor, even kings on their thrones, will hear this last
message of mercy which goes to the earth in the
beginning of the sounding of the seventh trumpet.”
Haskel, SSP, 190.
“We are to give the last warning of God to men and
what should be our earnestness in studying the Bible
and our zeal in spreading the light! Let every soul
who has received the divine illumination seek to impart
it. Let the workers go from house to house, opening the
Bible to the people, circulating the publications, telling
others of the light that has blessed their own souls. Let
literature be distributed judiciously, on the trains, in the
street, on the great ships that ply the sea, and through the
mails.
“A great work is to be done, and those who know
the truth should make mighty intercession for help. The
love of Christ must fill their own hearts. The Spirit of
Christ must be poured out upon them, and they must be
making ready to stand in the judgment. As they
consecrate themselves to God, a convincing power
will attend their efforts to present the truth to others.
We must no longer sleep on Satan’s enchanted ground,
but call into requisition all our resources, availing
ourselves of every facility with which Providence has
furnished us. The last warning is to be proclaimed
before ‘many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and
kings,’ and the promise is given, ‘Lo, I am with you
alway, even unto the end of the world.’ Rev. 10:11;
Mt. 28:20.” 9 Testimonies, 123.

“Neither will this work be done in a corner, for it is
to go before ‘many peoples, and nations, and tongues,
and kings,’ as will be clearly seen in our study of
Revelation 14:6-12.” Smith, DR, 529.
“The two armies will stand distinct and separate,
and this distinction will be so marked that many who
shall be convinced of truth will come on the side of
God's commandment-keeping people. When this grand
work is to take place in the battle, prior to the last

251

GEMS FROM REVELATION

252

REVELATION 11

REVELATION 11
REVELATION 11:1-19
1 And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel
stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar,
and them that worship therein.
2 But the court which is without the temple leave out, and
measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city
shall they tread under foot forty and two months.
3 And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in
sackcloth.
4 These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks
standing before the God of the earth.
5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt
them, he must in this manner be killed.
6 These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood,
and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.
7 And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast
that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against
them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.
8 And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord
was crucified.
9 And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations
shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not
suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.
10 And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them,
and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these
two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.
11 And after three days and an half the spirit of life from God
entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear
fell upon them which saw them.
12 And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them,
Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and
their enemies beheld them.
13 And the same hour was there a great earth-quake, and the
tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men
seven thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory
to the God of heaven.
14 The second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh
quickly.
15 And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices
in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever
and ever.
16 And the four and twenty elders, which sat before God on
their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God,
17 Saying, We give thee thanks, O LORD God Almighty, which
art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy
great power, and hast reigned.
18 And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the
time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou
shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the
saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest
destroy them which destroy the earth.
19 And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was
seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were
lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and
great hail.

MEASURING THE TEMPLE
REVELATION 11:1
And there was given me a reed like
unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying,
Rise, and measure the temple of God, and
the altar, and them that worship therein.
And There Was Given Me.—
“We here have a continuation of the instruction
which the angel began giving to John in the preceding
chapter; hence these verses properly belong to that
chapter, and should not be separated by the present
division. In the last verse of Revelation 10, the angel
gave a new commission to John as a representative of the
church. In other words, as already shown, we have in
that verse a prophecy of the third angel’s message. The
message is connected with the temple of God in
heaven, and is designed to fit a class of people as
worshipers.” Smith, DR, 531.
The Measuring Rod.—
“...The one absolute rule by which men’s actions
are measured for eternity, is an infinitely perfect and
unvarying standard. It cannot be comprehended by the
finite mind; for it is infinite. ‘Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep
His commandments: for this is the whole duty of
man. For God shall bring every work into judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil.’ (Ec. 12:13,14.) The ‘reed like
unto a rod,’ with which John was bidden to measure,
was the commandments of God....” Haskel, SSP, 193.
“To the law and to the testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them.” Isa. 8:20.
“The word ‘reed’ is ‘kanna’ in the Greek, and
from it we get our English word canon, which means a
rule, a law, a standard, or order of doctrine or discipline.
The word canon is used in the religious world, as the
rule or authority for the Christian. We speak of ‘the
canon of scripture’, or the law of scripture, the rule of
scripture. What the angel commands is: ‘Measure the
temple and the altar!’ Take the Bible, the canon or rule
of scripture, and examine or restore the temple and the
altar.” Cooke, #15-UR, 23,24.
“A measure is ‘any standard of comparison or
judgment.’ The only standard of comparison by which
the heavenly sanctuary and its services can be measured

253

GEMS FROM REVELATION
or judged is the earthly sanctuary and its services.
The earthly was typical of the heavenly and types always
throw floods of light on their antitypes. When Moses
built the tabernacle and established its services he was
cautioned to carefully follow the pattern of heavenly
things. See Ex. 25:8,9,40. The earthly and typical was
a miniature picture of the heavenly and antitypical,
and is therefore the measuring rod by which it can be
measured or studied. Most of our knowledge regarding
the heavenly sanctuary and the priestly ministry of Christ
has been gained through the study of the types.” Bunch,
TR, 113.
The Angel.—
“The angel is the same angel of Rev. 10 that was
talking to John, which is Jesus Christ.” PJ
Rise.—
“The discouraged worshippers after the passing of
the date 1844 were to ‘arise, shine,’ for new light had
come, and the glory of the Lord was to be upon them.
Isaiah 60:1. And that light was a mightier message,
which would illumine the whole world with its glory.
Rev. 18:1. It would shine forth in its brilliance in the
darkest hour of human history. Isaiah 60:2.” Anderson,
UR, 104.
“Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory
of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness
shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but
the Lord shall arise upon thee, and His glory shall be
seen upon thee.” Isaiah 60:1,2.
“The command to ‘rise’ indicates that the advent
people were cast down with sorrow and
disappointment; that active missionary work had
ceased because they thought their work was done.”
Bunch, TR, 113.
Measure.—

“Because the mistake was made in regard to
the meaning of the cleansing of the sanctuary, the divine
command was given to discover their mistake by the
study of the sanctuary question. They were to
measure, study, investigate, and critically examine the
subject, their ignorance of which had caused their
mistake and disappointment.” Bunch, TR, 113.
“To measure an object requires special attention
be given to that object. The call to rise and measure the
temple of God is a prophetic command to the church to
give the subject of the temple, or sanctuary, a special
examination.” Smith, DR, 532.
“To measure would be to consider and evaluate and
decide their status—a judgment work.” Straw, SR, 72.
Measure the Temple.—
“It was the very next morning after the
disappointment of 1844 that those who went through

that experience had a vision of the sanctuary in
heaven and the work of Christ in behalf of mankind.
Then it was that these people got a new view of the
purpose and work of Christ and the sanctuary in
heaven and the method by which God’s people are
judged.” Straw, SR, 72.
“The truth concerning the temple and the altar
has been lost to the Christian church. In the Old
Testament, the prophet Daniel had revealed that the
Antichrist was responsible for this: ‘By him the daily
sacrifice was taken away and the place of his
sanctuary was cast down.’ Dan. 8:11 (‘sacrifice’ not
in the original.)
“It was ‘the daily’ that was taken away. ‘The
daily’ represented the ministration of Christ in the
heavenly temple. This would be taken away, and the
place of his sanctuary, i.e. the heavenly sanctuary, would
be cast down. How did the Papacy take away ‘the daily’
and cast down the sanctuary? He did it by setting up a
counterfeit priesthood, sanctuary and altar. What is the
altar that is to be measured or restored? It is the
altar of incense. The altar of incense in the earthly
sanctuary was especially connected with the ministry of
the priest. When the Roman Catholic system developed,
the world was deceived into looking to the Catholic
system of priesthood for its salvation. The great truths
of Christ’s heavenly sanctuary, and his mediation in that
sanctuary, were cast down or lost.
“But did not the Protestant Reformation restore the
truth concerning ‘the daily’, or Christ’s ministration,
and the heavenly sanctuary? No it did not. The
Reformation commenced the restoration of the truth of
the gospel, but they did not complete it.
They
emphasized the priesthood of believers.
“Now the priesthood of believers is a very
important truth, but the Reformers did not have the light
on the heavenly sanctuary and the priesthood of Christ in
heaven above. That truth was rediscovered in 1844 as a
result of the ‘great disappointment’.
When that
disappointment occurred, it drove the people of God of
that day, to seek the reason. They were convinced that
God was in the Great Second Advent Movement, so they
took the reed, the canon of scripture, and with it
examined the question of the temple. They soon
discovered that the temple in the book of Revelation
was the heavenly temple, the anti-type of the Jewish
temple of the Old Testament. They also found that the
book of Hebrews referred to this temple:
“ ‘But Christ being come an high priest, who is
set on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in
the heavens, a minister of the sanctuary [temple], and
of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not
men.’ ‘But Christ being come an high priest of good
things to come, by a greater and more perfect
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of
this building.’ Hebrews 8:1,2,9.
“They found that in the book of Hebrews, the
priests’ ministry in the Old Testament sanctuary was a
figure, or shadow of Christ’s ministry in the heavenly

254

REVELATION 11
sanctuary.
“ ‘Who serve unto the example and the shadow
of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God,
when he was about to make the tabernacle, for see,
saith He, that thou make all things according to the
pattern shown thee in the mount.’ Hebrews 8:5.
“In the earthly temple there were two holy places
and so it is in the heavenly temple.
“ ‘For Christ is not entered into the holy places
made with hands, which are figures of the true, [or
the true ones] but into heaven itself, now to appear in
the presence of God for us.’ Heb. 9:24.
“They also discovered that the first half of the book
of Revelation pictured Christ ministering in the first
apartment. [Rev. 8:3-5.] In the second half of
Revelation, Christ is seen ministering in the second
apartment of the heavenly temple just as it was in the
Old Testament type. In Revelation 11:19, the Deity is
distinctly revealed as present in the second apartment.
“ ‘The temple of God was opened in heaven and
there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament
[or covenant], and there were lightnings and voices
and thunderings. Rev. 11:19.
“The expression: ‘There were lightnings and
voices and an earthquake and great hail’ is indicative of
the tremendous activity associated with the Throne of
God. This indicates that the activities of the Deity
were now where the ark is. Thus the latter part of
Revelation reveals Christ ministering in the second
apartment.
“They also discovered in the prophecy of Daniel 7
that after the four universal monarchies would reign, the
Antichrist or Papacy, would reign for 1260 years. This
ended in 1798. The prophet then revealed an aweinspiring phenomenon in the heavenly temple. It was
the transfer of the Deity from one division of the
temple to another. ‘I beheld till the thrones were cast
down [or positioned] and the Ancient of Days did sit.’
“Thrones were placed, or put in position. There is
a movement of thrones, and the Ancient of Days did sit.
God the Father is moving. He is transferring.
‘His throne was like the fiery flame and his [its]
wheels as burning fire, a fiery stream issued and
came forth from before him, thousand thousands
ministered unto him and ten thousand time ten
thousand stood before him. The judgment was set
and the books were opened.’ [or, ‘the court sat in
judgment.’ RSV] Daniel 7:9,10.
“For what reason would God the Father transfer
His location in the heavenly temple? The answer is
given in Daniel 8:14: ‘Unto [until] 2300 days, then
shall the sanctuary be cleansed.’
“At the end of the 2,300 year period [1844], there
was to take place the cleansing of the heavenly
sanctuary or temple. What does this represent? We
will show later that it represents a work of judgment, that
was conducted in the ‘Holy of holies’ of the heavenly
temple. Therefore, in 1844, there commenced in the
heavenly temple a ministry of judgment. This was the
key to the great disappointment of 1844. The prediction

of Daniel 7 then reveals that after the Father was seated
in the judgment, ‘Behold one like the Son of Man
[Jesus] came with the clouds of heaven and came to
the Ancient of Days and they [the clouds of angels]
brought him near before him.’ Daniel 7:13.
“Here Christ is described as coming to ‘the Holy of
holies’, of the awesome heavenly temple. This was the
significance of the coming of Christ in 1844; it was not
to the earth, but to the judgment scene in the heavenly
temple. Thus the command of Revelation 11:1, after the
disappointment of 1844, to ‘rise and measure [or
restore] the temple and the altar’ was fulfilled.”
Cooke, #15-UR, 24-27.
“The subject of the sanctuary was the key which
unlocked the mystery of the disappointment of 1844. It
opened to view a complete system of truth, connected
and harmonious, showing that God’s hand had directed
the great advent movement and revealing present duty as
it brought to light the position and work of His people.
…Now in the holy of holies they again beheld Him, their
compassionate High Priest, soon to appear as their king
and deliverer. Light from the sanctuary illumined the
past, the present, and the future. They knew that God
had led them by His unerring providence. Though, like
the first disciples, they themselves had failed to
understand the message which they bore, yet it had been
in every respect correct. In proclaiming it they had
fulfilled the purpose of God, and their labor had not been
in vain in the Lord. Begotten ‘again unto a lively hope,’
they rejoiced ‘with joy unspeakable and full of glory.’”
Great Controversy, 424.
“I believe the Sanctuary to be cleansed at the end of
the 2300 days, is the New Jerusalem Temple, of which
Christ is a minister. The Lord shew me in vision, more
than one year ago, that Brother Crosier had the true
light on the cleansing of the Sanctuary, &c; and that it
was His will, that Brother C. should write out the view
which he gave us in the Day-Star Extra, February 7,
1846. I feel fully authorized by the Lord, to
recommend that Extra, to every saint.” A Word to the
Little Flock, 1847.
Temple, Altar, and Them That Worship Therein.—
“Revelation 11:1-2 contains a strong allusion to the
Day of Atonement, which comes immediately after a
reference to the completion of the time prophecies of
Daniel (Rev. 10:5,6). In Leviticus 16—the major Day
of Atonement chapter—atonement is made for the
high priest, the sanctuary, the altar, and the people.
The only other place in Scripture where the terms
sanctuary, altar, and people are combined is in
Revelation 11:1-2. Since the NT High Priest, Jesus
Christ, needs no atonement, the common reference to
sanctuary, altar, and people being measured appears to
be a deliberate recollection of the Day of Atonement as
the day when these were evaluated or ‘measured’ (cf.
2 Sam. 8:2; Matt. 7:2).” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR,
189,190.

255

GEMS FROM REVELATION

Measuring What Temple?—
“This could not refer to the temple in Jerusalem,
for it had been destroyed by Titus in 70 AD, and John
received his vision 26 years later in 96 AD. It had to
refer to the heavenly temple.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 20.

“The prophet was told to measure them that
worship in the temple; for the creatures of His hand
reflect His image, and are measured by the same
standard. Angels worship in that temple, and they reflect
the character of Him who is love. There were also men
in that temple as worshipers; saints, who, while still
on earth, were by faith within the inner veil; and they
too were measured by the same reed of His law. Not an
outward measure of stature, nor an external weighing of
motives, as viewed by the human eye, but character was
the test, with the rule of heaven for a standard.” Haskel,
SSP, 194.

“The temple here cannot mean the church, for the
church is brought to view in connection with this temple
as ‘them that worship therein.’ The temple is therefore
the literal temple in heaven, and the worshipers the true
church on earth.” Smith, DR, 531.

“Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:
Fear God, and keep His commandments: for this is the
whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil.” Ec. 12: 13,14.

Measuring the Temple.—
“Thou son of man, show the house to the house
of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their
iniquities: and let them measure the pattern. And if
they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them
the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the
goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all
the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof: and write it
in their sight, that they may keep the whole form
thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.
This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the
mountain the whole limit thereof round about shall
be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.”
Ezekiel 43:10-12.

“To deal with our fellow men in every instance just
as we should wish them to deal with us is a rule which
we should apply to ourselves practically. God’s laws are
to be obeyed to the letter. In all our intercourse and deal
with our fellow men, whether believers or unbelievers,
this rule is to be applied: ‘Love thy neighbor as thyself.’
Here many who profess to be Christians will not bear
the measurement of God; when weighed in the
balances of the sanctuary, they will be found
wanting.” 2 Testimonies, 43.

“And he shall make an atonement for the holy
sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the
tabernacle of the congregation, and for the altar, and
he shall make an atonement for the priests, and for all
the people of the congregation.” Leviticus 16:33.

“Through Christ was to be fulfilled the purpose
of which the tabernacle was a symbol—that glorious
building, its walls of glistening gold reflecting in
rainbow hues the curtains inwrought with cherubim, the
fragrance of ever-burning incense pervading all, the
priests robed in spotless white, and in the deep mystery
of the inner place, above the mercy seat, between the
figures of the bowed, worshipping angels, the glory of
the Holiest. In all, God desired His people to read His
purpose for the human soul.” Education, 36.
Measuring the Altar of Incense.—
“And he shall go out unto the altar that is before
the LORD, and make an atonement for it.” Leviticus
16:18. “And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the
horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin
offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make
atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is
most holy unto the Lord.” Exodus 30:10.
“John was to measure the altar. Here he saw the
High Priest, with His censer, offering the prayers of
His saints. [See Rev. 8:3].” Haskel, SSP, 193.
Measuring Them That Worship Therein.—

“His church is to be a temple built after the Divine
similitude, and the angelic architect has brought his
golden measuring rod from heaven, that every stone
may be hewed and squared by the divine
measurement and polished to shine as an emblem of
heaven, radiating in all directions the bright, clear
beams of the Sun of righteousness. The church is to be
fed with manna from heaven and to be kept under the
sole guardianship of His grace. Clad in complete armor
of light and righteousness, she enters upon her final
conflict. The dross, the worthless material, will be
consumed, and the influence of the truth testifies to the
world of its sanctifying, ennobling character.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 17.
“The grand judgment is taking place, and has
been going on for some time. Now the Lord says,
‘Measure the temple and the worshipers thereof.’
Remember when you are walking the streets about your
business, God is measuring you; when you are
attending your household duties, when you engage in
conversation, God is measuring you. ...When you are
doing your work remember there is One that is watching
the spirit in which we are doing it. Shall we not bring
the Saviour into our everyday lives, into our secular
work and domestic duties? Then in the name of God we
want to leave behind everything that is not necessary, all
gossiping or unprofitable visiting, and present ourselves
as servants of the living God.” (Manuscript 4, 1888).
7BC, 972.

256

REVELATION 11
“In vision on the Isle of Patmos John said: (Rev.
11:1 quoted.) This solemn work is to be done upon the
earth. Look and see how stands your measurement of
character as compared with God’s standard of
righteousness, his holy law. The worshipers are to pass
under the measuring line of God. Who will bear the
test? Christ says, ‘I know thy works.’” Youth
Instructor, 9/25/1886.
“All who occupy positions in our institutions will
be tested. If they will make Christ their pattern, He will
give them wisdom and knowledge and understanding;
they will grow in grace and aptitude in Christ’s way;
their characters will be molded after His similitude. If
they fail of keeping the way of the Lord, another spirit
will control the mind and judgment, and they will plan
without the Lord and will take their own course and
leave the positions they have occupied. The light has
been given them; if they depart from it, let no man
present a bribe to induce them to remain. They will be a
hindrance and a snare. The time has come when
everything is to be shaken that can be shaken, that
those things which cannot be shaken may remain.
Every case is coming in review before God; He is
measuring the temple and the worshipers therein.” 7
Testimonies, 219.
“The Disappointment of those who expected our
Lord to come to earth in 1844 is outlined in Rev.
10:9,10—the message from the book of Daniel
concerning the cleansing of the sanctuary they
interpreted to mean the coming of Christ to the earth.
The thought of the Saviour’s return was sweet as honey
to them, but the sweetness turned to bitterness when their
hopes were dashed. However, the prophecy outlined
that, following that Disappointment, they would
understand and preach concerning the true meaning of
the cleansing of the sanctuary. ‘And he [the angel] said
unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many
peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings. And
there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the
angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of
God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.’
(Rev. 10:11; 11:1).
“This clearly states that, after the 1844
Disappointment, those who would then see the light
concerning the ministry of Jesus in the heavenly
sanctuary were to make this message known to all
mankind. But more than this was included in this
prophecy: the double meaning concerning the cleansing
of the church and the individuals of the church was
also to be made clear to the people. …However, this is
a feature that has not been as fully proclaimed, as no
doubt it will be in the future, among those who are
praying for the latter rain, which is to be followed by the
reception of the seal of the living God upon the cleansed
temple.” Were, 144,000 Sealed!, 110,111.
“In the balances of the sanctuary the Seventh-day

Adventist church is to be weighed. She will be judged
by the privileges and advantages that she has had. If
her spiritual experience does not correspond to the
advantages that Christ, at infinite cost, has bestowed on
her, if the blessings conferred have not qualified her to
do the work entrusted to her, on her will be pronounced
the sentence: ‘Found wanting.’ By the light bestowed,
the opportunities given, will she be judged.”
8Testimonies, 247.

REVELATION 11:2
But the court which is without the
temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is
given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city
shall they tread under foot forty and two
months.
The Court Which is Without the Temple.—
“That the court refers to this earth is proved thus:
The court is the place where the victims were slain
whose blood was to be ministered in the sanctuary. The
antitypical victim must die in the antitypical court, and
He died on Calvary in Judea. The Gentiles being thus
introduced, the attention of the prophet is directed to the
great feature of Gentile apostasy, the treading down of
the holy city forty and two months during that time.”
Smith, DR, 532.
“The church of God below is one with the church
of God above. Believers on the earth and the beings in
heaven who have never fallen constitute one church.
Every heavenly intelligence is interested in the
assemblies of the saints who on earth meet to worship
God. In the inner court of heaven they listen to the
testimony of the witnesses for Christ in the outer
court on earth, and the praise and thanksgiving from the
worshipers below is taken up in the heavenly anthem,
and praise and rejoicing sound through the heavenly
courts because Christ has not died in vain for the fallen
sons of Adam.” 6 Testimonies, 366.
Measure It Not.—
“This must be interpreted to mean that the attention
of the church is now directed to the inner temple and the
service there. Matters pertaining to the court are of less
consequence now. It is given to the Gentiles.” Smith,
DR, 532
For It Is Given Unto the Gentiles.—
“In Ephesians 2:11,12, we have the inspired
definition of the word ‘gentiles’ or ‘heathen’—those
who are ‘aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel’. In
Rev. 11:2 the word ‘gentiles’ or ‘heathen’ refers to the
Papal church in its persecution of the ‘Israel of God’
during the Dark Ages.” Were, KTCFS, 33.
Measure the Temple, Not the Court.—

257

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“1. The Papacy was permitted by Heaven to
dominate or control the earth for 1260 years and it
certainly did.
“2. It is the earth where Papal worship is centered.
Papal worship is centered in earthly things; in earthly
tabernacles, and earthly priesthood, an earthly deity, and
earthly sacrifice [the mass]. As James describes the
power that is not of God: ‘It is earthly, sensual,
devilish.’ James 3:15.
“The difference between true and false worship is
determined by the center of that worship. Paganism’s
worship is centered in the earth, in earthly symbols. The
worship of Apostate Protestantism likewise, is centered
in the earth, on the cross, in the court, on Christ’s work
on earth—His death, burial, and resurrection. Calvinism
and the so-called ‘New Adventism’ likewise are centered
on the earth. “Everything was done for me 2000 years
ago.’ But the center of true worship is where Christ
is. The faith and devotion of the believer must focus on
Jesus, where He is now. And where is Jesus Christ since
His ascension? ‘There is one God and one mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.” 1
Timothy 2:5.
“Jesus is not now on the cross, nor in the tomb, nor
is He on the earth. As the apostle Paul declared:
“ ‘You are not come to the mount that might be
touched [Mt. Sinai]… but you are come unto mount
Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
angels, To the general assembly and church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaketh better things than that of Abel.” Heb.
12:18-24.
“…The believer is to center his worship in the
heavenly temple where Christ is. It is in the heavenly
temple where salvation is ministered.” Cooke, #15-UR,
28,29.
The Holy City.—
“And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have
covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may
plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth,
and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.” Isaiah
51:16.
“And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against
God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and
them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him
to make war with the saints, and to overcome them.”
Rev. 13:6.
“The church of God is not only the most holy, but
the only holy place on this earth. It must therefore be the
court of the heavenly temple or sanctuary. Our text
proves this conclusively. It declares that the court is ‘the
holy city’ which the papacy trampled underfoot for 1260
years, during which time God’s two wit-nesses had to do

their teaching clothed in sackcloth. Because the church
is the only part of the heavenly temple that is on earth, it
is often spoken of as ‘an holy temple’ and ‘the temple
of God.’ See 1 Cor. 3:16,17; 6:19,20; Eph. 2:19-22; 2
Thess. 2:3,4. This church temple has been built ‘for a
habitation of God through the Spirit.’ All through
the Scriptures the church is spoken of as the temple
or sanctuary of God, because it is a part of it.”
Bunch, TR, 115.
“The present passage is parallel with the
description in Dan. 7:7,23, which delineates a treading
down by the fourth beast. Inasmuch as this beast’s
activities are directed particularly against the ‘saints of
the most High’ (Dan. 7:25), it is not illogical to
understand that ‘the holy city’ here represents the
people of God.” SDA Bible Commentary, Vol.7, 801.
“New Jerusalem is the community of the
righteous, the true church, the ‘host’ of Daniel 8:23,24,
which is ‘trampled’ on by the citizens of the great city,
Babylon.” Maxwell, God Cares, 302.
The Holy City Shall They Tread Under Foot.—
“The court of the heavenly sanctuary was not to be
measured because it was disconnected with the sanctuary
proper, and would be under the control of the enemies of
God for 42 months, 1260 prophetic days or literal years.
This period is always applied to the reign of the
papacy. See Dan. 7:25,26; 8:10-14; Rev. 13:5-7. What
was given into the hands of the papacy for 1260 years,
and what was trampled underfoot by them during that
time? Of the papal horn of the Roman beast, Daniel
said: ‘I beheld, and the same horn made war with the
saints, and prevailed against them.’ In answer to
Daniel’s questions regarding the work of this persecuting
power, the angel Gabriel said: ‘And he shall speak
great words against the Most High, and shall wear
out the saints of the Most High, and think to change
times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand
until a time and times and the dividing of time.’ Dan.
7:21,25. It was the saints of God or the church that
was given into the hands of the papacy and
persecuted and trample under foot for 1260 years.”
Bunch, TR, 114.
“When Daniel was given another vision of the
work of the papacy he saw this anti-christian power
casting ‘the host of heaven’ to the ground and stamping
upon them. He beheld it magnifying itself against ‘the
Prince of the host, and by him the daily ministration
was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was
cast down.’ He then heard the question asked: ‘How
long shall be the vision concerning the daily
ministration, and the transgression of desolation, to
give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden
underfoot?’ The answer was: ‘Unto two thousand
and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be
cleansed.’ Dan. 8:10-14. It is evident that Daniel and
the Revelator were speaking of the same events. It was

258

REVELATION 11
the church, or ‘saints of the most High’ or ‘the host of
heaven,’ that was given into the hands of and trampled
underfoot by the papacy during the 1260 years. The
Revelator speaks of it as ‘the court’ and ‘the holy city.’
There is therefore no other possible conclusion than that
the church and not the world is the court of the heavenly
sanctuary. This was the part of the temple of God that
the ‘man of sin’ and ‘son of perdition’ entered and
controlled during the Middle Ages, and in which the
false and counterfeit priestly system of the papacy
supplanted the true. See 2 Thess. 2:3,4.” Bunch, TR,
114.
“In the sixth century the papacy had become firmly
established. Its seat of power was fixed in the imperial
city, and the bishop of Rome was declared to be the head
over the entire church. Paganism had given place to the
papacy. The dragon had given to the beast ‘his power,
and his seat, and great authority.’ Rev. 13:2. And
now began the 1260 years of papal oppression foretold
in the prophecies of Daniel and the Revelation. Dan.
7:25; Rev. 13:3-7. Christians were forced to choose
either to yield their integrity and accept the papal
ceremonies and worship, or to wear away their lives in
dungeons or suffer death by the rack, the fagot, or the
headsman’s ax. Now were fulfilled the words of Jesus:
‘Ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren,
and kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they
cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated of all
men for My name’s sake.’
Luke 21:16,17.
Persecution opened upon the faithful with greater fury
than ever before, and the world became a vast battlefield.
For hundreds of years the church of Christ found refuge
in seclusion and obscurity.” Great Controversy, 54,55.
“In the thirteenth century was established that most
terrible of all the engines of the papacy—the
Inquisition…. ‘Babylon the great’ was ‘drunken with
the blood of the saints.’ The mangled forms of millions
of martyrs cried to God for vengeance upon that apostate
power.” Great Controversy, 59,60.
“The Gentiles (the Papacy) tread upon the
courtyard of the temple for 1260 days (years)—the Dark
Ages. They tread upon those who proclaimed the light
of truth on earth—the candlestick of the church in the
courtyard during the Thyatiran period. Because Papal
Rome preferred darkness, the two witnesses had to
prophesy clothed in sackcloth.” PJ
“It was the church or the court of the temple of God
that ‘the man of sin’ entered and polluted during the
1260 years by taking away the daily ministration of
Christ and putting in its place a human and counterfeit
system of sacrifice and mediation. Prophecy says: ‘And
they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall
take away the daily ministration, and they shall place
the abomination that maketh desolate.’ Dan. 11:31.
In the typical service the ministration in the court and
holy place was known as the ‘continual’ or ‘daily’

ministration. Any interference with the service in the
court would interrupt the entire sanctuary service.
When the papacy got control of the church or court of
God’s temple and supplanted the true with the false
mediatorial system, the sanctuary and its priesthood were
trampled underfoot just as truly as willful and defiant
sins tread ‘underfoot the Son of God.’ See Heb. 10:2629.” Bunch, TR, 116.
Forty and Two Months.—
“In prophecy one day stands for a year, and
time is reckoned thirty days to the month. Forty-two
months is equivalent to twelve hundred and sixty days of
prophetic time, or twelve hundred and sixty years of
literal time.
“…This power was established in Rome in 538 AD
on the ruins of the Western Empire, and continued until
1798 AD. This was the period known as the Dark Ages
for Europe.” Haskel, SSP, 195.
“The Holy City ...was to be trampled under the feet
of the sinners for 42 months, or for 1260 years. This
clearly refers to the 1260 years of Papal supremacy so
often referred to in the Bible.” Straw, SR, 72.
“The persecution of the church did not continue
throughout the entire period of the 1260 years. God in
mercy to His people cut short the time of their fiery trial.
In foretelling the ‘great tribulation’ to befall the
church, the Saviour said: ‘Except those days should be
shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the
elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.’ Matthew
24:22. Through the influence of the Reformation the
persecution was brought to an end prior to 1798.”
Great Controversy, 266,267.
A New Series of Events.—
“The Gentiles being thus introduced, the attention
of the prophet is directed to the great feature of Gentile
apostasy, the treading down of the holy city forty and
two months during that time. Thus we are carried
back into the past by an easy and natural transition, and
our attention is called to a new series of events.” Smith,
DR, 532.

THE TWO WITNESSES
REVELATION 11:3
And I will give power unto my two
witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days,
clothed in sackcloth.
The Two Witnesses.—
“ ‘The “Two Witnesses” are the Old and New
Testaments.... The essential purpose of the Scriptures is
to give witness to the mercy and verity of God. Our

259

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Lord commands, “Search the Scriptures, ...they are
they which testify [bear witness] of Me.” (Jn. 5:39).
This was addressed to the Jews, and described the
character and office of the Old Testament. The New
Testament is similarly pronounced the giver of
testimony. “This gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached in all the world for a witness unto all
nations.” (Mt. 24:14.)’ George Croly, The Apocalypse
of St. John, p.164.” Smith, DR, 534.
“The two witnesses represent the Scriptures of
the Old and the New Testament. Both are important
testimonies to the origin and perpetuity of the law of
God. Both are witnesses also to the plan of salvation.
The types, sacrifices, and prophecies of the Old
Testament point forward to a Saviour to come. The
Gospels and Epistles of the New Testament tell of a
Saviour who has come in the exact manner foretold
by type and prophecy.” Great Controversy, 267.

The Two Witnesses—the Old and New Testaments
A Thousand Two Hundred and Threescore Days.—
“The period of ‘a thousand two hundred and
threescore days’ is variously referred to in the
Scriptures. It appears in three forms:
“As ‘1260 days’ in this verse and Rev. 12:6.
“As ‘42 months’ in Revelation 11:2 and 13:5.
“As ‘3½ times’ in Daniel 7:25 and 12:7, and
Revelation 12:14.
“These all refer to the same period and can
easily be calculated. A ‘time’ is a year, as is evident
from Daniel 11:13, marginal reading. A year has twelve
months, and a Biblical month contains thirty days. (See
note on Rev. 9:10.) Thus we have the following:
1 year of 12 months at 30 days = 360 days. Thus,
3½ years (times) of 360 days =1260 days=1260 yrs.
42 months of 30 days =1260 days=1260 yrs.
“...Thus we have a definite measure for calculating
the prophetic periods, bearing in mind that in prophecy
a day is equal to a year of ordinary time. (Ezekiel
6:7,8; Num. 14:34.)” Smith, DR, 533.
Power Given Them to Prophesy in Sackcloth.—
“[Sackcloth is] the emblem of distress and
mourning. In Rev. 6:12 it is used as the symbol of the
obscuration of light. ‘And the sun became black as
sackcloth of hair.’ During the 1260 years of papal
supremacy, the church, which should have been the light

of the world, was compelled to flee to the wilder-ness
and hide in the caves and among the mountains. See
Rev. 12:6,14. Also during this period the Scriptures
were proscribed, and a cloud of pagan superstitions
spread over the church like a cloak of sackcloth
obscuring its light.” Bunch, TR, 119.
“In the beginning of the sixth century, about AD
538, Justinian, emperor of Constantinople, in his
controversy with the Arians, and other schismatics in the
Greek church, constituted the bishop of Rome head over
all others, both in the western and eastern churches, who,
by his authority, suppressed the reading of the Bible
by laymen, pretending that they could not read and
understand without the assistance of the clergy.
About this time, too, the Latin language ceased to be
spoken in Italy, and the Greek and Latin both became
dead languages. The Bible at that time not being
written or translated into any other languages in
Europe, it became an easy task for the bishop to obscure
the doctrine and discipline of the word of God, so far as
suited his convenience, and to obtain universal power
over the minds and consciences of men, and clothe the
Scriptures in sackcloth. If, then, the Scriptures were
first clothed in sackcloth in AD 538, and were to
prophesy 1260 years in this situation, their prophecy
would end in 1798.” Miller, Evidence, 199.
“For 1,260 years during the Dark Ages (AD 538 to
AD 1798), as predicted in Revelation 11:3, the
Scriptures were symbolically clothed in ‘sackcloth.’
Not only were they chained up in secluded
monasteries, but the Bible itself was an almost
unknown book except for a few small portions.
Moreover, it was written in ‘dead’ languages rather
than the common tongue of the people, so that it could
only be understood by a select group of elite clergy.
This kept the masses in spiritual darkness and
superstitious bondage. At one point, laymen were
burned at the stake simply for owning or even just
reading the Bible.” Batchelor, Newsletter, 6/2005.
“The synod of Toulouse, 1229, presided over by
the papal legate, celebrated the close of the Albigensian
crusades and perfected the code of the Inquisition. It has
an unenviable distinction among the great synods on
account of its decree forbidding laymen to have the
Bible in their possession.’—History of the Christian
Church, Philip Schaff, Volume 5, page 812.” Metcalf,
GPDR, 110.
“In a convocation held at Oxford under Archbishop
Arundel in 1408, it was enacted: ‘That no man
hereafter by his own authority translate any text of
the scripture into English or any other tongue, by
way of a book, booklet, or tract and that no man read
any such book, booklet or tract, now lately composed
in the time of John Wycliffe or since… publicly or
privately upon pain of greater excommunication…. He
that shall do contrary to this shall likewise be punished

260

REVELATION 11
as a favourer of heresy and error.’ Encyclopedia
Brittanica, (1911) Vol.3, p.897.” Cooke, #16-UR, 7.
“During this time of Papal power, God’s people
who held to the two witnesses —The Bible, and the Old
and New Testament would be doing a work in the world,
but under distressing circumstances—clothed in
sackcloth. Although God’s people were living in
ignominy and considered heretics, yet the same
power that accompanied Elijah in closing the heavens
against the apostates would be working during these
years.” Straw, SR, 73.
“During the greater part of this period, God’s
witnesses remained in a state of obscurity. The Papal
power sought to hide from the people the Word of Truth,
and set before them false witnesses to contradict its
testimony. When the Bible was proscribed by religious
and secular authority; when its testimony was perverted,
and every effort made that men and demons could invent
to turn the minds of the people from it; when those who
dared proclaim its sacred truths were hunted, betrayed,
tortured, buried in dungeon cells, martyred for their
faith, or compelled to flee to mountain fastnesses, and to
dens and caves of the earth—then the faithful witnesses
prophesied in sackcloth. Yet they continued their
testimony throughout the entire period of 1260 years. In
the darkest times there were faithful men who loved
God’s word and were jealous for His honor. To these
loyal servants were given wisdom, power, and
authority to declare His truth during the whole of
this time.” Great Controversy, 267,268.
“It had been Rome’s policy, under a profession of
reverence for the Bible, to keep it locked up in an
unknown tongue and hidden away from the people.
Under her rule the witnesses prophesied ‘clothed in
sackcloth.’” Great Controversy, 269.
How the Sackcloth Came Off the Two Witnesses.—
“The time of great persecution was the period
during which the witnesses prophesied covered with
sackcloth. The Reformation removed the sackcloth
from the two witnesses. From the close of the
fourteenth century, when Wycliffe’s translation
placed the Word of God in the hands of the common
people of England, until the full dawn of the
Reformation, the restraint which had long been place
upon the Scriptures was gradually removed.” Haskel,
SSP, 199.

REVELATION 11:4
These are the two olive trees, and the
two candlesticks standing before the God of
the earth.
The Old and New Testament Witnesses are Two Olive
Trees.—

“The angel, in his allusion to the two olive trees,
quotes the prophet Zechariah, 4:3, ‘And two olive trees
by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the
other upon the left side thereof.’ Here the olive trees
are used in a figurative sense, and properly denote the
‘sons of oil,’ or the two cherubims which stood over the
ark, and spread their wings over the mercy seat. The
wings of the cherubims stretched from either side of the
house to the center over the mercy seat, and their faces
turned inwards down upon the mercy seat, and the glory
of the God of Israel was above the cherubims. These
cherubims are a lively type of the Old and New
Testament. The signification of cherub is ‘fullness of
knowledge;’ so is the word of God, ‘that the man of
God may be thoroughly furnished, perfect in every
good work.’ They have the whole truth, all we can
know about Jesus Christ in this state. They stand on
either hand of Christ, one before he came in the flesh,
pointing to a Messiah to come, by all its types and
shadows; and like the cherub whose wings touched the
outer wall of the room and reached to the center over the
mercy seat, so did the Old Testament reach from the
creation of the world down to John’s preaching in the
wilder-ness, and like the cherub looking down on the
mercy seat, it testified of the Messiah. The other
cherubim’s wings reached from the center over the
mercy seat, and touched the other wall of the room,
while his face was turned back upon the mercy seat. So
does the New Testament begin at the preaching of John,
and reveals all that is necessary for us to know, down to
the end of the world. And all the ordinances of the New
Testament house look back to the sufferings, death, and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, and are to continue until his
second coming and end of the world. These cherubims
were made of olive trees, and overlaid with pure gold, 1
Kings 6:23-28.
“Again: the angel tells Zechariah what the two
olive trees are, Zech. 4:4-6, (quoted). Here we are
plainly told that the two olive trees are the word of
the Lord.” Miller, Evidence, 192,193.
“And within the oracle he made two cherubims of
olive tree, each ten cubits high. And five cubits was the
one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the other wing of
the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing unto
the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits. And the
other cherub was ten cubits: both the cherubims were
of one measure and one size. The height of the one
cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the other
cherub. And he set the cherubims within the inner
house: and they stretched forth the wings of the
cherubims, so that the wing of the one touched the one
wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other
wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst of
the house. And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.” 1
Kings 6:23-28.
“They are the ‘two olive branches which through
the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of
themselves.’ By the prophet Zechariah, the church is

261

GEMS FROM REVELATION
represented as a golden candlestick having seven
branches, each bearing aloft a light for the world. These
seven branches receive their oil from a single bowl, and
the oil for this bowl is supplied by two olive trees, one
on either side. The purity of the oil they burn is
represented by the close connection with living, growing
trees. This oil is the oil of grace, the truth of God. The
unity of the seven candlesticks is typified by the
common bowl from which each gains its supply of oil.
How beautiful a picture of the work of God’s Word in
ministering to the needs of the church on earth. Life
flows from the Old as well as the New Testament to
those whose hearts are open channels for the Spirit.”
Haskel, SSP, 197,198.
“The word is the preacher’s light, and as the golden
oil flows from the heavenly olive tree into the bowl, it
makes the lamp of life flash with a clearness and power
that all will discern. Those who have the privilege of
sitting under such a ministry, if their hearts are
susceptible to the Holy Spirit’s influence, will feel an
inner life. The fire of God’s love will be kindled
within them.” Testimonies to Ministers, 339-340.
The Old and New Testament Witnesses are Two
Candlesticks.—
“The entrance of thy words giveth light.” Ps.
119:130.
“Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto
my path.” Ps. 119:105.
“As candlesticks are the means of light, so is the
Word of God. Candlesticks are used in the Scriptures in
the same sense as lamps.” Miller, Evidence, 193.
Standing Before the God of the Whole Earth.—
“‘Then answered I, and said unto him, What are
these two olive-trees upon the right side of the
candlestick and upon the left side thereof? And I
answered again, and said unto him, what be these two
olive-branches which through the two golden pipes
empty the golden oil out of themselves? and he
answered me and said, ...These are the two anointed
ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth.’
Zech. 4:11-14.
“The anointed ones standing by the Lord of the
whole earth have the position once given to Satan as
covering cherub. By the holy beings surrounding His
throne, the Lord keeps up a constant communication
with the inhabitants of the earth.” Review & Herald,
7/20/1897.
“From the two olive trees, the golden oil was
emptied through golden pipes into the bowl of the
candlestick, and thence into the golden lamps that gave
light to the sanctuary. So from the holy ones that stand
in God’s presence, His Spirit is imparted to human
instrumentalities that are consecrated to His service.
The mission of the two anointed ones is to

communicate light and power to God’s people. It is
to receive blessing for us that they stand in God’s
presence. As the olive trees empty themselves into
the golden pipes, so the heavenly messengers seek to
communicate all that they receive from God. The
whole heavenly treasure awaits our demand and
reception; and as we receive the blessing, we in our turn
are to impart it. Thus it is that the holy lamps are fed,
and the church becomes a light-bearer in the world.”
Review & Herald, 3/2/1897.

REVELATION 11:5
And if any man will hurt them, fire
proceedeth out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man
will hurt them, he must in this manner be
killed.
If Any Man Will Hurt Them.—
“To hurt the word of God is to oppose, corrupt,
or pervert its testimony, and turn people away from
it. Against those who do this work, fire proceedeth out
of their mouth to devour them, that is, judgment of fire is
pronounced in that word against such. It declares that
they will have their punishment in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone.” Smith, DR, 534.
“[Rev. 11:5 and 22:18,19 quoted]. This verse has
been verified in our day in the history of deistical
France. The rulers of France, in the revolution,
proclaimed a war of extermination against the
fishermen’s Bible, as they were pleased to term it; and
within six years they exterminated themselves, the
republic, and almost their principles. The kingdom was
deluged in blood; anarchy was the law of the land;
and the judgments denounced by this word were
literally accomplished, so that deists themselves stood
appalled at the horror and confusion their own principles
had brought upon their heaven-daring crimes.” Miller,
Evidence, 195.
Fire Proceedeth Out of Their Mouth and Devoureth
Their Enemies.—
“[Rev. 11:5 quoted.] Men cannot with impunity
trample upon the word of God. The meaning of this
fearful denunciation is set forth in the closing chapter of
the Revelation. ‘I testify unto every man that heareth
the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in this book. And if any
man shall take away from the words of the book of
this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the
things which are written in this book.’ Rev. 22:18,19.
“Such are the warnings which God has given to
guard men against changing in any manner that which
He has revealed or commanded.
These solemn

262

REVELATION 11
denunciations apply to all who by their influence lead
men to regard lightly the law of God. They should
cause those to fear and tremble who flippantly declare it
a matter of little consequence whether we obey God’s
law or not. All who exalt their own opinions above
divine revelation, all who would change the plain
meaning of Scripture to suit their own convenience,
or for the sake of conforming to the world, are taking
upon themselves a fearful responsibility. The written
word, the law of God, will measure the character of
every man and condemn all whom this unerring test shall
declare wanting.” Great Controversy, 268.

16:4.” Anderson, UR, 108,109.

OT: “For, behold, the Lord will come with fire,
and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his
anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. For
by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all
flesh: and the slain of the Lord shall be many.” Isaiah
66:15,16.

“When connection with the living trees [The Old
and New Testaments] is severed, spiritual death is the
result. The lights may burn for a time, but they soon
exhaust the supply in the bowl, and gradually the flame
dies out. Extinguishing a light does not affect the olive
trees. ...Men may claim to receive light, independently
of these witnesses, but there are no channels for the
communication of the spirit of wisdom and
knowledge, except these two trees, or some of their
branches, through which the life, the golden oil, is
constantly flowing. It is thus that they have power to
stay the heavens that it rain not. It is for this reason that
the three and a half years of drought in the days of Elijah
are used by the divine historian to illustrate the three and
one-half prophetic years, the twelve hundred and sixty
years of darkness, brought about by severing the
connection between the church and the two witnesses.
When the connection was broken the restraining
power of God was withdrawn, and as in the natural
world, so in the spiritual, there was nothing to
prevent bloodshed, famine, and persecution.” Haskel,
SSP, 198,199.

NT: “And to you who are troubled rest with us,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with
his mighty angels, In flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ.” 2 Thess. 1:7, 8

REVELATION 11:6
These have power to shut heaven, that it
rain not in the days of their prophecy: and
have power over waters to turn them to
blood, and to smite the earth with all
plagues, as often as they will.
In the Days of Their Prophecy.-“For 1260 years. See Rev.11:3 comments.” PJ
They Have Power.—
“In verse 5 and 6 we are told that those who hurt
these witnesses will themselves be killed, and will be
smitten with the plagues and judgments of God, for these
witnesses have power over nature to shut heaven and
turn the waters into blood. Moses warned Israel that if
they turned away from God, He would ‘shut up the
heaven, that there be no rain.’ Deut. 11:16,17. They
did turn from God, and Elijah the prophet was raised up
to bring the nation back to God. He commanded that
there be no rain, and it did not rain for 3½ prophetic
years. James 5:17; 1 Kings 17 and 18. It is significant
that 3½ years measures 1260 days, or, in prophecy, 1260
years. (A prophetic year is 360 prophetic days, or literal
years, so that 3½ years equals 1260 literal years.)
“When atheistic Pharaoh said to Moses, ‘Who is
the Lord, that I should obey His voice?’ he challenged
the very God of heaven. Forthwith the rivers of Egypt
were turned into blood. That same power resides in
the New Testament, for one of the seven last plagues
will be the turning of the water into blood. Rev.

“In what sense have these witnesses power to shut
heaven, turn waters to blood, and bring plagues on the
earth? Elijah shut heaven so that it did not rain for
three years and a half, but he did it by the word of
the Lord. Moses by the word of the Lord turned the
waters of Egypt to blood. Just as these judgments,
recorded in their testimony, have been fulfilled, so will
every threatening and judgment pronounced by them
against any people surely be accomplished.” Smith, DR,
535.

They Have Power to Shut Heaven That It Rain Not in
the Days of Their Prophecy.—
“Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not
deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and
worship them; And then the Lord’s wrath be kindled
against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be
no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye
perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord
giveth you.” Dt. 11:16,17.
“Thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredoms
and with thy wickedness. Therefore the showers have
been withholden, and there hath been no latter rain;
and thou hadst a whore’s forehead, thou refusedst to be
ashamed.” Jer. 3:2,3
Power Over the Waters to Turn Them to Blood.—
“And the second angel poured out his vial upon
the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead man: and
every living soul died in the sea.
“And the third angel poured out his vial upon
the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became
blood. And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art
righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be,

263

GEMS FROM REVELATION
because thou hast judged thus. For they have shed the
blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them
blood to drink; for they are worthy.” Revelation 16:3-6.

pit, which denote the theories of men or devils, that have
no foundation in the word of God.” Miller, Evidence,
117.

(FIGURATIVE): “By waters, we understand
people; and by blood, wars. This text has been amply
fulfilled in the wars of Europe, fighting for religious
tenets and ecclesiastical power, claiming their
prerogatives from the two witnesses, and wresting and
perverting the word of God to their own destruction.
‘And from thence come wars, tumults, fightings,’
because they understand not.” Miller, Evidence, 196.

“With respect to France, the fact that the beast
comes out of the bottomless pit has been understood as
indicating that the nation had no foundation—it was an
atheistical power. A new form of satanic power had
manifested itself.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 802.

Power to Smite the Earth With All Plagues.—
“I testify unto every man that heareth the words of
the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that
are written in this book.” Rev. 22:18.

The Beast That Ascends Out of the Bottomless Pit.—
“In many of the nations of Europe the powers that
ruled in Church and State had for centuries been
controlled by Satan, through the medium of the papacy.
But here is brought to view a new mani-festation of
Satanic power. It had been Rome’s policy, under a
profession of reverence for the Bible, to keep it locked
up in an unknown tongue and hidden away from the
people.
Under her rule the witnesses prophesied
‘clothed in sackcloth.’ But another power—the beast
from the bottomless pit—was to arise to make open,
avowed war upon the word of God.”
Great
Controversy, 268,269.

As Often As They Will.—
“As often as judgments are recorded on their
pages to take place, so often they will come to pass. An
instance of this the world is yet to experi-ence in the
infliction of the seven last plagues.” Smith, DR, 535.

REVELATION 11:7,8
And when they shall have finished their
testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of
the bottomless pit shall make war against
them, and shall overcome them, and kill
them.
And their dead bodies shall lie in the
street of the great city, which spiritually is
called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
Lord was crucified.
When They Shall Have Finished Their Testimony.—
“The period when the two witnesses were to
prophesy clothed in sackcloth ended in 1798. As they
were approaching the termination of their work in
obscurity, war was to be made upon them by the power
represented as ‘the beast that ascendeth out of the
bottomless pit.’” Great Controversy, 268.
The Beast.—
“A ‘beast’ in prophecy, denotes a kingdom, or
power. (See Daniel 7:17,23.)
That Ascendeth.-“When a new head controls Satan’s 7-headed
beast, it is described as ‘ascending out of the bottomless
pit.’ See Rev. 17:8. Here the 6th head is seen
ascending out of the pit as it gives the papacy (the 5 th
head) ‘a deadly wound.’” PJ.
Bottomless Pit.—
“The figures used in this text are, the bottomless

“‘The Revolution,’ writes Lamartine, ‘made
France a vast cemetery.’” Burnside, RWU, 137.

“‘This beast, or kingdom, is out of the bottom-less
pit—no foundation—an atheistic power— “spiritually
Egypt.” (See Exodus 5:2: “Pharaoh said, Who is the
Lord, that I should obey His voice to let Israel go? I
know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.”) Here
is Atheism. Did any kingdom, about 1798 manifest the
same spirit?—Yes, France; she denied the being of God
in her national capacity, and made war on the
“Monarchy of heaven.” ’ (George Storrs, Midnight Cry,
May 4, 1843, Vol. IV, Nos. 5,6, p. 47.)” Smith, DR,
535,537.
“Inasmuch as atheism was particularly popular in
France at this time and the anti-religious spirit of the day
naturally militated against the use of and belief in
Scripture, the First French Republic has been
identified as the beast of the present passage.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 803.
“France was dominated with what they called
Enlightenment philosophies, taught by Jacques
Rousseau and Francois Voltaire. Voltaire said that the
Lisbon earthquake of 1755 taught that God doesn’t care
for us, so we had better look out for ourselves. He
rejected the inspiration of the Bible and said that
human reason was far superiour to Christianity. He
especially hated the Old Testament, saying that it
reduces humans to brutes.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 103.
Nine Specifications of the Beast of Revelation 11.—
“1. It is a political power or kingdom.
2. It rises at the close of the 1260 year period,
i.e. 1798.

264

REVELATION 11
3. It emerges from the bottomless pit, or the abyss.
4. It is connected with, or is a part of spiritual
Babylon.
5. It causes an earthquake or political upheaval.
6. It is likened to Egypt.
7. It slays or abolishes the Bible.
8. It is likened also to Sodom.
9. It was located where true Christians had suffered
enormous persecution.” Cooke, #16-UR, 8.
Shall Make War Against Them.—
“The atheistical power that ruled in France during
the Revolution and the Reign of Terror, did wage such a
war against God and His holy word as the world had
never witnessed. The worship of the Deity was
abolished by the National Assembly. Bibles were
collected and publicly burned with every possible
manifestation of scorn. The law of God was trampled
underfoot.
The institutions of the Bible were
abolished. The worldly rest day was set aside, and in its
stead every tenth day was devoted to reveling and
blasphemy.
Baptism and the Communion were
prohibited. And announcements posted conspicuously
over the burial places declared death to be an eternal
sleep.” Great Controversy, 273,274.
“About the close of the eighteenth century, in
consequence of the abominable corruptions of the
church of Rome being exposed to public view, the men
of the world began to treat revelation as a fiction, and
religion as priestcraft; and instead of searching for the
pillar and ground of the truth, ‘their imaginations
became vain, and their foolish minds were darkened.’
They declared war against the Bible, the ‘two
witnesses,’ which war became general all over Europe
and America. Some of the most eminent and principal
writers in this controversy were in France, the principal
kingdom among the ten, into which Rome had been
divided at the close of the fifth century; and so
successful were these writers, that almost the whole
nation of the French became Deists, or Atheists, in a
short time.” Miller, Evidence, 199.
Overcome and Kill Them.—
“‘In 1793 a decree passed the French Assembly
forbidding the Bible, and under that decree the Bibles
were gathered and burned, and every possible mark of
contempt heaped upon them, and all the institutions of
the Bible abolished; …The Goddess of Reason was set
up, in the person of a vile woman, and publicly
worshiped. Surely here is a power that exactly answers
the prophecy.’ (George Storrs, Midnight Cry, May 4,
1843, Vol. IV, Nos. 5,6, p. 47.)” Smith, DR, 538.
“‘In the year 1793, ...the gospel was, by a solemn
act of the Legislature and the people abolished in France.
The indignities offered to the actual copies of the Bible
were unimportant after this; their life is in their
doctrines, and the extinction of the doctrines is the

extinction of the Bible. By the decree of the French
Government, declaring that the nation acknowledged
no God, the Old and New Testaments were slain
throughout the limits of Republican France. But
contumelies to the Sacred Books could not have been
wanting, in the general plunder of every place of
worship. In Lyons they were dragged at the tail of an ass
in a procession through the streets....’
“ ‘On the 1st of November, 1793, Gobet, with the
Republican priests of Paris, had thrown off the gown,
and abjured Religion. On the 11th, a “Grand Festival,”
dedicated to “Reason and Truth,” was celebrated in the
Cathedral of Notre Dame, which had been desecrated,
and been named “the Temple of Reason;” a pyramid was
erected in the center of the Church, surmounted by a
temple, inscribed “To philosophy.” The torch of “Truth”
was on the altar of “Reason” spreading light, etc. The
National Convention and all the authorities attended at
this burlesque and insulting ceremony.’ (George Croly,
The Apocalypse of St. John, pp. 175-177.)” Smith, DR,
537.
Fruit of Papal Policy for 1260 Years.—
“The war against the Bible, carried forward for
so many centuries in France, culminated in the scenes
the Revolution. That terrible outbreaking was but the
legitimate result of Rome’s suppression of the
Scriptures. It presented the most striking illustration
which the world has ever witnessed of the working out
of the papal policy—an illustration of the results to
which for more than a thousand years the teaching of the
Roman Church had been tending.” Great Controversy,
265.
“It was popery that had begun the work which
atheism was completing. The policy of Rome had
wrought out those conditions, social, political, and
religious, that were hurrying France on to ruin. Writers,
in referring to the horrors of the Revolution, say that
these excesses are to be charged upon the throne and the
church. In strict justice they are to be charged upon the
church. Popery had poisoned the minds of kings against
the Reformation, as an enemy to the crown, an element
of discord that would be fatal to the peace and harmony
of the nation. It was the genius of Rome that by this
means inspired the direst cruelty and the most galling
oppression which proceeded from the throne.” Great
Controversy, 276.
“The anti-Christian stance of the French
Revolution was a long time developing. Under the
direction of Pope Innocent III in the 1200’s, France
attacked the progressive but ‘heretical’ Albigenses and
committed genocide on them. ...During the Protestant
Reformation in the 1500’s, an estimated 400,000 French
Catholics quickly adopted the Bible-centered doctrines
taught by the French Reformer of Geneva, John Calvin.
How different the country’s history might have been if it
had granted the Huguenots (as the French Protestants
were known) full religious freedom! For a while, the

265

GEMS FROM REVELATION
‘two witnesses’ preached joyously in France; but not for
long. The French kings, encouraged by their bishops
and by many of their nobles, fought no fewer than
eight civil wars against the Protestant Huguenots....
“In October 1685, King Louis XIV formally
revoked the ‘irrevocable’ Edict of Nantes, in the same
act making all the Huguenots outlaws but forbidding
them to leave the country. Some 500,000 (no one
knows the exact number) abandoned their homes and
possessions rather than abandon their faith. ...The
infamous revocation of the Edict of Nantes reduced the
Huguenots ‘to a persecuted, martyr church, to be
proscribed till the eve of the French Revolution, and
drove thousands of their numbers into exile, to the
lasting gain of England, Holland, Prussia, and
America’—and to the everlasting loss of France.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 285,286.
Beast From Bottomless Pit is 6th Head of Rev. 17.—
“Organized atheism in France was the fruitage
of the long period of papal [Babylonian] principles
dominating the society. In Daniel 11:40 this power of
atheism is termed the King of the South [Egypt]. It is
the same power as described here in Rev. 11:7,8.
Organized Atheism arose out of the bottomless pit as a
new power. It is the 6th head of the 7-headed beast in
Rev. 17 that gave the 5th head its deadly wound.” PJ.
The U.S.S.R., China, North Korea, Viet Nam, Cuba:
Continuance of Atheism (Beast from Bottomless Pit).—
“And at the time of the end shall the king of the
south (atheism) push at him (the papacy). Daniel
11:40.
“Militant atheism, however, did not end with
the setting up of the French Republic. The forces of
the godless, so dominant in the revolution, spread north
and east to find a fertile soil. Even more destitute and
downtrodden than the French peasants during the reign
of the last kings of France, was the great nation of the far
north and east. Religion to them was something that
symbolized make-believe and oppression. Is it any
wonder that when that country was plunged into political
revolution in 1917, a vital part of that uprising was an
attack upon religion?” Anderson, UR, 110,111.
The Great City.—
“Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city.” Rev.
14:8. “Alas, alas that great city Babylon, that mighty
city!” Rev. 18:10.
Spiritually Sodom and Egypt.—
“ ‘“Spiritually” this power “is called Sodom.”
What was the characteristic sin of Sodom?
Licentiousness. Did France have this character? She
did; fornication was established by law during this
period spoken of.’ (George Storrs, Midnight Cry, May 4,
1843, Vol. IV, Nos. 5,6, p. 47.)” Smith, DR, 537.
“‘The great city’ in whose streets the witnesses are

slain, and where their dead bodies lie, is ‘spiritually’
Egypt. Of all nations presented in Bible history, Egypt
most boldly denied the existence of the living God
and resisted His commands.
No monarch ever
ventured upon more open and high-handed rebellion
against the authority of Heaven than did the king of
Egypt. When the message was brought him by Moses,
in the name of the Lord, Pharaoh proudly answered:
‘Who is Jehovah, that I should hearken unto His
voice to let Israel go? I know not Jehovah, and
moreover I will not let Israel go.’ Ex. 5:2, A.R.V.
This is atheism, and the nation represented by Egypt
would give voice to a similar denial of the claims of the
living God and would manifest a like spirit of unbelief
and defiance. ‘The great city’ is also compared,
‘spiritually,’ to Sodom. The corruption of Sodom in
breaking the law of God was especially manifested in
licentiousness. And this sin was also to be a preeminent characteristic of the nation that should fulfill the
specifications of this scripture.
“According to the words of the prophet, then, a
little before the year 1798 some power of satanic origin
and character would rise to make war upon the Bible.
And in the land where the testimony of God’s two
witnesses should thus be silenced, there would be
manifest the atheism of the Pharaoh and the
licentiousness of Sodom.” Great Controversy, 269.
“Sodom stood for vice and luxury. See Gen.
19:4-8 and Ezekiel 16:49,50,56-58.
It fittingly
represented the exorbitant luxury and vice of European
nobility and royalty and the orgy of immorality
associated with the French Revolution. (Paris was wide
open, and at least one eighth of all marriageable women
may be estimated to have practiced prostitution.) The
pharaoh of Egypt in Moses’ time en-slaved the Israelites
and scoffed, ‘I do not know the Lord, and moreover I
will not let Israel go.’ Ex. 5:2. Egypt symbolized the
bold skepticism of the philosophes and the blatant deChristianization of the Revolution.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 303.
Spiritually the Place Where Jesus was Crucified.—
“And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying
unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And
he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks.” Acts 9:4,5.
“This specification of the prophecy was also
fulfilled by France. In no land had the spirit of enmity
against Christ been more strikingly displayed. In no
country had the truth encountered more bitter and
cruel opposition. In the persecution which France
had visited upon the confessors of the gospel, she had
crucified Christ in the person of His disciples.
“Century after century the blood of the saints had
been shed. While the Waldenses laid down their lives
upon the mountains of Piedmont ‘for the word of God,
and for the testimony of Jesus Christ,’ similar witness

266

REVELATION 11
to the truth had been borne by their brethren, the
Albigenses of France. In the days of the Reformation
its disciples had been put to death with horrible tortures.
King and nobles, highborn women and delicate maidens,
the pride and chivalry of the nation, had feasted their
eyes upon the agonies of the martyrs of Jesus. The brave
Huguenots, battling for those rights which the human
heart holds most sacred, had poured out their blood on
many a hard-fought field. The Protestants were counted
as outlaws, a price was set upon their heads, and they
were hunted down like wild beasts.” Great Controversy,
271.
“The French Reformers …determined to strike a
bold blow against the superstitions of Rome, that should
arouse the whole nation. Accordingly placards attacking
the mass were in one night [October, 1534] posted all
over France. Instead of advancing the reform, this
zealous but ill-judged movement brought ruin, not only
upon its propagators, but upon the friends of the
reformed faith throughout France. It gave the Romanists
what they had long desired—a pretext for demanding the
utter destruction of the heretics as agitators
dangerous to the stability of the throne and the peace
of the nation.
“By some secret hand—whether of indiscreet
friend or wily foe was never known—one of the placards
was attached to the door of the king’s private chamber.
The monarch [King Francis I] was filled with horror. In
this paper, superstitions that had received the veneration
of ages were attacked with an unsparing hand. And the
unexampled boldness of obtruding these plain and
startling utterances into the royal presence aroused the
wrath of the king. In his amazement he stood for a little
time trembling and speechless. Then his rage found
utterance in the terrible words: ‘Let all be seized without
distinction who are suspected of Lutheresy. I will
exterminate them all.’ Ibid., b. 4, ch. 10. The die was
cast. The king had determined to throw himself fully
on the side of Rome.
“Measures were at once taken for the arrest of
every Lutheran in Paris. A poor artisan, an adherent of
the reformed faith, who had been accustomed to
summon the believers to their secret assemblies, was
seized and, with the threat of instant death at the stake,
was commanded to conduct the papal emissary to the
home of every Protestant in the city. He shrank in horror
from the base proposal, but at last fear of the flames
prevailed, and he consented to become the betrayer
of his brethren. Preceded by the host, and surrounded
by a train of priests, incense bearers, monks, and
soldiers, Morin, the royal detective, with the traitor,
slowly and silently passed through the streets of the city.
The demonstration was ostensibly in honor of the ‘holy
sacrament,’ an act of expiation for the insult put upon the
mass by the protesters. But beneath this pageant a deadly
purpose was concealed. On arriving opposite the house
of a Lutheran, the betrayer made a sign, but no word was
uttered. The procession halted, the house was entered,

the family were dragged forth and chained, and the
terrible company went forward in search of fresh
victims. They ‘spared no house, great or small, not even
the colleges of the University of Paris.... Morin made all
the city quake.... It was a reign of terror.’ --Ibid., b. 4,
ch. 10.0
“The victims were put to death with cruel
torture, it being specially ordered that the fire should be
lowered in order to prolong their agony. But they died as
conquerors. Their constancy were unshaken, their peace
unclouded. Their persecutors, powerless to move their
inflexible firmness, felt themselves defeated. ‘The
scaffolds were distributed over all the quarters of Paris,
and the burnings followed on successive days, the design
being to spread the terror of heresy by spreading the
executions.
The advantage, however, in the end,
remained with the gospel. All Paris was enabled to see
what kind of men the new opinions could produce.
There was no pulpit like the martyr's pile. The serene joy
that lighted up the faces of these men as they passed
along... to the place of execution, their heroism as they
stood amid the bitter flames, their meek forgiveness of
injuries, transformed, in instances not a few, anger into
pity, and hate into love, and pleaded with resistless
eloquence in behalf of the gospel."--Wylie, b. 13, ch. 20.
“The priests, bent upon keeping the popular fury at
its height, circulated the most terrible accusations against
the Protestants. They were charged with plotting to
massacre the Catholics, to overthrow the government,
and to murder the king. Not a shadow of evidence could
be produced in support of the allegations. Yet these
prophecies of evil were to have a fulfillment; under far
different circumstances, however, and from causes of an
opposite character. The cruelties that were inflicted upon
the innocent Protestants by the Catholics accumulated in
a weight of retribution, and in after centuries wrought
the very doom they had predicted to be impending,
upon the king, his government, and his subjects; but
it was brought about by infidels and by the papists
themselves. It was not the establishment, but the
suppression, of Protestantism, that, three hundred years
later, was to bring upon France these dire calamities.
“Suspicion, distrust, and terror now pervaded all
classes of society. Amid the general alarm it was seen
how deep a hold the Lutheran teaching had gained upon
the minds of men who stood highest for education,
influence, and excellence of character. Positions of trust
and honor were suddenly found vacant. Artisans,
printers, scholars, professors in the universities, authors,
and even courtiers, disappeared. Hundreds fled from
Paris, self-constituted exiles from their native land, in
many cases thus giving the first intimation that they
favored the reformed faith. The papists looked about
them in amazement at thought of the unsuspected
heretics that had been tolerated among them. Their rage
spent itself upon the multitudes of humbler victims who
were within their power. The prisons were crowded,
and the very air seemed darkened with the smoke of
burning piles, kindled for the confessors of the gospel.

267

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Francis I had gloried in being a leader in the great
movement for the revival of learning which marked the
opening of the sixteenth century. He had delighted to
gather at his court men of letters from every country. To
his love of learning and his contempt for the ignorance
and superstition of the monks was due, in part at least,
the
degree
of
toleration that had
been granted to the
reform.
But,
inspired with zeal to
stamp out heresy,
this
patron
of
learning issued an
edict
declaring
printing abolished
all over France!
Francis I presents
one among the
many examples on
record showing that
intellectual culture
is not a safeguard
against religious intolerance and persecution.
“France by a solemn and public ceremony was
to commit herself fully to the destruction of
Protestantism. The priests demanded that the affront
offered to High Heaven in the condemnation of the mass
be expiated in blood, and that the king, in behalf of his
people, publicly give his sanction to the dreadful work.
“The 21st of January, 1535, was fixed upon for
the awful ceremonial. The superstitious fears and bigoted
hatred of the whole nation had been roused. Paris was
thronged with the multitudes that from all the
surrounding country crowded her streets. The day was
to be ushered in by a vast and imposing procession.
‘The houses along the line of march were hung with
mourning drapery, and altars rose at intervals.’ Before
every door was a lighted torch in honor of the ‘holy
sacrament.’ Before daybreak the procession formed at
the palace of the king. ‘First came the banners and
crosses of the several parishes; next appeared the
citizens, walking two and two, and bearing torches.’ The
four orders of friars followed, each in its own peculiar
dress. Then came a vast collection of famous relics.
Following these rode lordly ecclesiastics in their purple
and scarlet robes and jeweled adornings, a gorgeous and
glittering array.
“ ‘The host was carried by the bishop of Paris
under a magnificent canopy,... supported by four princes
of the blood.... After the host walked the king.... Francis
I on that day wore no crown, nor robe of state.’ With
‘head uncovered, his eyes cast on the ground, and in his
hand a lighted taper,’ the king of France appeared ‘in the
character of a penitent.’ Ibid., b. 13, ch. 21. At every
altar he bowed down in humiliation, nor for the vices
that defiled his soul, nor the innocent blood that stained
his hands, but for the deadly sin of his subjects who had
dared to condemn the mass. Following him came the
queen and the dignitaries of state, also walking two and

two, each with a lighted torch.
“As a part of the services of the day the monarch
himself addressed the high officials of the kingdom in
the great hall of the bishop’s palace. With a sorrowful
countenance he appeared before them and in words of
moving eloquence bewailed ‘the crime, the blasphemy,
the day of sorrow and disgrace,’ that had come upon the
nation. And he called upon every loyal subject to aid in
the extirpation of the pestilent heresy that threatened
France with ruin. ‘As true, messieurs, as I am your king,’
he said, ‘if I knew one of my own limbs spotted or
infected with this detestable rottenness, I would give it
you to cut off.... And further, if I saw one of my children
defiled by it, I would not spare him.... I would deliver
him up myself, and would sacrifice him to God.’ Tears
choked his utterance, and the whole assembly wept, with
one accord exclaiming: ‘We will live and die for the
Catholic religion!’--D'Aubigne, History of the
Reformation in Europe in the Time of Calvin, b. 4, ch.
12.
“Terrible had become the darkness of the nation
that had rejected the light of truth. The grace ‘that
bringeth salvation’ had appeared; but France, after
beholding its power and holiness, after thousands had
been drawn by its divine beauty, after cities and hamlets
had been illuminated by its radiance, had turned away,
choosing darkness rather than light. They had put from
them the heavenly gift when it was offered them. They
had called evil good, and good evil, till they had fallen
victims to their willful self-deception. Now, though
they might actually believe that they were doing God
service in persecuting His people, yet their sincerity
did not render them guiltless. The light that would have
saved them from deception, from staining their souls
with bloodguiltiness, they had willfully rejected.
“A solemn oath to extirpate heresy was taken in the
great cathedral where, nearly three centuries later, the
Goddess of Reason was to be enthroned by a nation that
had forgotten the living God. Again the procession
formed, and the representatives of France set out to
begin the work which they had sworn to do. ‘At short
distances scaffolds had been erected, on which certain
Protestant Christians were to be burned alive, and it was
arranged that the fagots should be lighted at the moment
the king approached, and that the procession should halt
to witness the execution.’ Wylie, b. 13, ch. 21. The
details of the tortures endured by these witnesses for
Christ are too harrowing for recital; but there was no
wavering on the part of the victims. On being urged to
recant, one answered: ‘I only believe in what the
prophets and the apostles formerly preached, and what
all the company of saints believed. My faith has a
confidence in God which will resist all the powers of
hell.’ D'Aubigne, History of the Reformation in Europe
in the Time of Calvin, b. 4, ch. 12.
“Again and again the procession halted at the
places of torture. Upon reaching their starting point at
the royal palace, the crowd dispersed, and the king and
the prelates withdrew, well satisfied with the day's
proceedings and congratulating themselves that the work

268

REVELATION 11
now begun would be continued to the complete
destruction of heresy.
“The gospel of peace which France had rejected
was to be only too surely rooted out, and terrible would
be the results. On the 21st of January, 1793, two
hundred and fifty-eight years from the very day that
fully committed France to the persecution of the
Reformers, another procession, with a far different
purpose, passed through the streets of Paris. ‘Again
the king was the chief figure; again there were tumult
and shouting; again there was heard the cry for more
victims; again there were black scaffolds; and again the
scenes of the day were closed by horrid executions;
Louis XVI, struggling hand to hand with his jailers and
executioners, was dragged forward to the block, and
there held down by main force till the ax had fallen, and
his dissevered head rolled on the scaffold.’ Wylie, b. 13,
ch. 21. Nor was the king the only victim; near the same
spot two thousand and eight hundred human beings
perished by the guillotine during the bloody days of the
Reign of Terror.
“The Reformation had presented to the world an
open Bible, unsealing the precepts of the law of God and
urging its claims upon the consciences of the people.
Infinite Love had unfolded to men the statutes and
principles of heaven. God had said: ‘Keep therefore and
do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding
in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people.’ Deuteronomy 4:6.
When
France rejected the gift of heaven, she sowed the
seeds of anarchy and ruin; and the inevitable
outworking of cause and effect resulted in the
Revolution and the Reign of Terror.”
Great
Controversy, 224-230.
“The ‘Church in the Desert,’ the few descendants
of the ancient Christians that still lingered in France in
the eighteenth century, hiding away in the mountains
of the south, still cherished the faith of their fathers. As
they ventured to meet by night on mountainside or
lonely moor, they were chased by dragoons and dragged
away to lifelong slavery in the galleys. The purest, the
most refined, and the most intelligent of the French were
chained, in horrible torture, amidst robbers and assassins.
(See Wylie, b. 22, ch.6.) Others, more mercifully dealt
with, were shot down in cold blood, as, unarmed and
helpless, they fell upon their knees in prayer. Hundreds
of aged men, defenseless women, and innocent
children were left dead upon the earth at their place
of meeting. In traversing the mountainside or the forest,
where they had been accustomed to assemble, it was not
unusual to find ‘at every four paces, dead bodies dotting
the sward, and corpses hanging suspended from the
trees.’ Their country, laid waste with the sword, the ax,
the fagot, ‘was converted into one vast, gloomy
wilderness.’ ‘These atrocities were enacted ...in no
dark age, but in the brilliant era of Louis XIV….’—
Ibid., b. 22, ch. 7.
“But the blackest in the black catalogue of

crime, most horrible among the fiendish deeds of all
the dreadful centuries, was the St. Bartholomew
Massacre-[1572].
The world still recalls with
shuddering horror the scenes of that most cowardly and
cruel onslaught. The king of France, urged on by
Romish priests and prelates, lent his sanction to the
dreadful work. A bell, tolling at dead of night, was a
signal for the slaughter. Protestants by thousands,
sleeping quietly in their homes, trusting to the
plighted honor of their king, were dragged forth
without a warning and murdered in cold blood.
“As Christ was the invisible leader of His people
from Egyptian bondage, so was Satan the unseen leader
of his subjects in this horrible work of multiplying
martyrs. For seven days the massacre was continued in
Paris, the first three with inconceivable fury. And it was
not confined to the city itself, but by special order of the
king was extended to all the provinces and towns where
Protestants were found. Neither age nor sex was
respected. Neither the innocent babe nor the man of
gray hairs was spared. Noble and peasant, old and
young, mother and child, were cut down together.
Throughout France the butchery continued for two
months. Seventy thousand of the very flower of the
nation perished.
“ ‘When the news of the massacre reached Rome,
the exultation among the clergy knew no bounds. The
cardinal of Lorraine rewarded the messenger with a
thousand crowns; the cannon of St. Angelo thundered
forth a joyous salute; and bells rang out from every
steeple; bonfires turned night into day; and Gregory
XIII, attended by the cardinals and other ecclesiastical
dignitaries, went in long procession to the church of St.
Louis, where the cardinal of Lorraine chanted a Te
Deum. ...A medal was struck to commemorate the
massacre.’
Henry White, The Massacre of St.
Bartholomew, ch. 14, par. 34.
“The same master spirit that urged on the St.
Bartholomew Massacre led also in the scenes of the
Revolution. Jesus Christ was declared to be an
impostor, and the rallying cry of the French infidels was,
‘Crush the Wretch,’ meaning Christ. Heaven-daring
blasphemy and abominable wickedness went hand in
hand, and the basest of men, the most abandoned
monsters of cruelty and vice, were most highly exalted.
In all this, supreme homage was paid to Satan; while
Christ, in His characteristics of truth, purity, and
unselfish love, was crucified.” Great Controversy, 271273.
“As the Jews, by rejecting the Word of God sent by
the prophets, severed their connection with heaven and
crucified their Lord, so France repeated the sin, and
crucified again the Son of God.” Haskell, SSP, 201.
“Spiritually, our Lord was crucified anew in the
streets of Paris. The motto of the French infidels was,
‘Crush the wretch,’ the wretch referring to Jesus
Christ.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 104.

269

GEMS FROM REVELATION
wound’ to the Papacy.’ Froom, Vol.2, pp.742,743.”
Cooke, #16-UR, 34,35.
Three Days and an Half.—
“For three years and a half, the two witnesses—
the two olive trees, which alone bring life to men or
nation—lay dead in the streets of Paris.” Haskel, SSP,
201.

Medal Struck by Gregory XIII
to Commemorate Massacre of 1572

(The Pope even commissioned Italian artist Vasari to paint a
mural of the Massacre—which still hangs in the Vatican!)

REVELATION 11:9
And they of the people and kindreds
and tongues and nations shall see their dead
bodies three days and an half, and shall not
suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.
Nations Shall See Their Dead Bodies Shall Not Suffer
Them to Be Put in Graves.—
“ ‘The language of this verse denotes the feelings
of other nations than the one committing the outrage on
the witnesses. They would see what war infidel France
had made on the Bible, but would not be led nationally
to engage in the wicked work, nor suffer the murdered
witnesses to be buried, or put out of sight among
themselves, though they lay dead three days and a half,
that is, three years and a half, in France. No; this very
attempt of France served to arouse Christians
everywhere to put forth a new exertion in behalf of
the Bible, as we shall presently see.’ (George Storrs,
Midnight Cry, May 4, 1843, Vol. IV, Nos. 5,6, p. 47.)”
Smith, DR, 538.
“JOSEPH PRIESTLY, (1733-1804), English
clergyman, philosopher and scientist. Authored eighty
works. In February, 1794, he declared on the basis of
Revelation 11, that France was currently fulfilling the
prediction in the French Revolution. Froom, Vol. 2,
p.744.
“GEORGE BELL. In 1796, in the ‘London
Evangelical Magazine’ he declared on the basis of
Revelation 11, that ‘the Gentiles’ of verse 2 were the
papacy; that the ‘earthquake’ of verse 13 was the
French Revolution and the ‘tenth part’ of verse 13
was France. He continued, ‘Have we not seen, in one of
the ten kingdoms, a most astonishing revolution? Have
we not also seen that kingdom fall off of the Papal
jurisdiction? Have we not good ground to hope that
the accomplishment of the prophecies respecting the
rising of the witnesses and the fall of Antichrist is near at
hand?’
One year later, Revolutionary France
restored the scriptures (resurrected the witnesses)
and two years later, France delivered ‘the deadly

“This period may be reckoned from November 26,
1793, when a decree, issued in Paris, abolished religion,
to June 17, 1797, when, it is held, the French
government removed restrictions against the practice of
religion.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 803.

REVELATION 11:10
And they that dwell upon the earth shall
rejoice over them, and make merry, and
shall send gifts one to another; because these
two prophets tormented them that dwelt on
the earth.
They That Dwell Upon the Earth.—
“And they that dwell on the earth shall wonder,
whose names were not written in the book of life….”
Revelation 17:8.
“The book of Revelation makes a distinction
between two groups of people: those who dwell on the
face of the earth, and those who dwell in heaven.
“Notice the following contrast of the two groups of
people in Revelation 13:6,8: ‘And he opened his mouth
in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.’ ‘And
all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him,
whose names are not written in the book of life of the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.’
“Those that dwell on the face of the earth are
those whose focus and attention is on earthly things.
To this class of people the gospel is preached. ‘And I
saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having
the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell
on the earth.’ Rev. 14:6.
“The true Christian dwells by faith with Christ in
heavenly places. ‘But God ...hath quickened us
together with Christ,... and hath raised us up together
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus.’ Eph. 2:4-6. ‘If ye then be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above, where Christ
sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection
on things above, not on things on the earth.’ Col.
3:1,2. (See also Ps. 16:11 and Ps. 91.)
“The Spirit of Prophecy makes the same
distinction:
“‘Upon all who dwell on the face of the whole
earth, upon all who make this world their home, the
day of God will come as a snare. It comes to them as a

270

REVELATION 11
prowling thief.’ Desire of Ages, 635.
“‘By profession you say to the world: My
citizenship is not here but above; while your works
decidedly say that you are a dweller on the earth.’ 4
Testimonies, 51.
“Those that dwell on the earth put the martyrs to
death: ‘How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou
not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell
on the earth?’ Rev. 6:9,10.
“Thus, The Old and New Testaments ‘tormented
them that dwell on the earth’ by condemning their life
of sin.” PJ
“And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness,
and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares.
“For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth.” Luke 21:35.
They That Dwell on the Earth Shall Rejoice Over
Them.—
“Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully
rejoice over me: neither let them wink with the eye that
hate me without a cause.
“Judge me, O LORD my God, according to thy
righteousness; and let them not rejoice over me.”
Psalm 35:19, 24.
“‘France stands apart in the world’s history as the
single state which, by the decree of her Legislative
Assembly, pronounced that there was no God, and of
which the entire population of the capital, and a vast
majority elsewhere, women as well as men, danced
and sang with joy in accepting the announcement.’—
Blackwood’s Magazine, November, 1870.”
Great
Controversy, 270.
“Infidel France had silenced the reproving voice of
God’s two witnesses. The word of truth lay dead in her
streets, and those who hated the restrictions and
requirements of God’s law were jubilant. Men
publicly defied the King of heaven. Like the sinners of
old, they cried: ‘How doth God know? and is there
knowledge in the Most High?’ Psalm 73:11.
“With blasphemous boldness almost beyond belief,
one of the priests of the new order said: ‘God, if You
exist, avenge Your injured name. I bid You defiance!
You remain silent; You dare not launch Your thunders.
Who after this will believe in Your existence?’… What
an echo is this of the Pharaoh’s demand: ‘Who is
Jehovah, that I should obey His voice?’ ‘I know not
Jehovah!’”
“ ‘The fool hath said in his heart, There is no
God.’ Psalm 14:1. And the Lord declares concerning
the perverters of the truth: ‘Their folly shall be
manifest unto all.’ 2 Timothy 3:9. After France had
renounced the worship of the living God, ‘the high and
lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,’ it was only a little
time till she descended to degrading idolatry, by the

worship of the Goddess of Reason, in the person of a
profligate woman. And this in the representative
assembly of the nation, and by its highest civil and
legislative authorities! Says the historian: ‘One of the
ceremonies of this insane time stands unrivaled for
absurdity combined with impiety. The doors of the
Convention were thrown open to a band of musicians,
preceded by whom, the members of the municipal body
entered in solemn procession, singing a hymn in praise
of liberty, and escorting, as the object of their future
worship, a veiled female, whom they termed the
Goddess of Reason. Being brought within the bar, she
was unveiled with great form, and placed on the right of
the president, when she was generally recognized as a
dancing girl of the opera.... To this person, as the
fittest representative of that reason whom they
worshiped, the National Convention of France rendered
public homage.’
“ ‘This impious and ridiculous mummery had a
certain fashion; and the installation of the Goddess of
Reason was renewed and imitated throughout the nation,
in such places where the inhabitants desired to show
themselves equal to all the heights of the Revolution.’—
Scott, vol. 1, ch. 17.
“Said the orator who introduced the worship of
Reason: ‘Legislators! Fanaticism has given way to
reason. Its bleared eyes could not endure the brilliancy
of the light. This day an immense concourse has
assembled beneath those gothic vaults, which, for the
first time, re-echoed the truth. There the French have
celebrated the only true worship—that of Liberty, that of
Reason. There we have formed wishes for the prosperity
of the arms of the Republic. There we have abandoned
inanimate idols for Reason, for that animated image, the
masterpiece of nature.’—M. A. Thiers, History of the
French Revolution….
“When the goddess was brought into the
Convention, the orator took her by the hand, and turning
to the assembly said: ‘Mortals, cease to tremble before
the powerless thunders of a God whom your fears
have created. Henceforth acknowledge no divinity but
Reason. I offer you its noblest and purest image; if you
must have idols, sacrifice only to such as this.... Fall
before the august Senate of Freedom, oh! Veil of
Reason!’
“ ‘The goddess, after being embraced by the
president, was mounted on a magnificent car, and
conducted, amid an immense crowd, to the cathedral of
Notre Dame, to take the place of the Deity. There she
was elevated on the high altar, and received the
adoration of all present.’—Alison, vol. 1, ch. 10. This
was followed, not long afterward, by the public burning
of the Bible.” Great Controversy, 274-276.
“A very large quantity of gold and silver taken
from the churches was sent to Paris, where much of it
was used to pay for the new national army. As
shipments of religious treasure arrived at the capital, ‘the
rabble,’ says a famous French historian, ‘indulging their
taste for the burlesque, caricatured in the most ludicrous

271

GEMS FROM REVELATION
manner the ceremonies of religion, and took as much
delight in profaning as they had formerly done in
celebrating them.’
“...On the second Decade day of Grassy (June
8.1794), Robespierre clothed himself as the prophet, or
priest, or, as his enemies said, the pope, of his new
Revolutionary religion. The day chosen was the Sunday
on which Catholics had planned to honor Pentecost. A
vast crowd followed him in procession.
“We are not discussing a Reformation from
Catholic tradition to the Protestant understanding of the
Bible.
We are watching the convulsions of a
nominally Christian society as it discarded, almost
vomited, the only form of Christianity it had been
permitted to know, and erected in its place a form of
paganism. ‘For the first time in European history since
the days of the [Roman] Emperor Julian the Apostate a
state deliberately embarked on a policy of deChristianization.’” Maxwell, God Cares, 288,289,290.
“Great was the joy of infidels everywhere for
awhile. But “the triumphing of the wicked is short”
[Job 20:5], so was it in France, for their war on the Bible
and Christianity had well-nigh swallowed them all up.
They set out to destroy Christ’s “two witnesses,” but
they filled France with blood and horror, so that they
were horror-struck at the result of their wicked
deeds, and were glad to remove their impious hands
from the Bible.’ (George Storrs, Midnight Cry, May 4,
1843, Vol. IV, Nos. 5,6, p. 47.)” Smith, DR, 539.
Because These Two Prophets Tormented Them.—
“The world loves sin, and hates righteousness, and
this was the cause of its hostility to Jesus. All who
refuse His infinite love will find Christianity a
disturbing element. The light of Christ sweeps away
the darkness that covers their sins, and the need of
reform is made manifest. While those who yield to the
influence of the Holy Spirit begin war with themselves,
those who cling to sin war against the truth and its
representatives. Thus strife is created, and Christ’s
followers are accused as troublers of the people.” Desire
of Ages, 306.

REVELATION 11:11
And after three days and an half the
Spirit of life from God entered into them,
and they stood upon their feet; and great
fear fell upon them which saw them.
Two Witnesses are Resurrected After 3 1/2 Years.—
“God’s faithful witnesses, slain by the blasphemous
power that ‘ascendeth out of the bottomless pit,’ were
not long to remain silent. ‘After three days and a half
the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and
they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon
them which saw them.’ Revelation 11:11. It was in
1793 that the decrees which abolished the Christian

religion and set aside the Bible passed the French
Assembly. Three years and a half later a resolution
rescinding these decrees, thus granting toleration to
the Scriptures, was adopted by the same body. The
world stood aghast at the enormity of guilt which had
resulted from a rejection of the Sacred Oracles, and men
recognized the necessity of faith in God and His word as
the foundation of virtue and morality. Saith the Lord:
‘Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and
against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted
up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of
Israel.’ Isaiah 37:23.” Great Controversy, 287.
“ ‘On the 17th of June, Camille Jourdan [president]
in the “Council of Five Hundred,” brought up the
memorable report on the “Revision of the laws relative
to religious worship.” It consisted of a number of
propositions, abolishing alike the Republican restrictions
on Popish worship, and the Popish restrictions on
Protestant.
“ ‘1. That all citizens might buy or hire edifices for
the free exercise of religious worship.
“ ‘...6. That all other laws concerning religious
worship should be repealed.
“ ‘Those regulations, in comprehending the whole
state of worship in France, were, in fact, a peculiar boon
to Protestantism....”
“ ‘The Church and the Bible had been slain in
France from November, 1793, till June, 1797. The
three years and a half were expended, and the Bible,
so long and so sternly repressed before, was placed in
honor, and was openly the book of free
Protestantism!’ (George Croly, The Apocalypse of St.
John, pp. 181-183.)” Smith, DR, 539,540.
The Spirit of Life Enters Into Them.—
“Here we see how the dead are brought back to
life. When the two witnesses died their spirits (breath
of life) went back to God who gave it. Their dead
bodies remained on earth. This the Bible teaches. See
Psalm 146:4, Daniel 12:2, and Ec. 12:7.
“Now, in this verse, the Spirit of life returns from
God to their dead bodies and they are resurrected to
life. Dr. Luke teaches this as well: “And they laughed
him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. And He put
them all out, and took her by the hand, and called,
saying, Maid, arise. And her spirit came again, and
she arose straightway: and He commanded to give her
meat.” Luke 8:53-55.’” PJ
Great Fear.—
“Psalm 14 and 53 describe the experience of the
French Revolution. The psalms are identical except for
verse 5:
“The fool [the atheist] hath said in his heart,
There is no God. They are corrupt, they have done
abominable works, there is none that doeth good.
2 The LORD looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand, and seek God.

272

REVELATION 11
3 They are all gone aside, they are all together
become filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
4 Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge?
who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not
upon the LORD.
5 There were they in great fear: for God is in
the generation of the righteous.
[5 There were they in great fear, where no fear
was: for God hath scattered the bones of him that
encampeth against thee: [the righteous] thou hast put
them to shame, because God hath despised them. Psalm
53:5.
During the French Revolution, Paris experienced a
great church cemetery land grab. Skeletons of countless
Parisians were dug up and carefully stacked along miles
of tunnels beneath the city.]
6 Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because
the LORD is his refuge.
7 Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of
Zion! when the LORD bringeth back the captivity of
his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be
glad.” Psalm 14.

REVELATION 11:12
And they heard a great voice from
heaven saying unto them, Come up hither.
And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud;
and their enemies beheld them.
Ascended Up to Heaven.—
“ ‘To understand this expression, see Daniel 4:22:
“Thy greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven.”
Here we see that the expression signifies great
exaltation.’ (George Storrs, Midnight Cry, May 4, 1843,
Vol. IV, Nos. 5,6, p. 47.)” Smith, DR, 540,541.
They Ascended Up to Heaven.—
“Concerning the two witnesses the prophet declares
further: ‘And they heard a great voice from heaven
saying unto them, Come up hither. And they
ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies
beheld them.’ Revelation 11:12. Since France made
war upon God’s two witnesses, they have been honored
as never before. In 1804 the British and Foreign Bible
Society was organized. This was followed by similar
organizations, with numerous branches, upon the
continent of Europe. In 1816 the American Bible
Society was founded. When the British Society was
formed, the Bible had been printed and circulated in fifty
tongues. It has since been translated into many hundreds
of languages and dialects.
“For the fifty years preceding 1792, little attention
was given to the work of foreign missions. No new
societies were formed, and there were but few churches
that made any effort for the spread of Christianity in
heathen lands. But toward the close of the eighteenth
century a great change took place. Men became

dissatisfied with the results of rationalism and realized
the necessity of divine revelation and experimental
religion. From this time the work of foreign missions
attained an unprecedented growth.
“The improvements in printing have given an
impetus to the work of circulating the Bible. The
increased facilities for communication between different
countries, the breaking down of ancient barriers of
prejudice and national exclusiveness, and the loss of
secular power by the pontiff of Rome have opened the
way for the entrance of the word of God. For some
years the Bible has been sold without restraint in the
streets of Rome, and it has now been carried to every
part of the habitable globe.
“The infidel Voltaire once boastingly said: ‘I am
weary of hearing people repeat that twelve men
established the Christian religion. I will prove that one
man may suffice to overthrow it.’ Generations have
passed since his death. Millions have joined in the war
upon the Bible. But it is so far from being destroyed,
that where there were a hundred in Voltaire’s time,
there are now ten thousand, yes, a hundred thousand
copies of the book of God. In the words of an early
Reformer concerning the Christian church, ‘The Bible is
an anvil that has worn out many hammers.’ Saith the
Lord: ‘No weapon that is formed against thee shall
prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee
in judgment thou shalt condemn.’ Isaiah 54:17.
“ ‘The word of our God shall stand forever.’
‘All His commandments are sure. They stand fast for
ever and ever, and are done in truth and
uprightness.’ Isaiah 40:8; Psalm 111:7, 8. Whatever
is built upon the authority of man will be overthrown;
but that which is founded upon the rock of God’s
immutable word shall stand forever.”
Great
Controversy, 287,288.
“The whole Bible has been translated into a total of
383 languages. Portions of the Bible have been
translated into more than 2,000 languages.” United
Bible Societies, Web Site, 6/2005.
“The French Revolution of 1789 acted as a sort of
spark.
Its antireligious attitude rebounded and
encouraged the unfolding of a great awakening in the
heart of Christendom. In different countries, yet at the
same time, Bible students concluded that humanity had
reached the last phase of history and that the Second
Coming was near. To increase the dissemination of the
Scriptures, numerous Bible societies were formed. …At
the beginning of the nineteenth century a host of
missionaries carried the gospel to the ends of the
earth. One of the first, William Carey left for India in
1793. Robert Morrison went to China in 1807. Robert
Moffatt (1816) as well as David Livingstone (1841)
pioneered work in Africa. And hundreds of others
followed in their footsteps.” Zurcher, COR, 53.
“Before all nations the Scriptures have since been
exalted. Those nations, which adhered most closely to

273

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the truths developed in the withdrawal from Roman
tyranny, have taken the lead in the work of
education, in invention, in judiciary matters, and in
all lines of progress. ...Millions of copies of the Word
have been printed. Its translation into hundreds of
different languages has placed ignorance of the
Scriptures entirely out of the question.
“...The exaltation of the Scriptures is always
followed by a government which recognizes the equal
rights of all men, and by a religion which grants the
privilege to every man to worship according to the
dictates of his own conscience. Men who advocate a
system of government that rejects the atoning blood of
Christ, or an educational system which exalts reason
above faith, place themselves on the very verge of a
precipice, and the next step will produce a repetition of
the Terrors of France.” Haskel, SSP, 202,203.

REVELATION 11:13
And the same hour was there a great
earthquake, and the tenth part of the city
fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men
seven thousand: and the remnant were
affrighted, and gave glory to the God of
heaven.
A Great Earthquake.—
“The Revolution of 1798 is spoken of as ‘a great
earthquake.’” Haskel, SSP, 203.
“Unhappy France reaped in blood the harvest she
had sown. Terrible were the results of her sub-mission
to the controlling power of Rome. Where France, under
the influence of Romanism, had set up the first stake at
the opening of the Reformation, there the Revolution set
up its first guillotine. On the very spot where the first
martyrs to the Protestant faith were burned in the
sixteenth century, the first victims were guillotined in
the eighteenth. In repelling the gospel, which would
have brought her healing, France had opened the door to
infidelity and ruin. When the restraints of God's law
were cast aside, it was found that the laws of man
were inadequate to hold in check the powerful tides
of human passion; and the nation swept on to revolt
and anarchy. The war against the Bible inaugurated an
era which stands in the world’s history as the Reign of
Terror. Peace and happiness were banished from the
homes and hearts of men. No one was secure. He who
triumphed today was suspected, condemned, tomorrow.
Violence and lust held undisputed sway.
“King, clergy, and nobles were compelled to
submit to the atrocities of an excited and maddened
people. Their thirst for vengeance was only stimulated
by the execution of the king; and those who had decreed
his death soon followed him to the scaffold.” Great
Controversy, 282,283.

The Reign of Terror.
Thousands, including many of the nobility and
Clergy perished during The Reign of Terror.
“When France publicly rejected God and set aside
the Bible, wicked men and spirits of darkness exulted in
their attainment of the object so long desired—a
kingdom free from the restraints of the law of God.
Because sentence against an evil work was not speedily
executed, therefore the heart of the sons of men was
‘fully set in them to do evil.’ Ecclesiastes 8:11. But
the transgression of a just and righteous law must
inevitably result in misery and ruin. Though not visited
at once with judgments, the wickedness of men was
nevertheless surely working out their doom. Centuries
of apostasy and crime had been treasuring up wrath
against the day of retribution; and when their iniquity
was full, the despisers of God learned too late that it is a
fearful thing to have worn out the divine patience. The
restraining Spirit of God, which imposes a check upon
the cruel power of Satan, was in a great measure
removed, and he whose only delight is the wretchedness
of men was permitted to work his will. Those who had
chosen the service of rebellion were left to reap its fruits
until the land was filled with crimes too horrible for pen
to trace. From devastated provinces and ruined cities
a terrible cry was heard—a cry of bitterest anguish.
France was shaken as if by an earthquake. Religion,
law, social order, the family, the state, and the church—
all were smitten down by the impious hand that had been
lifted against the law of God. Truly spoke the wise man:
‘The wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.’
‘Though a sinner do evil a hundred times, and his
days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be
well with them that fear God, which fear before Him:
but it shall not be well with the wicked.’ Prov. 11:5;
Ecclesiastes 8:12, 13. ‘They hated knowledge, and
did not choose the fear of the Lord;’ ‘therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices.’ Proverbs 1:29, 31.” Great
Controversy, 286.
“Historians dealing with this historic event
commonly bring into use the phrase, ‘the earth-quake
of the French Revolution,’ to describe the scenes of
that unparalleled upheaval. Burke, in England, three
years before, had forecast events in France as leading on

274

REVELATION 11
toward an ‘earthquake in the political world.’ As it
came, Alison, the historian says: ‘The minds of men
were shaken as by the yawning of the ground during the
fury of an earthquake.’” Burnside, RWU, 136,137.
A Tenth Part of the City Fell.—
“ ‘What city? (See Revelation 17:18: “The
woman which thou sawest is that great city which
reigneth over the kings [kingdoms] of the earth.”)
That city is the papal Roman power. France is one of
the “ten horns” that gave “their power and strength
unto the [papal] beast;” or is one of the ten kingdoms
that arose out of the Western Empire of Rome, as
indicated by the ten toes of Nebuchadnezzar’s image,
Daniel’s ten-horned beast [Daniel 7:24], and John’s tenhorned dragon. [Revelation 12:3.] France, then was “a
tenth part of the city,” and was one of the strongest
ministers of papal vengeance; but in this revolution it
“fell,” and with it fell the last civil messenger of papal
fury.’ (George Storrs, Midnight Cry, May 4, 1843, Vol.
IV, Nos. 5,6, p. 48.)” Smith, DR, 542.
Tenth Part of City Identified in 1687!—
“Peter Jurieu, exiled minister of the French church
at Rotterdam, writing some time before 1687 [two years
after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes—1685], said:
‘Now what is this tenth part of the city, which shall
fall? In my opinion we cannot doubt that ‘tis France.
This kingdom is the most considerable part, or piece, of
the ten horns, or states, which once made up the great
Babylonian city.... This tenth part of the city shall fall,
with respect to the Papacy; it shall break with Rome,
and the Roman religion.’—‘The Accomplishment of the
Scripture Prophecies,’ part 2, chap.13, pp. 264,265.
London, 1687.” Burnside, RWU, 137.
The Remainder of the City (9/10) Falls Later.—
“This is not the final earthquake, for only a
fraction of the city ...falls at this time (cf. ch. 16:18).
This earthquake signifies a temporary judgment that
frightens into submission some of those who have
gloried in the death of the witnesses.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 804.
“Spiritualism asserts that men are unfallen
demigods; that ‘each mind will judge itself;’ that ‘true
knowledge places men above all law;’ that ‘all sins
committed are innocent;’ for ‘whatever is, is right,’ and
‘God doth not condemn.’ The basest of human beings it
represents as in heaven, and highly exalted there. Thus it
declares to all men, ‘It matters not what you do; live as
you please, heaven is your home.’ Multitudes are thus
led to believe that desire is the highest law, that license is
liberty, and that man is accountable only to himself.
“With such teaching given at the very outset of
life, when impulse is strongest, and the demand for selfrestraint and purity is most urgent, where are the
safeguards of virtue? what is to prevent the world
from becoming a second Sodom?
“At the same time anarchy is seeking to sweep

away all law, not only divine, but human. The
centralizing of wealth and power; the vast combinations
for the enriching of the few at the expense of the many;
the combinations of the poorer classes for the defense of
their interests and claims; the spirit of unrest, of riot and
bloodshed; the world-wide dissemination of the same
teachings that led to the French Revolution—all are
tending to involve the whole world in a struggle
similar to that which convulsed France.” Education,
237,238.
“Let all who would understand the meaning of
these things read the eleventh chapter of Revelation.
Read every verse, and learn the things that are yet to
take place in the cities. Read also the scenes portrayed
in the eighteenth chapter of the same book.” 21MR, 91.
“The final earthquake occurs when all 10 horns
turn against the papacy in the 7th plague. See Rev.
17:16.” PJ
In the Earthquake Were Slain of Men [margin, names
of men] Seven Thousand.—
“The margin reads ‘names of men’. Undoubtedly,
this term refers to the titles of men that were associated
with the aristocracy. Did the French Revolution abolish
the titles of men that were so divisive in French society?
Note the decree of June 19, 1790:
“ ‘Hereditary nobility is forever abolished: in
consequence the titles of prince, duke, count,
marquis, viscount, vidame, baron, knight, messive,
ecyler, noble and all other similar titles shall neither
be taken by anyone whomsoever, nor given to
anybody.’ Sir Robert Anderson. ‘Constitution and
Selected Documents’, p.33.” Cooke, #16-UR, 19.
“Not only was the reign of papal tyranny at an end,
but the power of the monarchy was shaken; and the vast
army of nobles, which some historians give as seven
thousand, lost their titles. The government was in the
hands of the middle classes, or the common people.”
Haskel, SSP, 203.
And the Remnant Were Affrighted, and Gave Glory to
the God of Heaven.—
“‘Their God-dishonoring and Heaven-defying work
filled France with such scenes of blood, carnage, and
horror, as made even the infidels themselves to tremble,
and stand aghast; and the “remnant” that escaped the
horrors of that hour “gave glory to God”—not
willingly, but the God of heaven caused this “wrath of
man to praise Him,” by giving all the world to see that
those who make war on heaven make graves for
themselves; thus glory redounded to God by the very
means that wicked men employed to tarnish that glory.’
(George Storrs, Midnight Cry, May 4, 1843, Vol. IV,
Nos. 5,6, p. 48.)” Smith, DR, 542.
Legacy of the French Revolution.—
“The French Revolution deserves a place in

275

GEMS FROM REVELATION
prophecy! It has had a most significant influence on the
world in which we and our families live today. More
than any other single factor, it changed world history by
(1) inducing the spirit of modern nationalism and by
(2) producing modern universal conscription,
leading, in turn, to (3) the immense armies and
drastically murderous wars that characterize our
times....
“In addition to conscription, huge national
armies, and staggering casualties, another continuing
legacy of the French Revolution is (4) Communism.
Karl Marx in defining Communism, and Lenin and
Trotsky in preparing for the violent Bolshevik
Revolution of 1917, carefully analyzed the course of
the French Revolution. In the process they learned all
too well a related lesson taught by the Frenchman Jean
Jacques Rousseau. This was the doctrine that a minority
who know what’s best for the people should impose
themselves on the majority for their own good. Today
only 5 percent of all Soviet citizens are members of the
ruling Communist party. Says Professor Palmer, ‘The
Communist movement would never have taken form as
it did except for the prior occurrence of the French
Revolution.’
“ ‘We are in no position as yet,’ writes the
respected British historian, V.H.H. Green, ‘to measure
the full impact of the French Revolution on the course of
world history. It was one of those decisive events which
opened a sluice-gate, and in the streams it released we
are still swimming, sometimes finding it difficult to keep
our head above the waters.’
“...Professor Green’s words are all too fitting.
Indeed, we live with yet another serious sequel to the
French Revolution, anti-Christian atheism.
Today
[1980’s], roughly one fourth of the human race is
ruled by atheistic (Marxist) governments.” Maxwell,
God Cares, 281,284.

REVELATION 11:14
The second woe is past; and behold, the
third woe cometh quickly.
The Third Woe Cometh Quickly.—
“The series of seven trumpets is here again
resumed. The second woe ended with the sixth
trumpet, August 11, 1840, and the third woe occurs
under the sounding of the seventh trumpet, which began
in 1844.
“Then where are we? ‘Behold!’ that is to say,
mark it well, ‘the third woe cometh quickly.’ The
fearful scenes of the second woe are past, and we are
now under the sounding of the trumpet that brings
the third and last woe. Shall we now look for peace
and safety, a temporal millennium, a thousand years of
righteousness and prosperity on earth? Rather let us
earnestly pray the Lord to awaken a slumbering world.”
Smith, DR, 542,543.

“The little period between 1840 and 1844, during
which the message of Rev. 10:1-11 was delivered, was
the time between the close of the sixth trumpet and the
sounding of the seventh.” Haskel, SSP, 204.
The Power of This Verse on the Second Advent
Movement Before the Disappointment.—
“Mark, this short space of time called ‘quickly,’ is
the whole period of time from the passing of the second
woe and sixth angel, to the commencing of the third
woe, and sounding of the seventh angel. This space of
time called quickly, defines the time to announce to
every nation and kindred and tongue and people that
Christ is coming, by the proclamation of the angel’s
message in Rev. 14: 6, 7. This is in accordance with the
testimony of the Saviour. Matt. 24: 3,14.
“No marvel, then, that those who had been looking
with intense anxiety for the passing away of the Ottoman
Supremacy, saw with such clearness that the time had
come for a body of people to proclaim the message in
question from thence down to the ending of the
prophetic periods of Daniel’s vision. And that the time
had then come for this message to go to every nation,
was still further demonstrated by a call for a Secondadvent Conference to be held in Boston about the
time the Ottoman empire lost its supremacy, and
many weeks before the news of its fall reached the
United States. At the close of this Conference, which
was convened a few weeks after the call, in October,
1840, an address of the Conference setting forth their
views respecting the second advent of our Lord, was sent
forth to the world, and from thence the work continued
until the message ended in the autumn of 1844.” Bates,
Autobiography, 173.
“When the Ottoman Empire fell in 1840, God’s
people saw that the third woe of the 7th trumpet would
soon come. At that time they thought that Jesus would
come when the 7th trumpet sounded. Indeed, the close
of the 2300 day prophecy of Daniel 8:14 was only four
years away. ‘Quickly,’ seemed to suggest a period of
four years’ probation for mankind. Josiah Litch,
sensing that time was short, gave the following appeal:
“ ‘When the second woe is past the third woe
cometh quickly. And when the seventh trumpet sounds,
the day of grace will be past. ...Reader, are you out of
the ark of safety? Then you have no time to lose in
seeking that refuge. Behold the Judge standeth before
the door? Time is short! The last plagues, the seven
vials in which is filled up the wrath of God will soon
be poured out, when all who have not the seal of God
upon them will feel the fierceness of that wrath.
“ ‘Professor, have you your lamp trimmed and
burning? Have you oil in your vessel with your lamp?
Have you on the wedding garment? And are you like the
good and faithful servant who is watching for the
Bridegroom? Look well to yourselves, lest when he
cometh your lamps should be gone out and while you are
gone to buy oil he enters in and the door be shut.’ Litch,
Signs, 2/1/1841.” PJ.

276

REVELATION 11

Woe and Trumpet the Same.—
“When the fifth angel had sounded 150 years the
first woe passed, 9. chap. 1,12. When the sixth angel had
sounded 391 years and 15 days, the second woe passed.
9:13; 11:14…. What I wish to show here is, that
there is no distinction between the woes and
trumpets. I think no one will be able to show any.
Therefore the three woes and the three trumpets are the
same.
The messengers in examining this subject
declared that the sixth trumpet ceased to sound and the
second woe passed on the 11th day of August, 1840.”
Bates, Waymarks, 89.
The Third Woe.—
“The seven angels are represented as receiving the
vials of the wrath of God—the seven last plagues—
after the opening of the Temple of God in heaven. If we
turn to Rev. 11:15-19, we shall find that the opening of
the Temple in heaven is an event that transpires under
the sounding of the seventh angel. And that account
concludes with a brief statement of the events of the
seventh vial, or last plague. Now if we turn to chap.
15:5-8, and 16:1-21, we shall read an expanded view of
the facts stated in chap. 11:15-19, and we shall find that
the two accounts conclude in the same manner, viz., with
the events of the last plague. These scriptures show
that the seven angels do not receive the vials of the
wrath of God to pour out upon the earth until the
Temple in heaven is opened. That Temple is opened
under the voice of the seventh angel. The third woe is
by reason of the voice of the seventh angel. Rev. 8:13;
9:12; 11:14. The seven plagues are poured out under the
sounding of that angel; hence the plagues are future,
and constitute the third woe.” Andrews, TAM, 116.
“The third woe comes by reason of the voice of the
seventh angel. Rev.8:13. The seven last plagues come
under the seventh trumpet. Rev.11:15-19; 15:5-8. The
seven plagues which fill up the wrath of God do
therefore constitute the third woe. The people of God
will not be removed from the earth till after six of the
plagues have been poured out. They must witness the
fearful scenes of the time of trouble. But the seal of the
living God will be their protection, so that though a
thousand fall at their side and ten thousand at their right
hand, it will not come nigh them. Ps.91:1-10. The
situation of the saints during the outpouring of the
plagues will be like that of Israel during the plagues
upon Egypt.” Andrews, JEO, 93.

THE SEVENTH TRUMPET
REVELATION 11:15-17
And the seventh angel sounded; and
there were great voices in heaven, saying,
The kingdoms of this world are become the

kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ;
and he shall reign for ever and ever.
And the four and twenty elders, which
sat before God on their seats, fell upon their
faces, and worshipped God,
Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord
God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art
to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy
great power, and hast reigned.
The Seventh Trumpet Brings Down the Last Phase of
the Fourth Empire [Papal Rome] and Establishes the
Fifth Kingdom of Jesus Christ.—

The Blowing of the 7 Trumpets
at the Fall of Jericho.
“As the sounding of the 7 Trumpets brought down
Jericho to allow the children to enter the Promised Land,
so the sounding of the 7 Trumpets of Revelation brings
down the empire of Rome that impedes the
establishment of Christ’s 5th kingdom. The seven
trumpets mark the key battles that bring down the fourth
world empire—[Rome in both phases, Pagan and Papal].
The seventh trumpet, like in the days of Joshua and
the Fall of Jericho, includes a seven-fold blast—the
seven last plagues.” PJ
“Under the seventh trumpet great Babylon
entire will sink to rise no more at all.” White, James,
SST, iii.
“With what do these [seven] trumpets deal?
With the wars, commotions, and political upheavals
which result in the breaking up and downfall of the
Roman Empire—the first four with the downfall of
Western Rome, the fifth and sixth with the downfall of
Eastern Rome, and the seventh with the final downfall
of Rome in its broadest sense, or all the kingdoms of
the world.” Bible Readings for the Home, 289.
(See additional comments on Rev. 8:2, 10:2.)
There Were Great Voices in Heaven.—
“By this we understand that the testimony and faith

277

GEMS FROM REVELATION
of the church is symbolized, in probationary time. If it
be urged that these voices are to be heard only in
heaven, we would ask, How many kingdoms there
are, or will there be in heaven? The answer must be,
But one. It is evident then, that the voices are to be
heard in this world, in probationary time, where the
‘kingdoms’ (plural) are.” White, James, The Seventh
Angel, R&H, 3/7/1854.
The Kingdoms of This World are Become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of His Christ.—
“The kings of the earth set themselves, and the
rulers take counsel together, against the LORD, and
against his anointed [Christ], saying, Let us break their
bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.”
Psalm 2:2,3.
“We think the seventh angel, or third woe-trumpet,
began to sound in 1844. According to the position taken
on the sixth trumpet, that ceased to sound Aug. 11, 1840,
at the downfall of the Turkish Empire. Concerning this
event, Inspiration says, ‘The second woe is past,
behold, the third woe cometh QUICKLY.’ Rev.
11:14. In 1844 Christ changed his position in the
heavenly sanctuary, preparatory to its cleansing, as
predicted, Dan. 8:14, at the ending of the 2300 days.
When the seventh angel sounds it is said, ‘And there
were great voices in Heaven, saying, The kingdoms of
this world ARE BECOME the kingdoms OF OUR
LORD, and of HIS CHRIST.’ Rev. 11:15. We think
Daniel the prophet speaks of the same event, chap.
7:13,14, ‘I saw in the night visions, and behold, one
like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven,
and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought
him near before him. And there WAS GIVEN HIM
DOMINION, and glory, and A KINGDOM, that all
people, nations, and languages should SERVE HIM.’
Doubtless the parable of the nobleman refers to the same
fact. ‘A certain nobleman went into a far country to
receive for himself A KINGDOM, and to return....
And it came to pass when he returned, having
RECEIVED THE KINGDOM,’ &c. Luke 19:12,15.
The foregoing we think plainly refers to the work which
takes place at the commencement of the sounding of the
seventh trumpet, when Christ changed his position in
the heavenly temple, and consequently assumed
different relations to mankind at large.” SDA Pub. Ass.,
1875, TST, 94,95.
“A kingdom can never be truly said to pass into the
hands of another power, while either the territory, the
capital, or the subjects, are beyond its control. It takes
the three: subjects, capital, and territory, to make the
full kingdom. The work of the investigative judgment,
is Christ making up the number of the subjects, or in
other words, taking one-third part of His kingdom; when
the judgment is ended, then is given to Him the Holy
City, the capital of His kingdom—the second third part.
When He comes to the earth, He takes possession of the
territory, and possesses the kingdom in all its fullness

forever.
“The enrollment for the new kingdom is made
by Christ in the presence of the Father, while angels
are watching. The books are open, the judgment
begins; the measuring reed is applied to character-ter.
Christ offers the prayers of all His saints—those whose
names are written in the book of life—together with the
fragrant incense of His own righteous life; in this way
the heirs of the kingdom are enrolled.” Haskel, SSP,
204,205.
“When Christ’s kingdom shall be established
‘under the whole heavens,’ it will be one kingdom;
but there is a sense in which the kingdoms (plural) of
this world become Christ’s before they are dashed to
pieces, to give place to the immortal king-dom. We may
learn this from Dan. 7:13,14; Ps. 2:8,9. And with the
scriptural view of the Sanctuary and priesthood of Christ
before us, we are led to apply these texts to the end of
the 2300 days in 1844, from which point we date the
sounding of the seventh angel. We cannot here dwell
on this point at length; but it seems evident that the
period for the ‘voices’ here mentioned, is the same as
that of the third angel. Rev. 14:9-12.” White, James,
The Seventh Angel, R&H, 3/7/1854.
“Since 1844, we have been living in the days of the
seventh trumpet. In 1844, ‘the temple of God was
opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple
the ark of his testament.’ Rev. 11:19. Then, as God’s
people gazed upon this beautiful scene in the heavenly
sanctuary, the ten commandments were brought to view,
and in that law of liberty, shone the Sabbath
commandment. This was the lost flag of God’s power!
The sign of God’s kingdom was restored to His church.
As the Sabbath is preached more fully during the loud
cry of the Third Angel’s Message, events belonging to
this last trumpet will bring down the last phase of the
fourth world empire—Papal Rome—and usher the
establishment of Christ’s fifth everlasting kingdom.
‘The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and He
shall reign for ever and ever.’ Rev. 11:15.” PJ
“The Kingdoms of this world are soon to be-come
the kingdoms of our Lord.
‘The seventh angel
sounded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ; and He shall
reign forever and ever.’ There is to be a rapid and
triumphant spread of the gospel. ‘And the temple of
God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in His
temple the ark of His testament; and there were
lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an
earthquake, and great hail.
“The ark of God’s testament, covered by the mercy
seat was seen in His temple. What does this ark
contain?—The law of God. Moses was directed to make
an ark, in which was to be placed the law of God, written
with His own finger upon the tables of stone. This law

278

REVELATION 11
God gave for the guidance of his people, and it was
stamped with the assurance, staked upon His almighty
power, that He had entered into covenant relation with
them. Today God makes a covenant with all who will
take their stand as loyal subjects of His kingdom,
reverencing the law that occupies so prominent a
position, beneath the mercy seat.
“The ark is a representation of the keeping power
of God. In it the law is kept. And today there comes to
us John’s testimony, ‘The temple of God was opened
in heaven, and there was seen in His temple the ark of
His testament.’” Battle Creek Letters, 57.
Coronation of Christ Announced.—
“The coronation of Christ is announced by the
great voices in heaven, and by the words of the
twenty four elders. Rev.11:15-17. This succeeds the
close of his priesthood. When Christ begins his reign, he
is invested by the Father with that power which Satan
usurped from Adam the first. The reign of the second
Adam is the re-establishment of the empire of God in
this revolted province. Christ does not take his own
throne to rule his enemies with a rod of iron till he has
closed up his priestly office at his Father‟s right hand.”
Andrews, JEO, 54.
“The seventh trumpet, like the preceding six,
covers a period of time, and the transfer of the
kingdoms from earthly powers to Him whose right it is
to reign, is the principal event to occur.” Smith, DR,
543.
And He Shall Reign Forever and Ever.—
“From the fifteenth verse to the end of the chapter,
we seem to be carried over the ground three distinct
times from the sounding of the seventh angel to the
end.” Smith, DR, 543.
Seventh Trumpet—A Military Conquest.—
“This [vs. 15] is a picture of Christ conquering
the world through military conquest, though of quite
a different sort than brought to view under the other
trumpets. That this is so can be seen from the fact that
this verse is an allusion to Psalm 2.
“ ‘The kings of the earth set themselves, and the
rulers take counsel together, against the LORD, and
against his anointed.’ Psalm 2:2.
“Since the word ‘Christ’ means ‘anointed,’ the
phrases ‘our Lord, and of his Christ’ and ‘the LORD,
and against His anointed’ are essentially the same,
though using different prepositions.
“Revelation’s idea of the Lord and His Christ
taking over the kingdoms of the world is found in Ps,
2:8: ‘Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession.’
“The very next verse says, ‘Thou shalt break
them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in
pieces like a potter’s vessel.’ (Ps. 2:9).
“This prophecy also in referred to in Revelation:
“And behold a white horse; and He that sat upon him

was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness
He doth judge and make war…. And the armies
which were in heaven followed him upon white
horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. And
out of His mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it He
should smite the nations: and He shall rule them
with a rod of iron.’ Rev. 19:11-15.
“Here the second coming of Christ is pictured as
Christ leading a heavenly army to battle to take over
the kingdoms of this world, an event predicted in
Psalm 2 and referred to in Rev. 11:15. Thus, the
seventh trumpet also is connected with military
conquest.” Pickle, STR, Part 8.
The Seventh Trumpet is not “The Last Trump.”—
“But is not the last trumpet of John‟s series of
seven the same as Paul‟s last trump? The reasons which
forbid their identity are perfectly conclusive. The
seventh trumpet is the last of a series, no one of which is
literally heard by the inhabitants of the earth. It is the
accomplishment of certain events that indicates the
transition from one of the seven angels to another. The
seventh is like each of the preceding six in that it is the
trumpet of an angel, and in that it is a symbolic and not a
literal trumpet. Revelation 8, 9, 10, 11. But the trumpet
which awakens the dead is not blown by an angel, but
by the Son of God himself. It is not a symbolic
trumpet, for it is literally heard by the inhabitants of
the earth. Matt.24:31; Zech.9:14-16; 1Thess.4:14-17. It
is called the last trump because when the Almighty
descended upon Mount Sinai, in glory and majesty, like
our Lord‟s second advent (Ex.19:16-19; Heb.12:18-27;
Matt.16:27; 2Thess. 1:7,8), the trump of God was heard,
as it will be once more when the dead are raised.
1Cor.15:51,52.” Andrews, JEO, 52.

REVELATION 11:18
And the nations were angry, and thy
wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that
they should be judged, and that thou
shouldest give reward unto thy servants the
prophets, and to the saints, and them that
fear thy name, small and great; and
shouldest destroy them which destroy the
earth.
A List of Events in Their Order.—
“The events under the sounding of the seventh
angel, though not given in chronological order, are, from
their nature not difficult to be arranged in the order of
their occurrence.
“1. In the days, i.e., years, of the beginning of the
voice of the seventh angel, the work of human probation
is finished. Rev.10:7. This, as we have seen, involves the
closing up of the immense work of our High Priest. It
also requires the proclamation of the final warnings to

279

GEMS FROM REVELATION
mankind.
“2. The most holy place of the temple in heaven is
opened. Rev.11:19. This is the place where our Lord's
priesthood is finished, and, as we shall hereafter see, is
the place where the Ancient of Days sits in judgment.
“3. While Christ is finishing his priesthood at the
tribunal of his Father, in the holiest of the heavenly
temple, the judgment of the righteous dead takes
place. Rev.11:18.
4. The coronation of Christ is announced by the
great voices in heaven, and by the words of the twenty
four elders. Rev.11:15-17. This succeeds the close of his
priesthood. When Christ begins his reign, he is invested
by the Father with that power which Satan usurped from
Adam the first. The reign of the second Adam is the reestablishment of the empire of God in this revolted
province. Christ does not take his own throne to rule his
enemies with a rod of iron till he has closed up his
priestly office at his Father‟s right hand.
5. The wrath of God comes upon the wicked when
Christ begins to rule them with the iron scepter of his
justice. It comes in the seven last plagues. Rev.11:18,19;
14:9-11, 18:20; 15:16; 19:11-21.
6. The anger of the nations comes in consequence
of the work of the unclean spirits under the sixth plague,
who incite them to the battle of the great day of God
Almighty. Rev..11:18; 16:13,14; 19:19-21.
7. The giving of rewards to the servants of God
is at the resurrection of the just. Rev.11:18; Luke 14:14;
Matt.16:27.
The final destruction of them that corrupt the
earth is at the end of the 1,000 years, in the second
death. Rev.11:18; 20:7-9.
The events of the seventh trumpet do therefore
extend over the whole period of the great day of
judgment.” Andrews, JEO, 53,54.
“Under the sounding of the seventh angel a
series of events transpires. This was also the case with
the other six. The events of the seventh angel
necessarily cover much time. Among them we find
mentioned, ‘The nations were angry’–‘Thy wrath is
come’–‘The time of the dead that they should be
judged’–‘Give reward unto thy servants the prophets,
and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and
great’–‘Destroy them which destroy [margin, corrupt,]
the earth.’
“While we may speak of fulfilled prophecy with
positiveness, we would apply unfulfilled prophecy with
becoming modesty. We may, however, suggest that the
anger of the nations will be immediately followed by
the wrath of God, or seven last plagues; [see Rev.
15:1;] that the judgment of the dead refers not to the
judgment of the righteous, for that takes place before the
plagues are poured out, but to the judgment of the
wicked during the 1000 years of Rev. 20; that the full
reward of the righteous will be given when they inherit
the New Earth, at the close of the 1000 years; and that at
that very time God will destroy by the second death all
who have corrupted the earth. And why may not the

sounding of the seventh angel continue until the end of
the 1000 years? and the third woe, cover all woe till sin
and sinners cease to be at the close of the seventh
millennium?” White, James, SST, 49.
Rev. 11:18 Summarizes the Rest of Revelation.—
“Rev. 11:18 not only climaxes the seven trumpets,
but it also summarizes the main issues to be addressed in
the last half of the Apocalypse. This is so because the
five main assertions of Revelation 11:18 each find their
counterpart at a crucial turning point in the last half of
the book.
“…The clause ‘the nations were angry’ is
paralleled by the anger of the dragon against the woman
in Revelation 12:17 (cf. 13,14). The clause ‘[thy wrath
is come]’ finds its equivalent in God’s seven bowls of
wrath in Revelation 15:1 (cf. 15-18). The ‘time to judge
the dead’ finds its counterpart in the judgment before
the great white throne in Revelation 20:11-15 (cf. 21,22).
The time of rewards is mentioned again in Revelation
22:11,12, in the context of Jesus’ promise to come
quickly. The opposite of that reward, the destruction of
the destroyers of the earth, is echoed in the language of
Revelation 19:2 (cf. 19).
“These parallels are not random. Each of these
texts summarizes the main point of that portion of
the book.
Together they suggest, therefore, a
comprehensive outline for Revelation 12 to 22.”
Paulien, End-Time, 106,107.
“I saw that the anger of the nations, the wrath of
God, and the time to judge the dead were separate and
distinct, one following the other, also that Michael had
not stood up, and that the time of trouble, such as never
was, had not yet commenced. The nations are now
getting angry, but when our High Priest has finished His
work in the sanctuary, He will stand up, put on the
garments of vengeance, and then the seven last plagues
will be poured out.” Early Writings, 36.
TIMELINE of Revelation 11:18
1844 to Close of Probation:
The Ark seen,
The nations were angry.
The judgment of the righteous dead.
Probation Closes to 2nd Coming:
Thy wrath is come.
The nations were angry.
2nd Coming to End of Millennium:
The judgment of the wicked dead;
Righteous rewarded.
Destroy them that destroy the earth
The Nations Were Angry.—
“Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom.” Matt. 24:7.
“I saw that the powers of earth are now being
shaken and that events come in order. War, and

280

REVELATION 11
rumors of war, sword, famine, and pestilence are first to
shake the powers of earth, then the voice of God will
shake the sun, moon, and stars, and this earth also. I saw
that the shaking of the powers in Europe is not, as
some teach, the shaking of the powers of heaven, but it
is the shaking of the angry nations.” Early Writings,
41.
[The above was written on Dec. 16, 1848. See note
under Rev. 7:2,3 concerning the 1848 revolutions that
shook Europe.]
“And at the commencement of the time of trouble,
we were filled with the Holy Ghost as we went forth
and proclaimed the Sabbath more fully.
“…The commencement of that time of trouble,
here mentioned does not refer to the time when the
plagues shall begin to be poured out, but to a short
period just before they are poured out, while Christ is in
the sanctuary. At that time, while the work of salvation
is closing, trouble will be coming on the earth, and the
nations will be angry, yet held in check so as not to
prevent the work of the third angel. At that time the
“latter rain,” or refreshing from the presence of the
Lord, will come, to give power to the loud voice of the
third angel, and prepare the saints to stand in the period
when the seven last plagues shall be poured out.” Early
Writings, 85.
“Everything in the world is in an unsettled state.
The nations are angry, and great preparations for
war are being made. Nation is plotting against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom. The great day of God is
hasting greatly. But although the nations are mustering
their forces for war and bloodshed, the command to the
angels is still in force, that they hold the four winds
until the servants of God are sealed in their
foreheads.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 221,222.
“Everything in our world is in agitation. There are
wars, and rumors of wars. The nations are angry, and
the time of the dead has come, that they should be
judged. Events are changing to bring about the day of
God which hasteth greatly. Only a moment of time, as it
were, yet remains. But while already nation is rising
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, there is
not now a general engage-ment. As yet the four winds
are held until the servants of God shall be sealed in
their foreheads. Then the powers of earth will marshal
their forces for the last great battle.” 6 Testimonies, 14.
The Nations Were Angry—at God’s People.—
“Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s
sake.” Matt. 24: 9.
“The dragon was wroth with the woman and
went to make war with the remnant of her seed.”
Rev. 12:17.
“The fallen denominational churches are Babylon.
Babylon has been fostering poisonous doctrines, the

wine of error. This wine of error is made up of false
doctrines, such as the natural immortality of the soul, the
eternal torment of the wicked, the denial of the preexistence of Christ prior to His birth in Bethlehem, and
advocating and exalting the first day of the week above
God’s holy and sanctified day. These and kindred
errors are presented to the world by the various
churches, and thus the Scriptures are fulfilled that say,
‘For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath
of her fornication.’ It is a wrath which is created by
false doctrines, and when kings and presidents drink
this wine of the wrath of her fornication, they are
stirred with anger against those who will not come
into harmony with the false and satanic heresies
which exalt the false sabbath, and lead men to trample
underfoot God’s memorial.” Testimonies to Ministers,
62.
Thy Wrath is Come.—
“We learn from Rev. 15:1, that the wrath of God is
the seven last plagues. ...This unmingled cup of wrath is
threatened in the message of the third angel, and is to
immediately follow it. The period of this wrath without
mercy is after Christ’s period of intercession ceases
before the Father; for as long as He intercedes, wrath
will be mingled with mercy-drops. Therefore this third
event will occur when there is ‘no Intercessor,’ [Isa.
59:16,] Christ having finished His work in the
heavenly Sanctuary, and the third and last message
of mercy being closed. Awful hour! Reader, prepare to
meet it!” White, James, The Seventh Angel, R&H,
3/7/1854.
“‘At that time shall Michael stand up, the great
Prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation even to that same time: and at
that time thy people shall be delivered, everyone that
shall be found written in the book.’ Daniel 12:1.
“When the third angel’s message closes, mercy no
longer pleads for the guilty inhabitants of the earth.
The people of God have accomplished their work. They
have received ‘the latter rain,’ ‘the refreshing from
the presence of the Lord,’ and they are prepared for the
trying hour before them. Angels are hastening to and fro
in heaven. An angel returning from the earth announces
that his work is done; the final test has been brought
upon the world, and all who have proved themselves
loyal to the divine precepts have received ‘the seal of
the living God.’ Then Jesus ceases His intercession in
the sanctuary above. He lifts His hands and with a loud
voice says, ‘It is done;’ and all the angelic host lay off
their crowns as He makes the solemn announcement:
‘He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he
which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is
holy, let him be holy still.’ Rev. 22:11. Every case has
been decided for life or death. Christ has made the
atonement for His people and blotted out their sins. The
number of His subjects is made up; ‘the kingdom and

281

GEMS FROM REVELATION
dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under
the whole heaven,’ is about to be given to the heirs of
salvation, and Jesus is to reign as King of kings and Lord
of lords.
“When He leaves the sanctuary, darkness covers
the inhabitants of the earth. In that fearful time the
righteous must live in the sight of a holy God without an
intercessor. The restraint which has been upon the
wicked is removed, and Satan has entire control of the
finally impenitent. God’s long-suffering has ended. The
world has rejected His mercy, despised His love, and
trampled upon His law. The wicked have passed the
boundary of their probation; the Spirit of God,
persistently resisted, has been at last withdrawn.
Unsheltered by divine grace, they have no protection
from the wicked one. Satan will then plunge the
inhabitants of the earth into one great, final trouble. As
the angels of God cease to hold in check the fierce winds
of human passion, all the elements of strife will be let
loose. The whole world will be involved in ruin more
terrible than that which came upon Jerusalem of
old.” Great Controversy, 613,614.
“The wrath of God are the judgments of God upon
the earth since 1844. Before the close of probation they
are mixed with mercy. The ‘seven last plagues’ are the
wrath of God unmixed with mercy—the most terrible of
God’s judgments. Thus, the seventh trumpet includes
within it the seven last plagues: ‘Thy wrath is come.’
Rev. 11:18.
“These seven last plagues, like antitypes of the
types, have similarities to the seven trumpets that
went before hand. Thus, the last phase of Rome—
Papal Rome—will receive judgments in the seventh
trumpet similar to those that fell on the first phase of
Rome—Pagan Rome—in the first six trumpets.
“The seventh trumpet of Revelation 11 includes the
seven-fold blast of the seven last plagues. “Solemn
events before us are yet to transpire. Trumpet after
trumpet is to be sounded; vial after vial poured out one
after another upon the inhabitants of the earth.” (3
Selected Messages, 426.) Just as at Jericho, when all
seven trumpets were blown on the seventh and last day,
so there will be a seven-fold blast of trumpets when ‘vial
after vial’ [seven vials of plagues] is ‘poured out’ in the
seventh trumpet. These horrific plagues fall specifically
on the last phase of Rome—Babylon the Great—the
great papal global church/state union.” PJ
“During this sounding, the righteous and wicked
pass through the last great time of trouble, in
comparison with which the Reign of Terror in France
was a light affliction.” Haskel, SSP, 206.
Time of the Righteous Dead that They Should Be
Judged.—
“Everything in our world is in agitation. There are
wars, and rumors of wars. The nations are angry, and
the time of the dead has come, that they should be
judged. Events are changing to bring about the day of

God which hasteth greatly. Only a moment of time, as it
were, yet remains.” 6 Testimonies, 14.
“We have learned that there is a space of time
at the beginning of the voice of the seventh angel, which
is employed in closing up the work of human probation.
During this period the living righteous conclude their
probation, and are accounted worthy to stand before the
Son of man. Luke 21:36. This is the time of the dead
that they should be judged, i.e., the time when the
righteous dead are accounted worthy of a part in the
first resurrection. Luke 20:35,36; Rev.11:18. It is
when the Ancient of Days sits in judgment that Christ is
crowned king; and this same event takes place under the
sounding of the seventh angel. Dan.7:9-14; Rev.11:1517. This shows that the judgment scene of Daniel 7 is in
the days of the seventh angel, and that the judgment of
the dead here brought to view is at the Father’s
tribunal.” Andrews, JEO, 55.
Time of the Wicked Dead that They Should Be
Judged.—
“[This] is the fourth event under the sounding of
the seventh angel which we will here notice. That
judgment has begun at the house of God, that this is,
in a certain sense, a period of judgment and decision,
we freely admit; but the judgment, the day of
judgment, the time of the dead that they should be
judged, is, evidently, in the future. It follows the last
plagues, and is to be introduced by the coming of Christ.
‘I charged thee therefore,’ says Paul, ‘before God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead at (not before) his appearing and his
kingdom.’ 2 Tim. 4:1. ‘Therefore judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the hearts.’ 1 Cor. 4:5.
“ ‘The time of the dead that they should be
judged,’ is in other scriptures called the ‘day of
judgment,’ ‘judgment of the great day,’ and ‘day of
the Lord.’ The Apostle, after stating that the present
world is reserved unto fire against the day of judgment
and perdition of ungodly men, says:
“‘But, beloved, be not ignorant of one thing, that
one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day.’ 2 Pet. 3:7,8. We are led
to consider that this text, with the connection considered,
teaches simply this, that the Lord’s day of judgment is a
thousand years in length. This view is strengthened by
comparing Rev. 20; Matt. 24:28-30; 25:31-46, which
cover the whole ground from the resurrection of the just
at the Second Advent, down to the second death of the
wicked, at the end of the one thousand years. Search and
see.” White, James, The Seventh Angel, R&H, 3/7/1854.
“The great majority of the dead, that is, the
wicked, are still in their graves after the visitation of
the plagues, and the close of the gospel age. A work of
judgment, of allotting to each one the punishment due
because of his sins, is carried on by the saints in

282

REVELATION 11
conjunction with Christ during the one thousand years
following the first resurrection. (1 Corinthians 6:2;
Revelation 20:4.) Inasmuch as this judgment of the
dead follows the wrath of God, or the seven last
plagues, it would seem necessary to refer it to the one
thousand years of judgment upon the wicked, above
mentioned; for the investigative judgment takes place
before the plagues are poured out.” Smith, DR, 545.

Matt. 5:11,12.

“During the thousand years between the first and
the second resurrection the judgment of the wicked
takes place. The apostle Paul points to this judgment as
an event that follows the second advent. ‘Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring
to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts.’ 1 Cor. 4:5. Daniel
declares that when the Ancient of Days came,
‘judgment was given to the saints of the Most High.’
Daniel 7:22. At this time the righteous reign as kings
and priests unto God. John in the Revelation says: ‘I
saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was
given unto them.’ ‘They shall be priests of God and of
Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand years.’ Rev.
20:4, 6. It is at this time that, as foretold by Paul, ‘the
saints shall judge the world.’ 1 Cor. 6:2. In union
with Christ they judge the wicked, comparing their
acts with the statute book, the Bible, and deciding every
case according to the deeds done in the body. Then the
portion which the wicked must suffer is meted out,
according to their works; and it is recorded against their
names in the book of death.” Great Controversy,
660,661.

“For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his
Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every
man according to his works.” Matt. 16:27.

“Then I saw thrones, and Jesus and the redeemed
saints sat upon them; and the saints reigned as kings and
priests unto God. Christ, in union with His people,
judged the wicked dead, comparing their acts with the
statute book, the Word of God, and deciding every case
according to the deeds done in the body. Then they
meted out to the wicked the portion which they must
suffer, according to their works; and it was written
against their names in the book of death. Satan also and
his angels were judged by Jesus and the saints. Satan’s
punishment was to be far greater than that of those
whom he had deceived. His suffering would so far
exceed theirs as to bear no comparison with it. After all
those whom he had deceived had perished, Satan was
still to live and suffer on much longer.
“After the judgment of the wicked dead had been
finished, at the end of the one thousand years, Jesus left
the city, and the saints and a train of the angelic host
followed Him.” Early Writings, 290,291.
Thou Shouldest Give Reward unto Thy Servants the
Prophets.—
“Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding
glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so
persecuted they the prophets which were before you.”

“These will enter upon their reward at the second
coming of Christ, for He brings their reward with Him.
(Matthew 16:27; Revelation 22:12.) The full reward of
the saints, however, is not reached until they enter
upon the possession of the new earth. (Matthew
25:34.)” Smith, DR, 545.

“And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall
be.” Rev. 22:12.
“Lead their young minds to contemplate the glories
of the reward that awaits the children of God.
Cultivate their imaginative powers by picturing the
splendor of the new earth and the city of God; and
when they are charmed with the prospect, tell them it
will be more glorious than their brightest imagination
can portray; for ‘it is written. Eye hath not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God hath prepared for them that
love him.’" Review & Herald, 2/14/1888.
Shouldest Destroy Them Which Destroy the Earth.—
“In Rev. 9:11, Satan is called ‘Apollyon’ the
‘Destroyer.’ The same term applies also to his agents or
followers. The destruction of the earth is charged to
Satan in Isa. 14:16,17. [‘Is this the man that made the
earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; that made
the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?’]
Satan is responsible for the curse of sin under which the
earth has been corrupted and defiled. See Gen. 6:11-13;
Isa. 24:5. In the book of Daniel the papal power is
designated ‘the desolator’ and ‘the abomination of
desolation.’ God’s sentence against the wicked is
destruction or annihilation and not eternal conscious
torment. God will utterly destroy the destroyers and
corrupters of the earth. This destruction will include
those who defile their own bodies.” Bunch, TR, 131.
“All the wicked, who have literally devastated vast
regions and wantonly destroyed human life, will be
forever devoured by those purifying fires from God
out of heaven. (2 Peter 3:7; Revelation 20:9.) Thus the
seventh trumpet reaches to the end of the one thousand
years. Momentous, startling, yet joyous thought! The
trumpet now sounding sees the final destruction of the
wicked, and the saints, clothed in a glorious immortality,
safely located on the earth made new.” Smith, DR, 546.
“Satan’s power upon the human family increases.
If the Lord should not soon come and destroy his power,
the earth would ere long be depopulated.”
1
Testimonies, 304.

283

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Satan will then plunge the inhabitants of the earth
into one great, final trouble. As the angels of God cease
to hold in check the fierce winds of human passion,
all the elements of strife will be let loose. The whole
world will be involved in ruin more terrible than that
which came upon Jerusalem of old.
…The same
destructive power exercised by holy angels when God
commands, will be exercised by evil angels when He
permits. There are forces now ready, and only waiting
the divine permission, to spread desolation everywhere.”
Great Controversy, 614.

REVELATION 11:19
And the temple of God was opened in
heaven, and there was seen in his temple the
ark of his testament; and there were
lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and
an earthquake, and great hail.
The Temple of God was Opened in Heaven.—
“And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is
called the holiest of all; Which had the golden censer,
and the ark of the covenant overlaid roundabout with
gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and
Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant;
And over it the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy
seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.”
Hebrews 9:3-5.
“This door was not opened until the mediation of
Jesus was finished in the holy place of the sanctuary in
1844. Then Jesus rose up and shut the door of the holy
place, and opened the door into the most holy, and
passed within the second veil, where He now stands by
the ark, and where the faith of Israel now reaches.”
Early Writings, 42.
“Behold, I have set before thee an open door,
and no man can shut it.” Revelation 3:8.

The ark of the covenant.

The Temple of God was Opened in Heaven, the Ark of
His Testament was Seen.—
“Once more the prophet carries us back to the
beginning of the trumpet. After the introduction of the
seventh trumpet in verse 15, the first great event that
comes to the mind of the seer is the transfer of the
kingdom from earthly to heavenly rule. God takes to
Him His great power, and forever crushes the rebellion
of this revolted earth, establishes Christ upon His own
throne, and remains Himself supreme over all. We are
next referred back to the state of the nations, the
judgment to fall upon them, and the final destiny of both
saints and sinners. (Verse 18.) After this field of vision
has been scanned, our attention is called back once more
in the verse now under notice, to the close of the
priesthood of Christ, the last scene in the work of mercy
for a guilty world.
“The temple is opened, and the second
apartment of the sanctuary is entered. We know it is
the holy of holies that is here opened, for the ark is seen;
and in that apartment alone the ark was deposited. This
took place at the end of the 2300 days, when the
sanctuary was to be cleansed. (Daniel 8:14). At that
time the prophetic periods ended and the seventh angel
began to sound. Since 1844, the people of God have
seen by faith the open door in heaven, and the ark of
God’s testament within. They are endeavoring to keep
every precept of the holy law written upon the tables
deposited there. That the tables of the law are there, just
as they were in the ark in the sanctuary erected by
Moses, is evident from the terms which John uses in
describing the ark. He calls it the ‘ark of His
testament.’
“The ark was called the ark of the covenant, or
testament, because it was made for the express purpose
of containing the tables of the testimony, or ten
commandments. (Exodus 25:16; 31:18; Deuteronomy
10:2,5.) It was put to no other use, and owed its name
solely to the fact that it contained the tables of the law.
If it did not contain the tables, it would not be the ark of
God’s testament, and could not truthfully be so called.
Yet John, beholding the ark in heaven under the
sounding of the seventh trumpet, still calls it the ‘ark of
His testament,’ affording unanswerable proof that the
law is still there, unaltered in one jot or tittle from the
copy which for a time was committed to the care of
men in the typical ark of the tabernacle during the time
of Moses.” Smith, DR, 546,547.
“[Rev. 11:19 quoted.] Here is disclosed to our
view the second apartment of the heavenly temple, and
here is shown the grand central object, which gives name
to the tabernacle itself. It is the ark of God, sometimes
called the ark of the covenant, or testament (Num.10:33;
Heb.9:4), and sometimes the ark of the testimony
(Ex.25:22). It is because the heavenly temple contains
the ark of God’s testimony that it is itself called the
tabernacle of the testimony in heaven. And the ark itself
is not empty; it contains what Rev.11:19 calls God’s
testament, and what Rev.15:5 calls ‘the testimony in

284

REVELATION 11
heaven.’ And these two terms must signify the ten
commandments, and cannot signify anything else.”
Andrews, JEO, 71,72.
“The opening of the holiest of all in the Temple in
heaven, by which the ark is seen, is an event that takes
place under the sounding of the seventh angel. And as
the ministration of our great High Priest is changed to
that apartment at the termination of the 2300 days, we
understand that the opening of the Temple is marked by
the termination of that period, as presented by the
proclamation of the first angel. The entrance of our high
Priest into the most holy place to minister before the ark
of God, calls the attention of the church to the
commandments of God contained within that ark. The
commandments of God have been shining out from
the heavenly Sanctuary since that time.” Andrews,
TAM, 132.
“It is under the seventh trumpet that the final phase
of Christ’s ministration in heaven commenced in 1844.
…And that also was the time when God’s people were
given a glimpse of God’s temple in heaven and saw the
ark containing the ten commandments and had revealed
to them the light in regard to the Sabbath truth.” Thiele,
OSIR, 182.
“While the ministration was confined to the first
apartment which was for the whole period of the year but
this day, the priest offered the blood of sin-offering in
that apartment to make reconciliation, i.e., to begin the
work of atonement. Leviticus 4. It was by this very
work that the sins were transferred to the sanctuary
through the blood of sin-offering. The high priest on
the day of atonement takes up this unfinished work
and completes it. The business of the day is to finish
the great work of atonement for the people of God, and
to remove their sins from the sanctuary, and place them
upon the head of the scape-goat. The work in the second
apartment of the earthly sanctuary does not therefore
represent the whole gospel dispensation, but simply that
part of it devoted to the finishing of the mystery of
God in the days of the seventh angel’s voice when he
begins to sound; in other words, it is the work embraced
in that period of time denominated the hour of God’s
judgment.
“There was a period in ‘the example and shadow of
heavenly things’ devoted to the finishing of the high
priest’s work. There is such a period devoted to the
finishing of the work of Christ in the days of the voice of
the seventh angel, at the conclusion of the gospel
dispensation. That work, in the ‘shadow of good things
to come,’ was accomplished in the second apartment of
the earthly sanctuary. This work in like manner is
wrought in the second apartment of the sanctuary in
heaven. It is a remarkable fact that the opening of the
second apartment of the temple in heaven is an event
located under the seventh angel’s voice, i.e., in the
very time when the work of probation is to be
finished. Rev.10:7; 11:15-19.

“The opening of the second apartment of the
heavenly temple is with manifest reference to the
accomplishment of the events which transpire in the
finishing of the mystery of God. These are: 1. The
session of the judgment by the Ancient of Days.
Dan.7:9-14; Rev.11:18; 14:6,7. 2. The conclusion of the
priesthood of Christ at this tribunal in the blotting out of
sins. Acts 3:19,20.
3. The coronation of Christ.
Rev.11:15-17; Dan.7:13,14; Ps.2:6-9. 4. Then the
pouring out of the vials of the wrath of God. Rev.11:18;
15:1, 5-8.” Andrews, JEO, 75,76.
“The announcement that the temple of God was
opened in heaven and the ark of His testament was seen
points to the opening of the most holy place of the
heavenly sanctuary in 1844 as Christ entered there to
perform the closing work of the atonement. Those
who by faith followed their great High Priest as He
entered upon His ministry in the most holy place, beheld
the ark of His testament. As they had studied the subject
of the sanctuary they had come to understand the
Saviour’s change of ministration, and they saw that He
was now officiating before the ark of God, pleading His
blood in behalf of sinners.
“The ark in the tabernacle on earth contained the
two tables of stone, upon which were inscribed the
precepts of the law of God. The ark was merely a
receptacle for the tables of the law, and the presence of
these divine precepts gave to it its value and sacredness.
When the temple of God was opened in heaven, the ark
of His testament was seen. Within the holy of holies, in
the sanctuary in heaven, the divine law is sacredly
enshrined—the law that was spoken by God Himself
amid the thunders of Sinai and written with His own
finger on the tables of stone.
“The law of God in the sanctuary in heaven is the
great original, of which the precepts inscribed upon the
tables of stone and recorded by Moses in the Pentateuch
were an unerring transcript. Those who arrived at an
understanding of this important point were thus led to
see the sacred, unchanging character of the divine law.
They saw, as never before, the force of the Saviour’s
words: ‘Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the law.’ Matthew
5:18. The law of God, being a revelation of His will, a
transcript of His character, must forever endure, ‘as a
faithful witness in heaven.’ Not one command has
been annulled; not a jot or tittle has been changed. Says
the psalmist: ‘Forever, O Lord, Thy word is settled in
heaven.’ ‘All His commandments are sure. They
stand fast for ever and ever.’ Psalms 119:89; 111:7,
8.” Great Controversy, 433-434.
“And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony
which I shall give thee.
“And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon
the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony
that I shall give thee. And there I will meet with
thee, and I will commune with thee from above the
mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are

285

GEMS FROM REVELATION
upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will
give thee in commandment unto the children of
Israel.” Exodus 25:16,21,22.
Similar to Isaiah’s Experience.—
“In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the
LORD sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and
his train filled the temple.” Isaiah 6:1.
“The vision given to Isaiah represents the
condition of God’s people in the last days. They are
privileged to see by faith the work that is going forward
in the heavenly sanctuary. ‘And the temple of God was
opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple
the ark of his testament.’ As they look by faith into the
holy of holies, and see the work of Christ in the heavenly
sanctuary, they perceive that they are a people of unclean
lips—a people whose lips have often spoken vanity, and
whose talents have not been sanctified and employed to
the glory of God. Well may they despair as they contrast
their own weakness and unworthiness with the purity
and loveliness of the glorious character of Christ. But if
they, like Isaiah, will receive the impression the Lord
designs shall be made upon the heart, if they will humble
their souls before God, there is hope for them. The bow
of promise is above the throne, and the work done for
Isaiah will be performed in them. God will respond
to the petitions coming from the contrite heart.”
4BC, 1139.
“In the Revelation, John says, “The temple of God
was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his
temple the ark of his testament.” Rev. 11:19. John
saw in vision the Lord’s people looking for His coming
and searching for truth. As the temple of God was
opened unto His people, the light of the law of God,
which was in the ark, shone forth. Those who receive
this light are brought to view in the proclamation of the
third angel’s message.” 4BC, 1152.
“In the autumn of 1846 we began to observe the
Bible Sabbath, and to teach and defend it. My
attention was first called to the Sabbath while I was on a
visit to New Bedford, Massachusetts, earlier in the same
year. I there became acquainted with Elder Joseph
Bates, who had early embraced the advent faith, and was
an active laborer in the cause. Elder B. was keeping the
Sabbath, and urged its importance. I did not feel its
importance, and thought that Elder B. erred in dwelling
upon the fourth commandment more than upon the other
nine. But the Lord gave me a view of the heavenly
sanctuary. The temple of God was opened in heaven,
and I was shown the ark of God covered with the
mercy seat. Two angels stood, one at each end of the
ark, with their wings spread over the mercy seat, and
their faces turned toward it. My accompanying angel
informed me that these represented all the heavenly host
looking with reverential awe toward the holy law which
had been written by the finger of God. Jesus raised the
cover of the ark, and I beheld the tables of stone on

which the Ten Commandments were written. I was
amazed as I saw the fourth commandment in the very
center of the ten precepts, with a soft halo of light
encircling it. Said the angel: ‘It is the only one of the
ten which defines the living God who created the
heavens and the earth and all things that are therein.
When the foundations of the earth were laid, then was
laid the foundation of the Sabbath also.’” 1Testimonies,
75-76.
“Special truths have been adapted to the conditions
of the generations as they have existed. The present
truth, which is a test to the people of this generation, was
not a test to the people of generations far back. If the
light which now shines upon us in regard to the
Sabbath of the fourth commandment had been given
to the generations in the past, God would have held
them accountable for that light.
“When the temple of God was opened in heaven,
John saw in holy vision a class of people whose attention
was arrested and who were looking with reverential awe
at the ark, which contained the law of God. The special
test upon the fourth commandment did not come
until after the temple of God was opened in heaven.
“Those who died before the light was given upon
the law of God and the claims of the fourth
commandment were not guilty of the sin of violating the
seventh-day Sabbath. The wisdom and mercy of God in
dispensing light and knowledge at the proper time, as the
people need it, is unsearchable. Previous to His coming
to judge the world in righteousness, He sends forth a
warning to arouse the people and call their attention
to their neglect of the fourth commandment, that they
may be enlightened, and may repent of their
transgression of His law, and prove their allegiance to
the great Lawgiver.” 2 Testimonies, 693.
The Ark, a Symbol of Jesus.—
“The ark and the ten commandments are symbols
to us that the Captain of the Lord’s hosts is now
guiding spiritual Israel, His church, to the Promised
Land, just as He did in Joshua’s day.” PJ
Ark Literally Seen at the Voice of God During the 7th
Plague.—
“A marvelous change has come over those who
have held fast their integrity in the very face of death.
They have been suddenly delivered from the dark and
terrible tyranny of men transformed to demons. Their
faces, so lately pale, anxious, and haggard, are now
aglow with wonder, faith, and love. Their voices rise in
triumphant song: ‘God is our refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we
fear, though the earth be removed, and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled,
though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof.’ Psalm 46:1-3.
“While these words of holy trust ascend to God, the
clouds sweep back, and the starry heavens are seen,

286

REVELATION 11
unspeakably glorious in contrast with the black and
angry firmament on either side. The glory of the
celestial city streams from the gates ajar. Then there
appears against the sky a hand holding two tables of
stone folded together. Says the prophet: ‘The heavens
shall declare His righteousness: for God is judge
Himself.’ Psalm 50:6.
That holy law, God’s
righteousness, that amid thunder and flame was
proclaimed from Sinai as the guide of life, is now
revealed to men as the rule of judgment. The hand
opens the tables, and there are seen the precepts of the
Decalogue, traced as with a pen of fire. The words are
so plain that all can read them. Memory is aroused, the
darkness of superstition and heresy is swept from every
mind, and God’s ten words, brief, comprehensive, and
authoritative, are presented to the view of all the
inhabitants of the earth.
“It is impossible to describe the horror and despair
of those who have trampled upon God’s holy
requirements. The Lord gave them His law; they might
have compared their characters with it and learned their
defects while there was yet opportunity for repentance
and reform; but in order to secure the favor of the world,
they set aside its precepts and taught others to transgress.
They have endeavored to compel God’s people to
profane His Sabbath. Now they are condemned by that
law which they have despised. With awful distinctness
they see that they are without excuse. They chose whom
they would serve and worship. ‘Then shall ye return,
and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serveth God and him that serveth
Him not.’ Malachi 3:18.
“The enemies of God’s law, from the ministers
down to the least among them, have a new conception of
truth and duty. Too late they see that the Sabbath of the
fourth commandment is the seal of the living God. Too
late they see the true nature of their spurious sabbath and
the sandy foundation upon which they have been
building. They find that they have been fighting against
God. Religious teachers have led souls to perdition
while professing to guide them to the gates of
Paradise. Not until the day of final accounts will it be
known how great is the responsibility of men in holy
office and how terrible are the results of their
unfaithfulness. Only in eternity can we rightly estimate
the loss of a single soul. Fearful will be the doom of him
to whom God shall say: Depart, thou wicked servant.”
Great Controversy, 638-640.
“Sacrilegious minds and hearts have thought
they were mighty enough to change the times and
laws of Jehovah; but, safe in the archives of heaven, in
the ark of God, are the original commandments, written
upon the two tables of stone. No potentate of earth has
power to draw forth those tables from their sacred hiding
place beneath the mercy seat.” (Signs, 2/28/1878). 7BC,
972.
And There Were Lightnings, Voices, Thunderings, an
Earthquake, and Great Hail.—

“When we read Ezekiel’s vision of the throne, it is
significant to notice how he described the movements of
the angelic beings, who are the messengers of Jehovah.
…Ezekiel says:
“ ‘And the fire was bright, and out of the fire went
forth lightning. The living creatures ran and returned
as the appearance of a flash of lightning.’” Ezekiel
1:13,14.
“ ‘And when they went, I heard the noise of their
wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of
the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an
host: when they stood, they let down their wings.’
Ezek. 1:24.
“What a sensational experience!
“ ‘And the sound of the cherubims’ wings was
heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the
Almighty God when he speaketh.’ Ezek. 10:5.
“As these mighty beings take off, like a flash of
lightning from the throne and return, there is a sound
like thunder. We could have a little whisper of this
when we recall the big military air bases and the taking
off of powerful fighter aircraft. But what a contrast to
the throne of God, the center of the universe, a place of
tremendous activity. As the messengers of God at the
behest of the Infinite, flash their way to and from the
throne to the vast universe, ‘there proceed lightnings
and thunderings and voices.’ We suggest this is what
the apostle is describing when he gazes at the activity
and atmosphere of the throne.” Cooke, #7-UR, 11,12.
“Not a sigh is breathed, not a pain felt, not a grief
pierces the soul, but the throb vibrates to the Father's
heart. The Bible shows us God in His high and holy
place, not in a state of inactivity, not in silence and
solitude, but surrounded by ten thousand times ten
thousand and thousands of thousands of holy
intelligences, all waiting to do His will. Through
channels which we cannot discern He is in active
communication with every part of His dominion. But
it is in this speck of a world, in the souls that He gave
His only-begotten Son to save, that His interest and the
interest of all heaven is centered. God is bending from
His throne to hear the cry of the oppressed. To every
sincere prayer He answers, "Here am I." He uplifts the
distressed and downtrodden. In all our afflictions He is
afflicted. In every temptation and every trial the angel of
His presence is near to deliver.
“Not even a sparrow falls to the ground without the
Father's notice.” Desire of Ages, 356.
“This verse depicts the tremendous activity in
heaven as first the Father, and then the Son,
transferred their thrones from the Holy to the Most
Holy Place of the heavenly sanctuary in 1844,
according to Daniel 8:14; 7:9,10,13,14.
“It also points to the end of the seventh trumpet,
when all heaven moves again to rescue God’s people
when Jesus comes again in the clouds of heaven with all
the holy angels with Him. ‘And the seventh angel
poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great

287

GEMS FROM REVELATION
voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne,
saying, It is done. And there were voices, and
thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the
earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.” Rev.
16:17,18.” PJ
“The Kingdoms of this world are soon to become
the kingdoms of our Lord. ‘The seventh angel sounded,

and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord and of His Christ; and He shall reign forever and
ever.’ There is to be a rapid and triumphant spread
of the gospel. ‘And the temple of God was opened in
heaven, and there was seen in His temple the ark of His
testament; and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.’” Battle
Creek Letters, 57.

1260 Day Time Prophecies
Of Daniel and Revelation

538 AD

1)

1798 AD

Daniel 7:25—Papal Dominion over Times, Laws, and God‟s People
2)

Daniel 12:4—Book of Daniel Sealed, God‟s People Scattered.

3)

Revelation 11:2—Gentiles (Papacy) Tread Down Holy City (God‟s People)

4)

Revelation 11:3—Two Witnesses (OT & NT) Prophesy Clothed in Sackcloth

5, 6) Revelation 12: 6, 14—God‟s People Flee From Papal Persecution to Wilderness
7) Revelation 13:4—Power to Blaspheme God and Make War with the Saints
FRENCH
REVOLUTION
1789-1799

288

REVELATION 11

1844
1840
1798

289

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 12
REVELATION 12:1-17
1 And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman
clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her
head a crown of twelve stars:
2 And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained
to be delivered.
3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a
great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven
crowns upon his heads.
4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did
cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman
which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as
it was born.
5 And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations
with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to
his throne.
6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a
place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand
two hundred and threescore days.
7 And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought
against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,
8 And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in
heaven.
9 And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the
Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out
into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.
10 And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come
salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down,
which accused them before our God day and night.
11 And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the
death.
12 Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them.
Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is
come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that
he hath but a short time.
13 And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child.
14 And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that
she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is
nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of
the serpent.
15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after
the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the
flood.
16 And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of
his mouth.
17 And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to
make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

REVELATION 12:1
And there appeared a great wonder in
heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and
the moon under her feet, and upon her head
a crown of twelve stars.

“ ‘A great sign,’ (Margin and R.V.) This
indicates that symbols are being employed.” Bunch,
TR, 132.
There Appeared A Great Wonder in Heaven.—
“Some are puzzled over the fact that the symbolic
woman representing the church is seen ‘in heaven.’ In
the first place the church is of heavenly origin and even
while in this earth, in rebellion against God, she lives ‘in
heavenly places,’ dwelling in the atmosphere of heaven.
Christians have already been ‘delivered from the power
of darkness,’ and ‘translated into the kingdom’ of
God. See Eph. 2:6; Col. 1:1:13. ...Not only did the
attack of Satan against the church begin in heaven, but
the conflict of the church is still ‘against principalities,
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
the world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places.’ Eph. 6:12. ‘Wicked spirits’ in ‘heavenly
places’ is the marginal reading.” Bunch, TR, 135.
A Woman.—
“I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy
head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.” Gen. 3:15.
“I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely
and delicate woman.” Jeremiah 6:2.
“What may we understand by woman in our text? I
answer, We must understand the people of God, in all
ages of the church, whether among the Jew or
Gentile: she is called a woman because she is the
spouse of Christ; she is likewise called a woman because
of her dependence on Christ for all things. As a man is
the head of the woman, so is Christ the head over all
things to the church, says the apostle. As the woman
depends on her husband for a name, for food, and for
raiment, so likewise the church of Christ, for a name—
‘And thou shalt be called by a new name, which the
mouth of the Lord shall name,’ Isa. 62:2-5. ‘And
they were called Christians first at Antioch.’ For
food, our text says, ‘that they should feed her there,’
etc. The prophet Isaiah says, 40:11, ‘He shall feed his
flock as a shepherd.’ John 6:53, ‘Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you.’ For raiment, the Psalmist, speaking of
the church, says, ‘She shall be brought to the king in
raiment of needlework; her clothing is wrought gold.’
The angel to the seven churches says, ‘He that
overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white
raiment.’” Miller, Evidence, 205,206.
“ ‘A woman,’ signifies the true church. (2

A Great Wonder.—

290

REVELATION 12
Corinthians 11:2.) A corrupt woman is used to represent
an apostate church. (Ezekiel 23:2-4; Rev. 17:3-6,15,18.)
By parity of reasoning, a pure woman, as in this
instance, would represent the true church.” Smith,
DR, 549.

they put on ‘the Lord Jesus Christ.’ See Rom.
13:12,14; Gal. 3:27. To put on Christ is to be clothed
with His character of righteousness which is the wedding
garment of the church or bride of Christ. See Isa. 52:1;
61:10; Rev. 19:7,8. Only when the church is clothed
with the righteousness of Christ is it ‘the light of the
world.’” Bunch, TR, 135.
“Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair
as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army
with banners?” Song of Solomon 6:10.

“The faithful ones, the church of the living God—
few as their numbers may be, are represented as the
‘woman’ [verse 1 quoted].” Haskel, SSP, 212.
“The people of God, symbolized by a holy
woman and her children, were represented as greatly in
the minority. In the last days only a remnant still
existed.” (Signs, 11/1/1899). 7BC, 972.
The Woman Is Not Mary.—
“All efforts to make this woman represent the
virgin Mary fail in the light of the fact that the same
woman continues the object of Satan’s wrath till the
second advent of Christ.” Bunch, TR, 132,133.
“Roman Catholic interpreters have sometimes
interpreted the woman in Revelation 12 as Mary. But
the highly symbolic character of the whole book, as well
as John’s introductory words—‘and there appeared a
great wonder in heaven’—indicate that the woman is a
symbol for the church of God.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 301.
“In Revelation the radiant woman of chapter 12
stands in stark contrast with the whore of chapter 17
decked out in gold, scarlet, and precious stones.”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 17.
Clothed with the Sun.—
“The sun is the source of light and is therefore the
symbol of Christ ‘the Sun of Righteousness’ and ‘the
light of the world.’ (Mal. 4:2; John 8:12; 9:5).
...What is the robe or garment of the church or bride of
Christ? Christians ‘put on the armour of light’ when

“The Lord has provided His church with
capabilities and blessings, that they may present to the
world an image of His own sufficiency, and that His
church may be complete in Him, a continual
representation of another, even the eternal world, of
laws that are higher than earthly laws. His church is to
be a temple built after the divine similitude, and the
angelic architect has brought his golden measuring rod
from heaven, that every stone may be hewed and
squared by the divine measurement and polished to shine
as an emblem of heaven, radiating in all directions the
bright, clear beams of the Sun of Righteousness. The
church is to be fed with manna from heaven and to be
kept under the sole guardianship of His grace. Clad in
complete armor of light and righteousness, she enters
upon her final conflict. The dross, the worthless
material, will be consumed, and the influence of the truth
testifies to the world of its sanctifying, ennobling
character....” Testimonies to Ministers, 17.
The Moon Under Her Feet.—
“The church of all ages stands on the
permanent foundation of Christ, the Rock of Ages, the
Living Word, as revealed through the writings of the
prophets and apostles. See Isa. 28:16; 1 Cor. 3:10,11;
Eph. 2:20-22. As the moon shines only because of a
borrowed light from the sun, so the Scriptures shine
because illuminated by Christ, the Living Word, and
‘the Sun of Righteousness.’” Bunch, TR, 135.
“In Psalm 89:34-37 the Lord declares that His
covenant and His word are as faithful and unaltered as
the moon. The church was established upon the word
of God.” Anderson, UR, 114.
“My covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn
by my holiness that I will not lie unto David. His seed
shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before
me. It shall be established for ever as the moon, and
as a faithful witness in heaven.” Ps. 89:34-37.
“The Old Testament was the foundation of the
Church. The only Scriptures Jesus used was the Old
Testament.” Burnside, RWU, 146.
“‘The moon’ is the symbol of the Mosaic period.
As the moon shines with a borrowed light derived from
the sun, so the former era shone with a light borrowed

291

GEMS FROM REVELATION
from the present. There they had the type and shadow;
here we have the antitype and the substance.
“...The woman, the church, had the moon under
her feet; that is, the Mosaic period had just ended, and
the woman was clothed with the light of the gospel sun,
which had just risen.” Smith, DR, 549,550.
“Every sacrifice from the Garden of Eden to the
cross, shadowed forth the great Sacrifice, and taught the
everlasting Gospel. By faith, the sinner confessing his
sins over the head of the innocent lamb, saw the real
Sacrifice, and the light from Calvary reflected from
the sacrifice shone into his heart. ” Haskel, SSP, 213.
Crown of Twelve Stars.—
“The crown denotes rulership and organization.
Twelve is consistently associated in scripture with
church government.” Cooke, #18-UR, 4.
“Around the head of the church clustered twelve
stars, representing the twelve apostles, who became the
fathers of the Christian church, their names are also
on the twelve foundation stones of the New
Jerusalem.” Haskel, SSP, 213.
“...By anticipation the church is represented as
fully organized, with its twelve apostles, before the man
child, Christ, appeared upon the scene. It was to be thus
constituted immediately after Christ should begin His
ministry; and He is more especially connected with this
church than with that of the former period.” Smith, DR,
550.
“The disciples were to go forth as Christ’s
witnesses, to declare to the world what they had seen and
heard of Him. Their office was the most important to
which human beings had ever been called, second
only to that of Christ Himself. They were to be
workers together with God for the saving of men. As in
the Old Testament the twelve patriarchs stood as
representatives of Israel, so the twelve apostles stand
as representatives of the gospel church.” Acts of the
Apostles, 19.

REVELATION 12:2
And she being with child cried,
travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered.
The Child.—
“Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son,
and shall call his name Immanuel.” Is. 7:14.
“For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is
given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder:
and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The
Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace.” Isa. 9:6.

She, Travailing in Birth, Pained to Be Delivered.—
“ ‘And she, being with child’—having the
promise that the seed of the woman should bruise the
serpent’s head—‘cried travailing in birth’—denoting
prayer in faith—‘and pained to be delivered’—that
is, an anxious and deep longing for the advent of the
promised Messiah, when she expected deliverance
from bondage, sin, and all her foes, Mt. 13:17.” Miller,
Evidence, 207.
“For verily I say unto you, That many prophets
and righteous men have desired to see those things
which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those
things which ye hear, and have not heard them.” Matt.
13:17.
“Ministering at the altar in the temple in Jerusalem,
was Zacharias, the priest. He and his wife Elizabeth
prayed daily for the advent of the Son of God. Jehovah
stopped to listen, and answered those prayers by giving
to the aged priest and his wife a son, the forerunner of
the Messiah.
“In the town of Nazareth, noted for its wicked-ness,
lived a young woman. Daily her heart was lifted to God,
asking for the advent of the promised Saviour. Again
Jehovah’s ear was reached, and that prayer was
answered. Gabriel came from the presence of God, and
made known to Mary that she, a virgin in Israel, should
become the mother of the Son of God. The spirituality
of her life is shown in her response to the angel. Taking
her God-given responsibility, with all the sorrow and
shame it entailed, she said: ‘Behold the handmaid of
the Lord.’ Three had been found who were true to the
God of Heaven. There were still others. Humble
shepherds, tending their flocks, heard the angels singing
at the birth of Christ; wise men of the East, searching
the prophecies, recognized the star as a herald of the
Saviour.
“On the day that the Babe was presented in the
temple, Simeon, an aged man upon whom the Holy
Ghost rested, and who saw with spiritual insight,
recognized in the little One the Redeemer of men. And
Anna, a prophetess, an aged widow, who lived in the
temple, and who sought God day and night for the
fulfillment of His promise, recognized divinity in the
Babe, and giving thanks, ‘spake of Him to all them
that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.’ This
increased the number who in deed and in truth were
waiting for the Messiah. They, while the world was
in darkness and unconcern, travailed in birth for the
world’s Redeemer.” Haskel, SSP, 211,212.
“We are told that when John the Baptist appeared
with his message ‘the people were in expectation, and
all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he
were the Christ, or not.’ Luke 3:15.” Bunch, TR, 137.
Time of This Vision.—
“Verses 1 and 2 cover a period of time beginning
just previous to the opening of the Christian Era, when

292

REVELATION 12
the church was earnestly longing for and expecting the
advent of the Messiah, and extending to the full
establishment of the gospel church with its crown of
twelve apostles.” Smith, DR, 549,550.

REVELATION 12:3,4
And there appeared another wonder in
heaven; and behold a great red dragon,
having seven heads and ten horns, and seven
crowns upon his heads.
And his tail drew the third part of the
stars of heaven, and did cast them to the
earth: and the dragon stood before the
woman which was ready to be delivered, for
to devour her child as soon as it was born.
Another Wonder in Heaven.—
“The symbol of the great red dragon, like that of
the woman, is seen ‘in heaven.’ This is true, first of
all, because the war between the two began in heaven.
Primarily the dragon is the devil and Satan who was
once in heaven. The first part of the struggle between
Michael and the once mighty Lucifer took place in
heaven around the throne of God. Because the war
between the two great antagonists began in heaven, the
symbol first appears to the prophet as being in heaven.
In the second place since the struggle was transferred to
this earth it has continued to be a warfare ‘in high
places’ or ‘heavenly places.’ Eph. 6:11-13.” Bunch,
TR, 142.
Red.—
“Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool.” Isa. 1:18.
“The original word here translated ‘red’ is used
only here and in Rev. 6:4 where it is applied to ‘the red
horse.’” Bunch, TR, 137.
A Great Red Dragon.—
“And the great dragon was cast out, that old
serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth
the whole world.” Rev. 12:9.
“In a primary sense, therefore, the dragon is the
devil and Satan. But it is evident that the great red
dragon with seven heads and ten horns does not describe
Satan in person, for Satan is described elsewhere in the
Bible as the former Lucifer, a mighty and beautiful
angel. It is evident that this Scripture must have both
a primary and secondary application. In a secondary
sense the great red dragon must represent the kingdom
of Satan over which he rules and through which he
makes war on and persecutes the church of God.
Satan is designated as ‘the prince of this world’ and
therefore in its broad sense the dragon must include the
angels, human beings, nations and organizations that

partake of the dragon spirit and are under his control.
Just as all persons and organizations who are controlled
by Christ are Christian in spirit, so all who are
dominated by Satan are dragon is spirit. The dragon
therefore includes every power used by Satan in making
war on the ‘Child’ or ‘Seed’ and the ‘woman’ or on
Christ and His church.” Bunch, TR, 138.

A Great Red Dragon Stood Before the Woman
“The dragon represents some power which
attempted to destroy Christ at His birth. Was any
such attempt made: Who made it? No formal answer to
this question need be given to anyone who has read how
Herod, in a fiendish effort to destroy the infant Jesus,
sent forth and slew all the children in Bethlehem from
two years old and under. But who was Herod? He was
a Roman governor. From Rome Herod derived his
power. Rome ruled at that time over all the world (Luke
2:1), and was therefore the responsible actor in this
event.
Moreover, Rome was the only earthly
government which at that time could be symbolized in
prophecy, for the very reason that its dominion was
universal.
It is not, therefore, without the most
conclusive reason that the Roman Empire is regarded
by Protestant commentators generally to be the
power indicated by the great red dragon.
“It may be worth mentioning that during the
second, third, fourth, and fifth centuries of the Christian
Era, next to the eagle the dragon was the principal
standard of the Roman legions. That dragon was
painted red, as if in faithful response to the picture
held up by the seer of Patmos they would exclaim to
the world, We are the nation which that picture
represents.” Smith, DR, 551-553.
“The line of prophecy in which these symbols are
found begins with Revelation 12, with the dragon that
sought to destroy Christ at His birth. The dragon is said
to be Satan (Revelation 12:9); he it was that moved upon
Herod to put the Saviour to death. But the chief agent
of Satan in making war upon Christ and His people
during the first centuries of the Christian Era was the
Roman Empire, in which paganism was the prevailing
religion. Thus while the dragon, primarily, represents
Satan, it is, in a secondary sense, a symbol of pagan
Rome.” Great Controversy, 438.

293

GEMS FROM REVELATION

Seven Heads.—
“All the nations of antiquity used the dragon as an
emblem. This would show a certain uniformity in their
governments and religions. Revelation 12 gives us a
picture of the dragon with seven heads. What do heads
represent in prophecy? Isa.7:8-9 indicates that they
represent rulers, or systems of government. Hence
the dragon had seven rulers, or systems of
government through which he worked to carry out
his program in the earth. Rev. 17:10 shows that all of
the heads had not appeared at the time the prophecy was
given. Thus these heads must represent the universal
work of the dragon, the entire number used in his
endeavors.” Straw, SR, 81.
“And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and
one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he
cometh, he must continue a short space.” Rev. 17:10.
“The seven heads are seven forms of civil power
which successively bear rule. These seven heads
belong alike to the dragon of Rev. 12, the beast of chap.
13, and that of chap. 17. This shows conclusively that
the dragon and these two beasts are symbols of the same
power under different heads; for there are not three sets
of seven heads, but it is evident that the heads are
successive forms of its power, one of them bearing
rule at a time, and then giving place to another. Rev.
17: 9,10. It appears that the dragon of chap. 12 and the
beast of chap. 13 and that of chap. 17 each represents
some one or more of the seven heads; yet as each is seen
with the seven heads, they must each in a certain sense
extend over all the period covered by the three symbols;
for there are not twenty-one heads. The proper period of
each seems to be this: the dragon before the 1260
years, the beast of chap. 13 during that period, and
the beast of chap. 17 since the deadly wound and
captivity at the close of that period.” Andrews, TAM,
77,78.
“Starting with Babylon, the dragon (Pagan Rome)
would be the fourth phase, the fourth head, of the
seven-headed beast.” PJ.
Ten Horns.—
“The Devil uses earthly powers. ‘The ten horns’
identify the dragon with the Roman empire, with its ten
divisions. Dan. 7:7,24.” Burnside, RWU, 147.
“The beast of ch. 13 and that of ch. 17 also had ten
horns each. Some hold the ten horns of the dragon to be
identical with those of these two beasts, and the latter to
be identical with the ten horns of the fourth beast of
Dan. 7.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 808.
(See further comments in Revelation 13:1.)
Seven Crowns Upon His Heads.—
“The crowns being upon the heads of the dragon

thus emphasize the fact that that beast represents the
governments which Satan has employed against the
Lord’s people down through the ages. In this chapter
we are taken back to the war in heaven between Christ
and Satan, and step by step we are brought down from
that time through Satan’s persecution of the church
during the days of Papal supremacy until his final
conflict with the remnant church. It will be observed
that it is the same dragon that persecutes down through
all the ages. It is the dragon that fought against Jesus in
glory (vs. 7-9). It is the same dragon that sought to slay
Christ when He was born into this world (v. 4). It is the
same dragon that persecutes the church during the days
of Papal supremacy (vs. 6, 13-16). It is the same dragon
that persecutes the remnant church (v. 17). Irrespective
of the government that existed at the various times when
Satan’s fury was particularly manifested, it was the same
Dragon. Thus the crowns upon the heads indicated
that the emphasis was upon the various governments
down the ages that have lent their power to further
the purposes of Satan in persecuting the church.”
Were, WATB, 133.
His Tail Drew.—
“It was the tail of the dragon that drew a third part
of the stars or angels from heaven and cast them to this
earth. In Isaiah 9:15 we read that ‘the prophet that
speaketh lies, he is the tail.’ The devil is said to be ‘a
liar, and the father of it.’ That is, of the first lie. It was
through a lie or falsehood that the angels were deceived
by Satan into joining him in revolt against the authority
and throne of God. It was also through a lie that he
seduced Eve to partake of the forbidden fruit. It is
through lies that he ‘deceiveth the whole world.’ His
tail is still casting down those deceived by his
falsehoods.” Bunch, TR, 142.
Third Part of the Stars of Heaven.—
“Angels are called stars throughout the
Scriptures. See Job 38:7; Isa. 14:13; Rev. 1:20. We are
told that many of the angels sinned and ‘kept not
their first estate’ and ‘left their own habitation.’ See 2
Pet. 2:4; Jude 6. That the stars of our text represent the
angels who joined Lucifer in his revolt and warfare
against Michael and were cast out of heaven with him is
evident from verse 7-9.” Bunch, TR, 142.
“Satan in his rebellion took a third part of the
angels. They turned from the Father and from His Son,
and united with the instigator of rebellion.”
3
Testimonies, 115.
“When Satan became disaffected in heaven, he did
not lay his complaint before God and Christ; but he
went among the angels who thought him perfect and
represented that God had done him injustice in
preferring Christ to himself.
The result of this
misrepresentation was that through their sympathy with
him one third of the angels lost their innocence, their
high estate, and their happy home.” 5 Testimonies,

294

REVELATION 12
291.
The Dragon Stood Before the Woman.—
“‘The dragon stood’ or ‘was standing’
(Weymouth), ‘before the woman,’ indicating a waiting
posture, an expectant attitude. …How long did the
dragon wait in anxious expectation for the birth of
Christ? Just as long as the woman or church waited.
The statement of Gen. 3:15 was spoken to Satan, and he
as well as the woman began to wait for the promise to be
fulfilled.... Satan’s only knowledge of the time when
the Messiah would be born was the revelations of the
prophets, and he was a very diligent student. Later
prophecies revealed to both the church and to Satan the
time, and when it drew near he was also ‘in expectation’
thinking that at last his time had come to overcome Him
in His earthly state whom he had failed to defeat before
His incarnation.” Bunch, TR, 140,141.
“In the light of the total historical perspective of
Daniel 7, the dragon in Revelation 12, who stood in
front of the woman of God ready to devour the
messianic child (12:3,4), functions as the fourth beast
of Daniel 7, that is, as the persecuting Roman Empire.”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 166.
“Satan had indeed timed things well that such an
empire with such an all-powerful emperor ruling over
it, filled the earth when the Son of God was born in
Bethlehem. For the time when Christ was on earth was
the all-crucial day in the history of redemption. If Satan
could destroy the power of Christ, or annihilate him, he
knew that his hellish principles must triumph. He
marshaled the world-empire under the master hand of
the imperial Caesars, absolutely controlling all things
religious as well as all things civil. Never were his
forces better prepared for the battle.” Magan, Vatican &
the War, 36.
“Notice that the pure woman (church) is separate
from, not riding, the beast (state).” PJ
To Devour Her Child As Soon As It Was Born.—
“Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said,
Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain
things? The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers
were gathered together against the Lord, and against his
Christ. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus,
whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel,
were gathered together.” Acts 4:25-27.
“Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of
the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and
slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all
the coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently inquired of
the wise men.” Mt. 2:16.

was turned against Him. From the time when He
appeared as a babe in Bethlehem, the usurper worked to
bring about His destruction. In every possible way he
sought to prevent Jesus from developing a perfect
childhood, a faultless manhood, a holy ministry, and
an unblemished sacrifice. But he was defeated. He
could not lead Jesus into sin. He could not discourage
Him, or drive Him from a work He had come on earth to
do. From the desert to Calvary, the storm of Satan’s
wrath beat upon Him, but the more mercilessly it fell,
the more firmly did the Son of God cling to the hand of
His Father, and press on in the bloodstained path. All
the efforts of Satan to oppress and overcome Him only
brought out in a purer light His spotless character.”
Desire of Ages, 759.
Satan Tries to Destroy Christ’s New Institutions.—
“After the Lord’s ascension, when the disciples
were scattered by persecution, Nicodemus came boldly
to the front. He employed his wealth in sustaining the
infant church that the Jews had expected to be
blotted out at the death of Christ.” Desire of Ages,
177.

REVELATION 12:5
And she brought forth a man child, who
was to rule all nations with a rod of iron:
and her child was caught up unto God, and
to his throne.
A Man Child.—
“Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given;
and the government shall be upon His shoulder; and
His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The
Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of
Peace.” Isaiah 9:6.
“Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign;
Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and
shall call his name Immanuel.” Isa. 7:14.
“The testimony concerning the ‘man child’ which
the dragon seeks to destroy, is applicable to only one
being that has appeared in this world, and that is our
Lord Jesus Christ. No other one has been caught up to
God and His throne, but He has been thus exalted. (Eph.
1:20,21; Heb. 8:2; Rev. 3:21.) No other one has
received from God the commission to rule all nations
with a rod of iron, but He has been appointed to this
work. (Ps. 2:7-9.)
“There can be no doubt that the man child
represents Jesus Christ. The time to which the prophecy
refers is equally evident. It was the time when Christ
appeared in this world as a babe in Bethlehem.” Smith,
DR, 551.

“When Jesus came into the world, Satan’s power

295

“And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among

GEMS FROM REVELATION
us.” John 1:14.
“Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of
the same…. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to
be made like unto his brethren….” Heb. 2:14,17.
“How can we but feel humble when we consider
how Jesus Christ, the Majesty of heaven, took it upon
Himself, even at the cost of His own life, to rescue a
fallen race? In doing this He took upon Himself the
nature of weak, sinful humanity, and came to this
world to battle with the powers of darkness. In His work
of overcoming sin, He opened the way, so that everyone
who will receive Him as his Saviour may also be an
overcomer.” Sermons and Talks, Vol. 2, 299.
Who Was to Rule All Nations With a Rod of Iron.—
“And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that
with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule
them with a rod of iron.” Rev. 19:15.

REVELATION 12:6
And the woman fled into the wilderness,
where she hath a place prepared of God,
that they should feed her there a thousand
two hundred and threescore days.
(See also comments under verse 14.)
Wilderness.—
“Gr. eremos, ‘a forsaken, desert, empty place,’
‘an uninhabited place.’
Here eremos doubtless
represents a place of seclusion or obscurity, an area or
condition in which the church would be in a place of
obscurity, away from the public gaze.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 808.
The Woman Fled Into the Wilderness.—

“Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of
iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s
vessel.” Psalm 2:8,9.
Child was Caught Up to God, and to His Throne.—
“While they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud
received him out of their sight.... This same Jesus,
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come
in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.”
Acts 1:9-11.
“Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places.” Eph. 2:20.
“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me
in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his throne.” Rev. 3:21.
“Jesus rose from the dead and ‘was caught up to
God and to his throne’ (verse 5), where He ‘al-ways
lives’ as our High Priest ‘to make intercession’ for us
(Heb. 7:25,26).” Maxwell, God Cares, 320,321.
“Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of
Zion. I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto
me, thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee.”
Ps. 2:6,7.
“We declare unto you glad tidings, how that the
promise which was made unto the fathers, God hath
fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath
raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second
psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee.” Acts 13:32,33.

The woman [church] finds religious liberty
in the wilderness.
“What may we understand by the woman ‘fleeing
into the wilderness,’ and ‘from the face of the
serpent.’ We must consider it in a state of obscurity;
this was true in the time we have stated. AD 538.
Historians tell us but little about any regular church but
the Roman church, and this has never been in an obscure
state; of course the Roman is not the church in the
wilderness. But they do tell us that, in the days of
Justinian, emperor of Constantinople, there were
many schismatics, as they were called, who opposed
the power of the bishop or pope of Rome, and doings
of councils in the east and west, and a large share of
the latter part of Justinian’s life was spent in
religious broils and expelling from his kingdom these
schismatics; and the code of laws which he published
about AD 533, forbade any Christians any rights or
privileges as citizens in his empire who would not
acknowledge the bishop of Rome as head. And in these
laws he gave the bishop power to hold courts and try all
matters of faith within his kingdom. These, and other
things of like import, drove all true followers of the
word of God to seek a rest out of the jurisdiction of
the city of nations; and, of course, became outlaws to
the Roman government.”
“Then, if we fix the beginning of the exile of the

296

REVELATION 12
church at the same time of setting up anti-Christ, AD
538, then the church was in its exiled state until AD
1798, which would be the 1260 years. It is here worthy
of remark, that the code of laws passed by Justinian
were in full force in the kingdoms belonging to, or
under the control of, the pope of Rome, respecting
the rights and privileges of those who might differ
from the Catholic faith, until the French took Rome,
in 1798, and declared Italy a republic; when free
toleration was given for any religious opinion or
privileges whatsoever. …This is the first time, during
the 1260 years, that free toleration of religion was
granted in any kingdom where the Catholic church
had power.” Miller, Evidence, 216,217.

enemies, the strength of the hills proved a sure defense.
From many a lofty cliff they chanted the praise of God,
and the armies of Rome could not silence their songs of
thanksgiving.” Great Controversy, 65-66.

“Of those who resisted the encroachments of the
papal power, the Waldenses stood foremost. In the
very land where popery had fixed its seat, there its
falsehood and corruption were most steadfastly resisted.
For centuries the churches of Piedmont maintained their
independence; but the time came at last when Rome
insisted upon their submission.
After ineffectual
struggles against her tyranny, the leaders of these
churches reluctantly acknowledged the supremacy of the
power to which the whole world seemed to pay homage.
There were some, however, who refused to yield to
the authority of pope or prelate.
They were
determined to maintain their allegiance to God and
to preserve the purity and simplicity of their faith. A
separation took place. Those who adhered to the
ancient faith now withdrew; some, forsaking their
native Alps, raised the banner of truth in foreign
lands; others retreated to the secluded glens and
rocky fastnesses of the mountains, and there preserved
their freedom to worship God.” Great Controversy, 64.

“Roger Williams was respected and beloved as a
faithful minister…; yet his steadfast denial of the right of
civil magistrates to authority over the church, and his
demand for religious liberty, could not be tolerated. The
application of this new doctrine, it was urged, would
‘subvert the fundamental state and government of the
country.’—(George Bancroft, History of the United
States of America). He was sentenced to banishment
from the colonies, and, finally, to avoid arrest, he was
forced to flee, amid the cold and storms of winter,
into the unbroken forest.” Great Controversy, 294.

“Among the leading causes that had led to the
separation of the true church from Rome was the
hatred of the latter toward the Bible Sabbath. As
foretold by prophecy, the papal power cast down the
truth to the ground. …They demanded not only that
Sunday be hallowed, but that the Sabbath be profaned;
and they denounced in the strongest language those who
dared to show it honor. It was only by fleeing from the
power of Rome that any could obey God's law in
peace.
“Behind the lofty bulwarks of the mountains—
in all ages the refuge of the persecuted and
oppressed—the Waldenses found a hiding place. Here
the light of truth was kept burning amid the dark-ness of
the Middle Ages. Here, for a thousand years, witnesses
for the truth maintained the ancient faith.
“God had provided for His people a sanctuary
of awful grandeur, befitting the mighty truths
committed to their trust. To those faithful exiles the
mountains were an emblem of the immutable
righteousness of Jehovah. …They thanked God that
He had provided for them an asylum from the wrath
and cruelty of men. They rejoiced in their freedom to
worship before Him. Often when pursued by their

“Their religious belief was their inheritance
from their fathers. They contended for the faith of
the apostolic church—‘the faith which was once
delivered unto the saints.’ Jude 3. ‘The church in the
wilderness,’ and not the proud hierarchy enthroned in
the world’s great capital, was the true church of
Christ, the guardian of the treasures of truth which
God has committed to His people to be given to the
world.” Great Controversy, 64.

Recalls the Exodus Story.—
“And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how
that the LORD thy God bare thee, as a man doth bear his
son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came into this
place.” Deuteronomy 1:31.
Where She Hath a Place Prepared of God.—
“Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee
in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I
have prepared.” Exodus 23:20.
They.—
“The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—three distinct
eternal Beings. See Rev. 1:4,5. And the angels.” PJ.
They Should Feed Her There.—
“Feed the flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.”
1Peter 5:2.
“Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where
thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at
noon.” Song of Solomon 1:7. [The ‘noon’ of the
gospel day was 1000 AD, the noon of the papacy was
1168 AD.]
“The Vaudois churches, in their purity and
simplicity, resembled the church of apostolic times.
Rejecting the supremacy of the pope and prelate, they
held the Bible as the only supreme, infallible authority.
Their pastors, unlike the lordly priests of Rome,
followed the example of their Master, who ‘came not

297

GEMS FROM REVELATION
to be ministered unto, but to minister.’ They fed the
flock of God, leading them to the green pastures and
living fountains of His holy word. Far from the
monuments of human pomp and pride the people
assembled, not in magnificent churches or grand
cathedrals, but beneath the shadow of the mountains, in
the Alpine valleys, or, in time of danger, in some rocky
stronghold, to listen to the words of truth from the
servants of Christ. The pastors not only preached the
gospel, but they visited the sick, catechized the
children, admonished the erring, and labored to settle
disputes and promote harmony and brotherly love.
In times of peace they were sustained by the freewill
offerings of the people; but, like Paul the tentmaker,
each learned some trade or profession by which, if
necessary, to provide for his own support.” The Great
Controversy, 68
A Thousand Two Hundred and Threescore Days.—
“The dark ages lasted from 538 to 1798. During
this time there was a great church showing its authority,
represented in the cathedrals. That was not the church
that fled to the wilderness.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 114.
“In the sixth century the papacy had become firmly
established. Its seat of power was fixed in the imperial
city, and the bishop of Rome was declared to be the head
over the entire church. Paganism had given place to the
papacy. The dragon had given to the beast ‘his power,
and his seat, and great authority.’ Rev. 13:2. And
now began the 1260 years of papal oppression
foretold in the prophecies of Daniel and the Revelation.
Dan. 7:25; Rev. 13:5-7. …For hundreds of years the
church of Christ found refuge in seclusion and
obscurity. Thus says the prophet: ‘The woman fled
into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared
of God, that they should feed her there a thousand
two hundred and threescore days.’ Rev. 12:6.” Great
Controversy, 54.
“And he shall speak great words against the most
High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High,
and think to change times and laws; and they shall be
given into his hand until a time and times and the
dividing of times.” Dan. 7:25.
“And to the woman were given two wings of a
great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into
her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times,
and half a time, from the face of the serpent.” Rev.
12:14.
“And power was given unto him to continue forty
and two months. And he opened his mouth in
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his
tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was
given unto him to make war with the saints, and to
overcome them.” Rev. 13:5-7.
“We have a common time period in these [seven]
passages (1260 days and equivalents) and a common

event: persecution of the saints.” Biblical Research
Inst., 1SOR, 329,330.
“The church fled into the wilderness at the time the
papacy was firmly established in 538, where it was
nourished by the word of God and the ministration of
angels during the long, dark, and bloody rule of that
power for 1260 years. The first six verses of this
chapter, as has been seen, take us down to the close of
the 1260 years in 1798, which marked the end of the
papal supremacy.” Smith, DR, 553.

REVELATION 12:7,8
And there was war in heaven: Michael
and his angels fought against the dragon;
and the dragon fought and his angels,
And prevailed not; neither was their
place found any more in heaven.
There Was War in Heaven.—
“In the 7th verse ...we are carried back into
previous ages. How far?—…to the very beginning of
the
great
controversy
between
truth
and
unrighteousness, when in heaven itself Michael (Christ)
and His angels fought against the dragon (Satan) and
his angels.” Smith, DR, 554.
“It was an angelic war. There was no destruction
of life. It was a struggle for supremacy, for control.
This is fascinating. The Creator could have put Lucifer
out of action in a flash, but He permitted His heavenly
messagers to strive for the mastery. One side fought
with Michael, the other with Lucifer. What was God’s
purpose in permitting this? Undoubtedly it was to reveal
their loyalty. It was a public declaration of their
allegiance. God always calls for public displays of
loyalty. Jesus said, ‘For whosoever shall be ashamed
of me and my words, of him shall the son of man be
ashamed…’ Luke 9:26. God will never accept
neutrality. It is counted as denial of Christ.”
[‘Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord,
curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof: because
they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of
the Lord against the mighty. Judges 7:23.] Cooke,
#18-UR, 11.
The War.—
“Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast
said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of
the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God.” Ezekiel
28:2,
“Satan was once an honored angel in heaven, next
to Christ. His countenance, like those of the other
angels, was mild and expressive of happiness. His
forehead was high and broad, showing great intelligence.
His form was perfect; his bearing noble and majestic.

298

REVELATION 12
But when God said to His Son, ‘Let us make man in
our image,’ Satan was jealous of Jesus. He wished to
be consulted concerning the formation of man, and
because he was not, he was filled with envy, jealousy,
and hatred. He desired to receive the highest honors in
heaven next to God.” Early Writings, 145.
“Sin originated with him who, next to Christ, had
been most honored of God and was highest in power and
glory among the inhabitants of heaven. Lucifer, ‘son of
the morning,’ was first of the covering cherubs, holy
and undefiled. He stood in the presence of the great
Creator, and the ceaseless beams of glory enshrouding
the eternal God rested upon him. ‘Thus saith the Lord
God; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and
perfect in beauty. Thou hast been in Eden the garden of
God; every precious stone was thy covering.... Thou art
the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so:
thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast
walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.
Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou
wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.’ Ezekiel
28:12-15.
“Little by little Lucifer came to indulge the desire
for self-exaltation. The Scripture says, ‘Thine heart
was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast
corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness.’
Ezekiel 28:17. ‘Thou hast said in thine heart,... I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God.... I will be
like the Most High.’ Isaiah 14:13, 14. Though all his
glory was from God, this mighty angel came to regard it
as pertaining to himself. Not content with his position,
though honored above the heavenly host, he ventured to
covet homage due alone to the Creator. Instead of
seeking to make God supreme in the affections and
allegiance of all created beings, it was his endeavor to
secure their service and loyalty to himself. And coveting
the glory with which the infinite Father had invested His
Son, this prince of angels aspired to power that was the
prerogative of Christ alone.
“Now the perfect harmony of heaven was broken.
Lucifer’s disposition to serve himself instead of his
Creator aroused a feeling of apprehension when
observed by those who considered that the glory of God
should be supreme.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 35.
“He [Satan] gained the sympathy of some of his
associates by suggesting thoughts of criticism
regarding the government of God. This evil seed was
scattered in a most seducing manner; and after it had
sprung up and taken root in the minds of many, he
gathered the ideas that he himself had first implanted in
the minds of others, and brought them before the
highest order of angels as the thoughts of other minds
against the government of God. Thus, by ingenious
methods of his own devising, Lucifer introduced
rebellion in heaven.” (Letter 162, 1906). 4BC, 1143.
“Satan determined to be first in the councils of
heaven, and equal with God. He began his work of

rebellion with the angels under his command, seeking to
diffuse among them the spirit of discontent. And he
worked in so deceptive a way that many of the angels
were won to his allegiance before his purposes were
fully known. Even the loyal angels could not fully
discern his character, nor see to what his work was
leading. When Satan had succeeded in winning many
angels to his side, he took his cause to God, representing
that it was the desire of the angels that he occupy the
position that Christ held.”
“The evil continued to work until the spirit of
disaffection ripened into active revolt. Then there was
war in heaven, and Satan, with all who sympathized
with him, was cast out. Satan had warred for the
mastery in heaven, and had lost the battle. God could
no longer trust him with honor and supremacy, and
these, with the part he had taken in the government of
heaven, were taken from him.” (Review & Herald,
1/28/1909). 7BC, 973.
War: Weapons Used.—
“Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of
your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is
no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of
his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.” John
8:44.
“God could have destroyed Satan and his
sympathizers as easily as one can cast a pebble to the
earth; but He did not do this. Rebellion was not to be
overcome by force. Compelling power is found only
under Satan’s government. The Lord’s principles are
not of this order. His authority rests upon goodness,
mercy, and love; and the presentation of these
principles is the means to be used. God’s government is
moral, and truth and love are to be the prevailing
power.” Desire of Ages, 759.
“In His dealing with sin, God could employ only
righteousness and truth. Satan could use what God
could not—flattery and deceit. He had sought to
falsify the word of God and had misrepresented His
plan of government before the angels, claiming that
God was not just in laying laws and rules upon the
inhabitants of heaven; that in requiring submission and
obedience from His creatures, He was seeking merely
the exaltation of Himself. Therefore it must be
demonstrated before the inhabitants of heaven, as well
as of all the worlds, that God’s government was just, His
law perfect. Satan had made it appear that he himself
was seeking to promote the good of the universe. The
true character of the usurper, and his real object, must be
understood by all. He must have time to manifest
himself by his wicked works.” Great Controversy,
498.
“God never forces the will or the conscience; but
Satan’s constant resort—to gain control of those whom
he cannot otherwise seduce—is compulsion by cruelty.

299

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Through fear or force he endeavors to rule the
conscience and to secure homage to himself. To
accomplish this, he works through both religious and
secular authorities, moving them to the enforcement of
human laws in defiance of the law of God.” Great
Controversy, 591.
“In so deceptive a way did he [Lucifer] work that
the sentiments that he inculcated could not be dealt with
until they had developed in the minds of those who
received them.” (Letter 114, 1903) 7BC, 973.
“ ‘God is love.’ 1 John 4:16. His nature, His law,
is love. It ever has been; it ever will be....
“The history of the great conflict between good and
evil, from the time it first began in heaven to the final
overthrow of rebellion and the total eradication of sin, is
also a demonstration of God’s unchanging love.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 31.
Michael.—
“# 3413 Michael = ‘who is like God.’” Strong’s
Concordance.
“Jude, verse 9, has the expression, ‘Michael the
archangel.’ Archangel is the head over angels, as
archbishop is head over bishops. But who is the
archangel? The apostle is 1 Thess. 4:16, says, ‘The Lord
Himself shall descend from Heaven with a shut, with
the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God
and the dead in Christ shall rise first.’ And John 5:25,
proves that it is the voice of the Son of God that wakes
the dead to life: ‘The dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God; and they that hear shall live.’ These
texts prove that Michael is the Son of God.” White,
James, Bible Adventism, 119,120.
Michael and His Angels Fought.—
“In heavenly council the angels pleaded with
Lucifer. The Son of God presented before him the
greatness, the goodness, and the justice of the
Creator, and the sacred, unchanging nature of His
law. God Himself had established the order of heaven;
and in departing from it, Lucifer would dishonor his
Maker and bring ruin upon himself. But the warning,
given in infinite love and mercy, only aroused a spirit
of resistance. Lucifer allowed his jealousy of Christ to
prevail, and became the more determined.” Patriarchs
& Prophets, 36.
“The very angels who, when Satan was seeking
the supremacy, fought the battle in the heavenly
courts and triumphed on the side of God, the very
angels who shouted for joy over the creation of our
world and its sinless inhabitants, the angels who
witnessed the fall of man and his expulsion from his
Eden home—these very heavenly messengers are most
intensely interested to work in union with the fallen,
redeemed race for the salvation of human beings
perishing in their sins.” 6 Testimonies, 456.

The Dragon and His Angels Fought.—
“Leaving his place in the immediate presence of
the Father, Lucifer went forth to diffuse the spirit of
discontent among the angels. He worked with
mysterious secrecy, and for a time concealed his real
purpose under an appearance of reverence for God. He
began to insinuate doubts concerning the laws that
governed heavenly beings, intimating that though laws
might be necessary for the inhabitants of the worlds,
angels, being more exalted, needed no such restraint,
for their own wisdom was a sufficient guide. They
were not beings that could bring dishonor to God; all
their thoughts were holy; it was no more possible for
them than for God Himself to err. The exaltation of the
Son of God as equal with the Father was represented as
an injustice to Lucifer, who, it was claimed, was also
entitled to reverence and honor. If this prince of angels
could but attain to his true, exalted position, great good
would accrue to the entire host of heaven; for it was his
object to secure freedom for all. But now even the liberty
which they had hitherto enjoyed was at an end; for an
absolute Ruler had been appointed them, and to His
authority all must pay homage. Such were the subtle
deceptions that through the wiles of Lucifer were fast
obtaining in the heavenly courts.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 37.
“Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of
the field which the LORD God had made. And he said
unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat
of every tree of the garden? …And the serpent said unto
the woman, Ye shall not surely die.” Gen 3:1,4.
And Prevailed Not.—
“And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not:
behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David,
hath prevailed….” Rev. 5:5.
Their Place Not Found Any More in Heaven.—
“For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be;
yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it
shall not be.” Psalm 37:10
“Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have
heard that anti-christ shall come, even now are there
many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last
time. They went out from us, but they were not of us;
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us: but they went out, that they might
be made manifest that they were not all of us.” 1 John
2:18,19.
Places For God’s People.—
“Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If thou wilt walk in
my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou
shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts,
and I will give thee places to walk among these that
stand by.” Zechariah 3:7.

300

REVELATION 12

REVELATION 12:9
And the great dragon was cast out, that
old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan,
which deceiveth the whole world: he was
cast out into the earth, and his angels were
cast out with him.
The Great Dragon Was Cast Out.—
“All heaven seemed in commotion. The angels
were marshaled in companies, each division with a
higher commanding angel at its head.
Satan,
ambitious to exalt himself, and unwilling to submit to
the authority of Jesus, was insinuating against the
government of God. Some of the angels sympathized
with Satan in his rebellion, and others strongly
contended for the honor and wisdom of God in giving
authority to His Son. There was contention among the
angels. Satan and his sympathizers were striving to
reform the government of God. They wished to look
into His unsearchable wisdom, and ascertain His purpose
in exalting Jesus and endowing Him with such unlimited
power and command.
They rebelled against the
authority of the Son. All the heavenly host were
summoned to appear before the Father to have each
case decided. It was there determined that Satan
should be expelled from heaven, with all the angels
who had joined him in the rebellion. Then there was
war in heaven. Angels were engaged in the battle;
Satan wished to conquer the Son of God and those who
were submissive to His will. But the good and true
angels prevailed, and Satan, with his followers, was
driven from heaven.” Early Writings, 145,146

Satan and His Angels Cast Out of Heaven.
“Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that

thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. By the
multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst
of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I
will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God:
and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the
midst of the stones of fire.” Ezekiel 28:15,16.
“How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son
of the morning! How art thou cut down to the
ground, which didst weaken the nations. For thou hast
said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt
my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon
the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north.
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds. I will be
like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to
hell, to the sides of the pit.” Isaiah 14:12-15.
“God saw that if Satan were not expelled from
heaven the angelic host would be in constant danger....”
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students, 268.
Deception Removed, Then Comes Rain.-“Commonly, when a storm approaches, first the
lightning is seen, then comes the rain.
“The casting out of Satan [like lightning] has to
do with the revelation of his real character in the
minds of God’s subjects whoever and wherever they
may be. When that occurs there is a separation of God’s
subjects from the presence of Satan and his forces. This
is why Satan desperately needs to use deception and
appear as an angel of light. On earth he uses false
religious leaders. Jesus said, ‘Beware of false prophets,
which come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves.’ Mt. 7:15. When God’s
watchmen finally perceive the apostasy in the church
and that the leaders are being controlled by Satan, and
when Satan’s masquerade is removed from the minds of
God’s subjects by the sound of their trumpet, and there is
a clear picture of his real character (and of the church he
is using), then God’s subjects separate from that
corporate sin.
“This separation from corporate sin always
results in rain. It happened in Elijah’s day on Mt.
Carmel, at Pentecost, in the 1844 period, and will
happen again in the loud cry. See Ezekiel 34:25-27,
Joel 2:20-23; Isaiah 30:21-25; Jer. 5:23-6:1; Pr. 1:23.”
PJ
Where Was Satan Cast Out?—
“The first expulsion of Satan was to the place
called hell, or ‘tartarus’. ‘For if God spared not the
angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell (Greek:
‘tartarus’) II Peter 2:4.
‘ ‘Tartarus’ is not this earth. Lucifer and his angels
originally were cast out before this earth was created;
however, after creation, Lucifer had access to this earth.
‘Tartarus’ is a place of ‘chains of darkness’ (I Peter
2:4) or ‘everlasting chains under darkness’. (Jude 6)
Darkness, is the opposite of light, indicating that it is a
place outside the presence of God. It was not Eden, nor

301

GEMS FROM REVELATION
could it apply to other worlds, for they are all realms of
light, wherein is God’s presence, as illustrated in
Genesis 2. We suggest that ‘Tartarus’ is outer space,
the area between the worlds. This is a place of
darkness. We suggest that from outer space Satan had
access to this and other worlds. Verse 9 indicates a
second casting out, but this time to the earth.” Cooke,
#18-UR, 10.
That Old Serpent, Called the Devil, and Satan.—
“Satan is described by a quartet of terms: dragon,
old serpent, devil, and Satan. What do these represent?
The dragon represents him as a persecutor and
destroyer. The old serpent speaks of his cunning and
deception. The devil indicates that he is a slanderer or
liar. (John 8:44) The fourth term, Satan, denotes an
adversary, especially in the setting of a law court. He is
the accuser of the brethren.” Cooke, #18-UR, 10.
“The dragon is said to be Satan (Revelation
12:9); he it was that moved upon Herod to put the
Saviour to death. But the chief agent of Satan in making
war upon Christ and His people during the first centuries
of the Christian Era was the Roman Empire, in which
paganism was the prevailing religion. Thus while the
dragon, primarily, represents Satan, it is, in a
secondary sense, a symbol of pagan Rome.” Great
Controversy, 438.
“In Rev. 12:9 the dragon is identified as the
devil. From this divine explanation we might infer that
other symbolic beasts of the prophecies of Daniel and
the Revelation are also probably meant to represent the
various phases of Satan’s evil work in using the nations
as his puppets. The evil one does not appear personally
on earth, but he employs every human organization he
can to oppose the work and the people of God.”
Price, Time of the End, 27.
“Rome Pagan is compared to the old serpent
because he works deceitfully and deceives the church,
(woman,) as the serpent did Eve, the woman in the
garden.” Miller, Evidence, 210.
Which Deceiveth the Whole World.—
“He [Satan] desired to usurp the throne of God.
Failing in this, he has worked in darkness, in
crookedness, in deception, to usurp his place in the
hearts of men. He has set up his throne between God
and man, to appropriate the adoration that belongs to
God alone.” (Manuscript 33, 1911). 6BC 1119
“Satan has continued to present to men, as he
presented to the angels, his false representations of
Christ and of God, and he has won the world to his
side. Even the professedly Christian churches have
taken sides with the great apostate.” (Review & Herald,
1/28/1909). 7BC, 973.
“Satan has originated fables with which to

deceive. He commenced in heaven to war against the
foundation of God’s government, and since his fall he
has carried on his rebellion against the law of God, and
has brought the mass of professed Christians to trample
under their feet the fourth commandment, which brings
to view the living God. He has torn down the original
Sabbath of the Decalogue, and substituted in its place
one of the laboring days of the week.” 1 Testimonies,
342.
“Satan makes the final generation (dwarfs
compared to the giants of the first generation) believe in
evolution—that they are getting better!
What a
deception.” PJ.
(SECONDARILY, PAGAN ROME): “This may be
said of Rome, for she conquered more nations by
deceit and flattery than by fair warfare.” Miller,
Evidence, 210.
Cast Into the Earth.—
“When Satan was thrust out of heaven, he
determined to make the earth his kingdom. When he
tempted and overcame Adam and Eve, he thought that
he had gained possession of this world; ‘be-cause,’
said he, ‘they have chosen me as their ruler.’ He
claimed that it was impossible that forgiveness should be
granted to the sinner, and therefore the fallen race were
his rightful subjects, and the world was his. But God
gave His own dear Son—one equal with Himself—to
bear the penalty of transgression, and thus He provided a
way by which they might be restored to His favor, and
brought back to their Eden home. Christ undertook to
redeem man and to rescue the world from the grasp of
Satan. The great controversy begun in heaven was to
be decided in the very world, on the very same field,
that Satan claimed as his.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 69.
“When the conflict was renewed upon the earth,
Satan again won a seeming advantage. By transgression,
man became his captive, and man’s kingdom also was
betrayed into the hands of the arch rebel. Now the
way seemed open for Satan to establish an
independent kingdom, and to defy the authority of God
and His Son. But the plan of salvation made it possible
for man again to be brought into harmony with God, and
to render obedience to His law, and for both man and the
earth to be finally redeemed from the power of the
wicked one.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 331.
His Angels Cast Out With Him.—
“Satan and the fallen angels had suffered a terrible
defeat, which Christ describes by saying, ‘I beheld
Satan as lightning fall from heaven’ (Luke 10:18), and
Peter tells us that these fallen angels have been delivered
‘into chains of darkness to be re-served unto
judgment’ (2 Pt. 2:4).” Smith, DR, 555.
“And the angels which kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in

302

REVELATION 12
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of
the great day.” Jude 6.
“He [God] cannot endure the presence of sin. It
is the thing that His soul hates. Even the angels that
stood about His throne, whom He loved, but who kept
not their first estate of loyalty, God cast out of heaven
with their rebel leader. Holiness is the foundation of
God’s throne; sin is the opposite of holiness; sin
crucified the Son of God.” Testimonies to Ministers,
145.
With Him.—
“When it was announced that with all his
sympathizers he must be expelled from the abodes of
bliss, then the rebel leader boldly avowed his contempt
for the Creator’s law. He denounced the divine statutes
as a restriction of their liberty, and declared that it was
his purpose to secure the abolition of law. With one
accord, Satan and his host threw the blame of their
rebellion wholly upon Christ, declaring that if they
had not been reproved, they would never have
rebelled.” (Manuscript 125, 1907). 4BC, 1162.

REVELATION 12:10
And I heard a loud voice saying in
heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength,
and the kingdom of our God, and the power
of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren
is cast down, which accused them before our
God day and night.
Now is Come Salvation, Strength, and the Kingdom of
our God, and the Power of His Christ.—
“The first declaration by the ‘loud voice’ consists
of a series of facts relative to Christ’s triumph over
Satan on the cross—the plan of ‘salvation’ was made
sure, ‘strength’ was provided for resisting the wiles of
Satan, Christ’s ‘kingdom’ was made sure, and His
‘power,’ literally, ‘authority,’ to be man’s Saviour, high
priest, and king was confirmed. (Matt. 28:18).” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 810.
Salvation.—
“Salvation came at Calvary. After the first conflict,
Satan could return to Heaven. Job 1:6-12. He claimed
to represent this world. Heb. 9:24. After Calvary we
have Christ as our Heavenly Representative. He
‘appears in the presence of God for us.’” Burnside,
RWU, 149.
The Kingdom of Our God.—
“Satan had contended that he was the rightful ruler
of this world. His failure to lead Jesus into sin
assured the kingdom for Christ.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 811.

Power of His Christ.—
“As a result of Calvary, power is available to the
believer to successfully resist Satan. …The Greek
word of power is ‘exousia’ meaning ‘authority’.
Because of Satan’s insinuations, Christ’s authority had
been under question. The war in heaven had been over
the question of authority, but now as a result of Calvary,
Jesus authority is fully established. His authority as
Saviour, Priest, and King is no longer under question.
At the close of His earthly ministry Jesus declared, ‘All
power [authority] is given unto me in heaven and in
earth.’ Matt. 28:18.” Cooke, #18-UR, 16.
“For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for
it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.”
Romans 1:16.
The Accuser of Our Brethren.—
“There has ever been a class professing godliness,
who, instead of following on to know the truth, make it
their religion to seek some fault of character or error of
faith in those with whom they do not agree. Such are
Satan’s right-hand helpers. Accusers of the brethren are
not few, and they are always active when God is at work
and His servants are rendering Him true homage. They
will put a false coloring upon the words and acts of
those who love and obey the truth. They will
represent the most earnest, zealous, self-denying
servants of Christ as deceived or deceivers. It is their
work to misrepresent the motives of every true and
noble deed, to circulate insinuations, and arouse
suspicion in the minds of the inexperienced. In every
conceivable manner they will seek to cause that which is
pure and righteous to be regarded as foul and deceptive.
“But none need be deceived concerning them. It
may be readily seen whose children they are, whose
example they follow, and whose work they do. ‘Ye
shall know them by their fruits.’ Matthew 7:16. Their
course resembles that of Satan, the envenomed slanderer,
‘the accuser of our brethren.’ Revelation 12:10.”
Great Controversy, 519,520.
“The work of Satan as an accuser began in heaven.
This has been his work on earth ever since man’s fall,
and it will be his work in a special sense as we
approach nearer to the close of this world’s history.”
Christ’s Object Lessons, 167,168.
The Accuser is Cast Down (At the Cross).—
“Could one sin have been found in Christ, had He
in one particular yielded to Satan to escape the terrible
torture, the enemy of God and man would have
triumphed. Christ bowed His head and died, but He held
fast His faith and His submission to God. ‘And I heard a
loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation,
and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the
power of His Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is
cast down, which accused them before our God day and
night.’ Rev. 12:10.

303

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Satan saw that his disguise was torn away. His
administration was laid open before the unfallen angels
and before the heavenly universe. He had revealed
himself as a murderer. By shedding the blood of the
Son of God, he had uprooted himself from the
sympathies of the heavenly beings. Henceforth his
work was restricted. Whatever attitude he might
assume, he could no longer await the angels as they
came from the heavenly courts, and before them
accuse Christ’s brethren of being clothed with the
garments of blackness and the defilement of sin. The
last link of sympathy between Satan and the heavenly
world was broken.
“Yet Satan was not then destroyed. The angels did
not even then understand all that was involved in the
great controversy. The principles at stake were to be
more fully revealed. And for the sake of man, Satan’s
existence must be continued. Man as well as angels
must see the contrast between the Prince of light and
the prince of darkness. He must choose whom he will
serve.” Desire of Ages, 761.
“It was Satan that prompted the world’s rejection
of Christ. The prince of evil exerted all his power and
cunning to destroy Jesus; for he saw that the Saviour’s
mercy and love, His compassion and pitying tenderness,
were representing to the world the character of God.
Satan contested every claim put forth by the Son of
God and employed men as his agents to fill the
Saviour’s life with suffering and sorrow.
The
sophistry and falsehood by which he had sought to
hinder the work of Jesus, the hatred manifested through
the children of disobedience, his cruel accusations
against Him whose life was one of unexampled
goodness, all sprang from deep-seated revenge. The
pent-up fires of envy and malice, hatred and revenge,
burst forth on Calvary against the Son of God, while
all heaven gazed upon the scene in silent horror.
“When the great sacrifice had been con-summated,
Christ ascended on high, refusing the adoration of angels
until He had presented the request: ‘I will that they also,
whom Thou hast given Me, be with Me where I am.’
John 17:24. Then with inexpressible love and power
came forth the answer from the Father's throne: ‘Let all
the angels of God worship Him.’ Hebrews 1:6. Not a
stain rested upon Jesus. His humiliation ended, His
sacrifice completed, there was given unto Him a name
that is above every name.
“Now the guilt of Satan stood forth without
excuse. He had revealed his true character as a liar
and a murderer. It was seen that the very same spirit
with which he ruled the children of men, who were
under his power, he would have manifested had he been
permitted to control the inhabitants of heaven.
“Satan’s lying charges against the divine
character and government appeared in their true
light. He had accused God of seeking merely the
exaltation of Himself in requiring submission and
obedience from His creatures, and had declared that,
while the Creator exacted self-denial from all others, He

Himself practiced no self-denial and made no sacrifice.
Now it was seen that for the salvation of a fallen and
sinful race, the Ruler of the universe had made the
greatest sacrifice which love could make; for ‘God was
in Christ, reconciling the world unto Himself.’ 2 Cor.
5:19. It was seen, also, that while Lucifer had opened
the door for the entrance of sin by his desire for honor
and supremacy, Christ had, in order to destroy sin,
humbled Himself and become obedient unto death.”
Great Controversy, 501,502.

REVELATION 12:11
And they overcame him by the blood of
the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony; and they loved not their lives
unto the death.
They Overcame Him.—
“Christ has made it possible for every member
of the human family to resist temptation. All who
would live godly lives may overcome as Christ
overcame, by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of
their testimony.
That long fast of the Saviour
strengthened Him to endure. He gave evidence to man
that He would begin the work of overcoming just
where ruin began—on the point of appetite.”
Counsels on Diet & Foods, 186.
“Your usefulness as laborers for God in the work of
recovering perishing souls, depends much on your
success in overcoming appetite. Overcome the desire
to gratify appetite, and if you do this your passions
will be easily controlled. Then your mental and
moral powers will be stronger. ‘And they overcame
...by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony.’” Counsels on Diet & Foods, 162.
Him.—
“The accuser of the brethren. (Satan works through
human agents.)” PJ
“Christ is our High Priest. Satan stands before
Him night and day as an accuser of the brethren.
With his masterly power he presents every objectionable
feature of character as sufficient reason for the
withdrawal of Christ’s protecting power, thus allowing
Satan to discourage and destroy those whom he has
caused to sin. But Christ has made atonement for every
sinner. Can we by faith hear our Advocate saying, ‘The
Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath
chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand
plucked out of the fire?’” (Manuscript 125, 1901).
4BC, 1178.
By the Blood of the Lamb.—
“Satan, the mighty, angelic being can be overcome.
And he is overcome in two ways: First, ‘they overcame
him by the blood of the Lamb’, i.e. on the basis of

304

REVELATION 12
Christ’s shed blood. In what way? Scripture employs
fifteen different phrases to emphasize the power of the
blood of Christ. ‘There is power in the blood.’
“1. It washes away our sins. (Rev. 1:5)
“2. It cleanses us from all sin. (1 John 1:7,9)
“3. It makes our spiritual garments white. (Rev.7:14)
“4. It propitiates or covers our sins. (Rom.3:25)
“5. It gives remission for our sins. (Heb.9:22)
“6. It purges the conscience. (Heb.9:14)
“7. It justifies the believer. (Rom.5:9)
“8. It gives peace to the guilty. (Col.5:20)
“9. It makes us nigh to God. (Eph.2:13)
“10. It redeems, or buys us back. (Col.1:14)
“11. It gives life. (John 6:54)
“12. It purchases the church of God. (Acts 20:28)
“13. It gives boldness to enter into God’s presence.
(Heb.10:19)
“14. It makes us perfect to do His will.
(Heb.13:20-21)
“15. It overcomes Satan. (Rev.12:11).”
Cooke, #18-UR, 17,18

They Loved Not Their Lives Unto the Death.—
“The greatest want of the world is the want of
men—men who will not be bought or sold, men who in
their inmost souls are true and honest, men who do not
fear to call sin by its right name, men whose conscience
is as true to duty as the needle to the pole, men who will
stand for the right though the heavens fall.”
Education, 57.

By The Word of Their Testimony.—
“If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shalt believe in thy heart that God raised him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart
man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.” Rom. 10:9,10.

“Whenever, through faith in the Lamb of God, a
soul renounces the service of sin, Satan’s wrath is
kindled. The holy life of Abel testified against Satan’s
claim that it is impossible for man to keep God’s law.
When Cain, moved by the spirit of the wicked one, saw
that he could not control Abel, he was so enraged that he
destroyed his life. And wherever there are any who
will stand in vindication of the righteousness of the
law of God, the same spirit will be manifested against
them. It is the spirit that through all the ages has set up
the stake and kindled the burning pile for the disciples of
Christ. But the cruelties heaped upon the follower of
Jesus are instigated by Satan and his hosts because they
cannot force him to submit to their control. It is the rage
of a vanquished foe. Every martyr of Jesus has died a
conqueror. Says the prophet, ‘They overcame him
[‘that old serpent, called the devil, and Satan’] by the
blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the
death.’ Rev. 12:11, 9.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 77.

“The gospel is to be presented, not as a lifeless
theory, but as a living force to change the life. God
would have His servants bear testimony to the fact
that through His grace men may possess
Christlikeness of character and may rejoice in the
assurance of His great love.” Ministry of Healing, 99.
“The Lord has shown me that great interest should
be taken by Sabbathkeepers to keep up their meetings
and make them interesting. There is great necessity of
more interest and energy being manifested in this
direction. All should have something to say for the
Lord, for by so doing they will be blest. A book of
remembrance is written of those who do not forsake
the assembling of themselves together, but speak
often one to another. The remnant are to overcome by
the blood of the Lamb and the word of their testimony.
Some expect to overcome alone by the blood of the
Lamb, without making any special effort of their own. I
saw that God has been merciful in giving us the power of
speech. He has given us a tongue, and we are
accountable to Him for its use. We should glorify God
with our mouth, speaking in honor of the truth and of
His unbounded mercy, and overcome by the word of
our testimony through the blood of the Lamb.
“We should not come together to remain silent;
those only are remembered of the Lord who assemble to
speak of His honor and glory and tell of His power; upon
such the blessing of God will rest, and they will be
refreshed.” Early Writings, 114,115.

“Calvary so reveals the love of God that
Christians would rather die than disobey. They
would rather suffer than sin. Of the early church, one
writer says, ‘Stephen was stoned, Matthew was slain in
Ethiopia, Mark dragged through the streets until dead,
Luke hanged. Peter and Simeon were crucified, Andrew
tied to a cross, James beheaded, Philip crucified and
stoned, Bartholomew flayed alive, Thomas pierced with
lances, James, the less, thrown from the temple and
beaten to death, Jude shot to death with arrows, Matthias
stoned to death and Paul beheaded.’—J. M. Carroll, The
Trail of Blood, pp. 11,12.” Burnside, RWU, 150.

REVELATION 12:12
Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye
that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of
the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come
down unto you, having great wrath, because
he knoweth that he hath but a short time.
Rejoice ye Heavens, and Ye that Dwell in Them.—
“This refers to the intelligent beings of unfallen
worlds. Why the rejoicing of other worlds? Because
Satan’s activities as accuser, have been curbed or
terminated. Until Calvary Satan had access to the
heavenly councils, but since Calvary access is no longer
available.” Cooke, #18-UR, 19.

305

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“God is the fountain of life; and when one chooses
the service of sin, he separates from God, and thus cuts
himself off from life. He is ‘alienated from the life of
God.’ Christ says, ‘All they that hate Me love death.’
Eph. 4:18; Prov. 8:36. God gives them existence for a
time that they may develop their character and
reveal their principles.
This accomplished, they
receive the results of their own choice. By a life of
rebellion, Satan and all who unite with him place
themselves so out of harmony with God that His very
presence is to them a consuming fire. The glory of Him
who is love will destroy them.
“At the beginning of the great controversy, the
angels did not understand this. Had Satan and his host
then been left to reap the full result of their sin, they
would have perished; but it would not have been
apparent to heavenly beings that this was the inevitable
result of sin. A doubt of God’s goodness would have
remained in their minds as evil seed, to produce its
deadly fruit of sin and woe.
“But not so when the great controversy shall be
ended. Then, the plan of redemption having been
completed, the character of God is revealed to all created
intelligences. The precepts of His law are seen to be
perfect and immutable. Then sin has made manifest its
nature, Satan his character. Then the extermination of
sin will vindicate God’s love and establish His honor
before a universe of beings who delight to do His will,
and in whose heart is His law.
“Well, then, might the angels rejoice as they
looked upon the Saviour’s cross; for though they did
not then understand all, they knew that the destruction of
sin and Satan was forever made certain, that the
redemption of man was assured, and that the universe
was made eternally secure.” Desire of Ages, 763,764.
Woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth.—
(See comments under Rev. 11:10.)
Devil Is Come Down, Having Great Wrath.—
[After Christ’s ascension] “Satan again counseled
with his angels, and with bitter hatred against God’s
government told them that while he retained his power
and authority upon earth their efforts must be tenfold
stronger against the followers of Jesus. They had
prevailed nothing against Christ but must overthrow His
followers, if possible. In every generation they must
seek to ensnare those who would believe in Jesus. He
related to his angels that Jesus had given His disciples
power to rebuke them and cast them out, and to heal
those whom they should afflict. Then Satan’s angels
went forth like roaring lions, seeking to destroy the
followers of Jesus.” Early Writings, 191,192.
“Prior to Calvary, Satan worked to win other
worlds to his rebellion. But now he is defeated. He is
limited to this earth, so he turns all his fury and hatred
against Christ’s saints.” Burnside, RWU, 150.

“The more we learn in reference to the early days
of the Christian church, and see with what subtlety Satan
worked to weaken and destroy, the better we shall be
prepared to resist his devices and meet coming perils.
We are in the time when tribulations such as the world
has never yet seen will prevail. ‘Woe to the inhabiters
of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down
unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth
that he hath but a short time.’ But God has set bounds
that Satan cannot pass. Our most holy faith is this
barrier; and if we build ourselves up in the faith, we shall
be safe in the keeping of the Mighty One. ‘Because
thou hast kept the word of My patience, I also will
keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall
come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon
the earth.’” 5 Testimonies, 297.
“I have been shown that Satan has not been stupid
and careless these many years, since his fall, but has
been learning. He has grown more artful. His plans are
laid deeper, and are more covered with a religious
garment to hide their deformity. The power of Satan
now to tempt and deceive is ten-fold greater than it
was in the days of the apostles. His power has increased,
and it will increase, until it is taken away. His wrath
and hate grow stronger as his time to work draws
near its close.” Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 2, 277.
“A man cannot be a happy Christian unless he is a
watchful Christian. He who overcomes must watch;
for, with worldly entanglements, error, and superstition,
Satan strives to win Christ’s followers from Him. It is
not enough that we avoid glaring dangers and perilous,
inconsistent moves. We are to keep close to the side of
Christ, walking in the path of self-denial and
sacrifice. We are in an enemy’s country. He who was
cast out of heaven has come down with great power.
With every conceivable artifice and device he is seeking
to take souls captive. Unless we are constantly on
guard we shall fall an easy prey to his unnumbered
deceptions.” 8 Testimonies, 100.
Satan’s Wrath.—
“Through spiritualism, Satan appears as a
benefactor of the race, healing the diseases of the people,
and professing to present a new and more exalted system
of religious faith; but at the same time he works as a
destroyer. His temptations are leading multitudes to
ruin.
Intemperance dethrones reason; sensual
indulgence, strife, and bloodshed follow. Satan delights
in war, for it excites the worst passions of the soul and
then sweeps into eternity its victims steeped in vice and
blood. It is his object to incite the nations to war against
one another, for he can thus divert the minds of the
people from the work of preparation to stand in the day
of God.
“…While appearing to the children of men as a
great physician who can heal all their maladies, he will
bring disease and disaster, until populous cities are
reduced to ruin and desolation. Even now he is at

306

REVELATION 12
work. In accidents and calamities by sea and by land,
in great conflagrations, in fierce tornadoes and
terrific hailstorms, in tempests, floods, cyclones, tidal
waves, and earthquakes, in every place and in a
thousand forms, Satan is exercising his power. He
sweeps away the ripening harvest, and famine and
distress follow. He imparts to the air a deadly taint, and
thousands perish by the pestilence. These visitations
are to become more and more frequent and
disastrous. Destruction will be upon both man and
beast. ‘The earth mourneth and fadeth away,’ ‘the
haughty people... do languish. The earth also is defiled
under the inhabitants thereof; because they have
transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the
everlasting covenant.’ Isaiah 24:4,5.
And then the great deceiver will persuade men that
those who serve God are causing these evils.” Great
Controversy, 589,590.
Short Time.—
“(Rev.12:12 quoted.) Fearful are the scenes which
call forth this exclamation from the heavenly voice. The
wrath of Satan increases as his time grows short, and
his work of deceit and destruction will reach its
culmination in the time of trouble.”
Great
Controversy, 623.
“The signs of Christ’s coming are fast fulfilling.
Satan sees that he has but a short time in which to
work, and he has set his agencies to work to stir up
the elements of the world, that men may be deceived,
deluded, and kept occupied and entranced until the
day of probation shall be ended and the door of mercy be
forever shut.
“The kingdoms of this world have not yet
become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ.
Do not deceive yourselves; be wide awake and move
rapidly, for the night cometh in which no man can work.
Do not encourage students who come to you burdened
with the work of saving their fellow men, to enter upon
course after course of study. Do not lengthen out to
many years the time for obtaining an education. By so
doing you give them the impression that there is time
enough, and this very plan proves a snare to their souls.”
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students, 414,415.
“And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one
is, and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh,
he must continue a short space.” Rev. 17:10.
“We are living in a time of special peril to the
youth. Satan knows that the end of the world is soon
to come, and he is determined to improve every
opportunity for pressing young men and young women
into his service.” 8 Testimonies, 223.

REVELATION 12:13
And when the dragon saw that he was

cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which brought forth the man child.
The Dragon Persecutes the Woman.—
“After the resurrection and ascension of Christ,
bitter persecution of His disciples followed. First it
was the Jews against the apostles. This was followed by
pagan persecution when it tried to overthrow the church.
It was especially bitter under Nero, Aurelius, Decius,
Valerian, and Diocletian.” Straw, SR, 79.
“From the destruction of Jerusalem, Christ passed
on rapidly to the greater event, the last link in the chain
of this earth’s history—the coming of the Son of God in
majesty and glory. Between these two events, there lay
open to Christ’s view long centuries of darkness,
centuries for His church marked with blood and tears
and agony. Upon these scenes His disciples could not
then endure to look, and Jesus passed them by with a
brief mention. ‘Then shall be great tribulation,’ He
said, ‘such as was not since the beginning of the world
to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those
days should be shortened, there should no flesh be
saved: but for the elect’s sake those days shall be
shortened.’ For more than a thousand years such
persecution as the world had never before known was to
come upon Christ’s followers. Millions upon millions
of His faithful witnesses were to be slain. Had not
God’s hand been stretched out to preserve His people, all
would have perished. ‘But for the elect's sake,’ He
said, ‘those days shall be shortened.’” Desire of Ages,
630.
“In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be
of good cheer; I have overcome the world.” John
16:33.

REVELATION 12:14
And to the woman were given two wings
of a great eagle, that she might fly into the
wilderness, into her place, where she is
nourished for a time, and times, and half a
time, from the face of the serpent.
Two Wings of a Great Eagle.—
“Ancient Israel was led by God from Egypt to the
Promised land.
“Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and
how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you
unto myself.” Ex. 19:4.
“As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her
young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them,
beareth them on her wings: So the LORD alone did
lead him.” Deut. 32:11,12.
“Here, the two wings of a great eagle symbolized
the Divine guidance and protection that came through
the fourth living creature that looked like an eagle,

307

GEMS FROM REVELATION
who introduced the fourth seal of Rev. 6:7,8, which
depicted this same time period. The wings of God’s
guidance and protection were needed to escape the
persecuting Roman church depicted in the fourth
seal.” PJ
Into the Wilderness.—
“This must denote a state of seclusion from the
public gaze, and of concealment from her foes.
“...The true church was out of sight. In secret
places they worshiped God. The caves and the hidden
recesses of the valleys of the Piedmont may be taken as
representative places, where the truth of the gospel was
sacredly cherished from the rage of its foes.” Smith, DR,
557.
“Behind the lofty bulwarks of the mountains—
in all ages the refuge of the persecuted and
oppressed—the Waldenses found a hiding place. Here
the light of truth was kept burning amid the dark-ness of
the Middle Ages. Here, for a thousand years, witnesses
for the truth maintained the ancient faith.” Great
Controversy, 66.
“The Protestant Reformation of the sixteenth
century began its work. God raised up Martin Luther
and his co-laborers to expose the true character of the
papacy, and break the power with which superstition had
enslaved the minds of the people. Luther nailed his
theses to the door of the church at Wittenberg; and the
pen with which he wrote them, according to the
symbolic dream of the good elector Frederick of Saxony,
did indeed span the continent, and shake the triple crown
on the pope’s head. Princes began to espouse the cause
of the Reformers. It was the dawning of religious light
and liberty, and God would not suffer the darkness to
swallow up its radiance.
“The spell was broken. Men found that the bulls
and anathemas of the pope fell harmless at their feet, just
as soon as they dared exercise their God-given right to
regulate their consciences by His word alone. Defenders
of the true faith multiplied. Soon there was enough
Protestant soil found in Europe and the New World
to swallow up the flood of papal fury, and rob it of its
power to harm the church. Thus the earth helped the
woman, and has continued to help her to the present
day, as the spirit of the Reformation and religious liberty
has been fostered by the leading nations of
Christendom.” Smith, DR, 558,559.
Into Her Place.—
“There was a place for the church of God in the
wilderness, in the outback areas, for 1260 years. ‘A
place prepared of God.’ Was there any particular
location where the church of God resided? The most
famous place of refuge in those dark years were the
Waldensian valleys amid the Cottian Alps, 30 miles west
of Turin, in northern Italy. Significantly this was about
the middle of the Papal empire, in the very heart of
its territory. There the Lord had a place prepared for

many of His people during those trying years. …At the
time of the universal flood, when the surface of the earth
was torn up and relaid, the Creator bore in mind the
future needs of His persecuted people. Certain areas
were formed that could serve as places of refuge.
“The Waldensian refuge was comprised of seven
remarkable valleys, so formed, that at that time, they
formed a natural fortress against invasion. One valley
led into the other and finally within them was the
seventh, a secret valley, accessible through a narrow
rocky canyon. In it was situated the little college,
where they educated young men for the ministry. These
valleys were self-supporting. The soil was very fertile
and provided sufficient food, including many nut trees.
In the mountain soil were abundant quantities of slate
which they used as building materials for their homes,
many of which were hidden among the trees along the
sides of the mountains. Here for centuries, the
Vaudois, as they were called, or Waldenses, resided,
maintaining the true faith.” Cooke, #18-UR, 23,24.
“Some, forsaking their native Alps, raised the
banner of truth in foreign lands; others retreated to
the secluded glens and rocky fastnesses of the
mountains, and there preserved their freedom to
worship God.” Great Controversy, 64.
“Not more surely is the place prepared for us in the
heavenly mansions than is the special place designated
on earth where we are to work for God.” Christ’s
Object Lessons, 327
Where She is Nourished.—
“If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these
things, thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ,
nourished up in the words of faith and of good
doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained.” 1 Timothy 4:6.
“The food that sustained the church during this
long period of darkness may have special reference to
spiritual food, ‘the bread of life.’ These Christian
pilgrims preserved the Scriptures in much of their
original purity and also retained much of the faith and
practices of the early church. Many of them were
observers of the true Sabbath, for the preservation of
which Christ had asked His people to pray. They sowed
the first seeds of truth that made possible the great
Protestant Reformation of the sixteenth century.”
Bunch, TR, 150.
“The Waldenses were among the first of the
peoples of Europe to obtain a translation of the Holy
Scriptures. Hundreds of years before the Reformation
they possessed the Bible in manuscript in their native
tongue. They had the truth unadulterated, and this
rendered them the special objects of hatred and
persecution.” Great Controversy, 65.

308

(See vs. 6 for more comments.)

REVELATION 12
For a Time, and Times, and Half a Time.—
“The mention of the period during which the
woman is nourished in the wilderness as ‘a time and
times and half a time,’ similar phraseology to that used
in Daniel 7:25, furnishes a key for the explanation of the
latter passage. The same period is called in Revelation
12:6, ‘a thousand two hundred and threescore days.’
This shows that a ‘time’ is one year, 360 days; two
‘times,’ two years, or 720 days; and ‘half a time,’ half a
year, or 180 days, making in all 1260 days. These days,
being symbolic, signify 1260 literal years.” Smith, DR,
558.
(See notes under Rev. 12:6.)
From the Face of the Serpent.—
“From the knowledge of Papal Rome.” Miller,
Evidence, 212.

REVELATION 12:15
And the serpent cast out of his mouth
water as a flood after the woman, that he
might cause her to be carried away of the
flood.
The Serpent.—
“Verse 15 continues with ...the actions of the
dragon toward the woman during her residence in the
wilderness.” Bunch, TR, 347.
“The flood which came out of the dragon’s
mouth.” Vs. 16. This shows that the dragon and
serpent are identical. The reason, we suggest, that the
word serpent is used is because the serpent represents
deception, lies, and cunning.” Cooke, #18-UR, 27.
Out of His Mouth Water.—
“As water is a symbol of the Holy Spirit [John
7:38,39], so the water out of the serpent’s mouth can
represent the spirit of Satan—the rise of spiritualism,
secularism, evolutionism.
“The waters which thou sawest, where the
whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and
nations, and tongues.” Rev. 17:15. The ‘water as a
flood’ can also refer to the people that are deceived by
and teach the false doctrines as well.” PJ
“All error has its origin and source in Satan and
comes out of the mouth of the dragon and Babylon, the
church of Satan. See John 8:44; Rev. 16:13,14; 18:2,3.
From this source comes a flood of lies or false
teachings including all the ‘abominations of the
earth.’ Rev. 17:5.” Bunch, TR, 152.
Cast Out of His Mouth Water As a Flood That He
Might Cause Her to Be Carried Away of the Flood.—
“Water, especially in the form of a river flooding
its banks and sweeping all before it, is used in the Bible

to symbolize an invading and conquering army. See
Isa. 8:7,8; Jer. 46:7,8; 47:2,3. A rushing flood of waters
is also symbolic of an over-whelming destruction of any
kind. See Ps. 90:5; 124:4,5; Dan. 11:22. ‘When the
enemy shall come in like a flood’ is an expression in
Isa. 59:19 describing the attacks of Satan against the
people of God individually or collectively.” Bunch, TR,
151.
“When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the
Spirit of the LORD shall lift up a standard against
him. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto
them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the
LORD.” Isaiah 59:19,20.
PRE-1798: During the 1260 years of papal supremacy,
as a result of serpentine propaganda, ‘the waters [or
peoples] on which the whore sits’ (Rev. 17) rose up to
sweep away the saints. Multitudes were inspired to
mount crusades against the ‘heretics.’” Cooke, #18-UR,
29.
“By its false doctrines the papacy had so corrupted
all nations as to have absolute control of the civil power
for long centuries. Through it Satan could hurl a mighty
flood of persecution against the church in every
direction, and this he was not slow to do.... Millions of
true believers were carried away by the flood, but the
church was not entirely swallowed up, for the days
were shortened for the elects sake. (Matthew 24:22.)”
Smith, DR, 558.
POST-1798:
“As the founders, those who possessed the true
spirit of reform, pass away, their descendants come
forward and ‘new-model the cause.’ While blindly
clinging to the creed of their fathers and refusing to
accept any truth in advance of what they saw, the
children of the reformers depart widely from their
example of humility, self-denial, and renunciation of
the world. Thus ‘the first simplicity disappears.’ A
worldly flood, flowing into the church, carries ‘with it
its customs, practices, and idols.’ Great Controversy,
385.
“Every college and university throughout
Europe and America, every newspaper, and every
other source of publicity or entertainment has for
more than two generations been engaged in a far
more subtle but no less effective campaign against the
Bible doctrine of creation, and thus against every
other truth of revealed religion, of which creation is
the logical and indispensable foundation. This is the
beast’s infiltration method, his fifth column.
Throughout all of the so-called ‘free’ peoples of the
Western World, the philosophy of development or
evolution during a thousand million years is almost
universally taught and believed, with its corollary that
man has grown up from some lower animal ancestors
instead of having been created sinless and with no bias

309

GEMS FROM REVELATION
toward evil. Logically following the evolution theory is
the conclusion that it is not man’s fault but his
misfortune that he is a sinner and subject to disease and
death; hence if any being is responsible for the evil and
misery in the world, it must be God Himself, who made
the human race by this strange process of development
from animal ancestors by the survival of the strongest
and most ruthless.” Price, Time of the End, 150.
“Satan has come down with great power, knowing
that his time is short. He is flooding the world with
pleasing fables, and the people of God love to have
smooth things spoken to them. Sin and iniquity are not
abhorred. I was shown that God’s people must make
more firm, determined efforts to press back the
incoming darkness.” 3 Testimonies, 328.
“To the active minds of children and youth the
scenes pictured in imaginary revelations of the future are
realities. As revolutions are predicted and all manner of
proceedings described that break down the barriers of
law and self-restraint, many catch the spirit of these
representations. They are led to the commission of
crimes even worse, if possible, than these sensational
writers depict. Through such influences as these, society
is becoming demoralized. The seeds of lawlessness are
sown broadcast. None need marvel that a harvest of
crime is the result.
“Works of romance, frivolous, exciting tales,
are, in hardly less degree, a curse to the reader. The
author may profess to teach a moral lesson, throughout
his work he may interweave religious sentiments; but
often these serve only to veil the folly and worthlessness
beneath.
“The world is flooded with books that are filled
with enticing error. The youth receive as truth that
which the Bible denounces as falsehood, and they love
and cling to deception that means ruin to the soul.
“…In the education of children and youth, fairy
tales, myths, and fictitious stories are now given a large
place. Books of this character are used in the schools,
and they are to be found in many homes. How can
Christian parents permit their children to use books
so filled with falsehood? When the children ask the
meaning of stories so contrary to the teaching of their
parents, the answer is that the stories are not true; but
this does not do away with the evil results of their use.
The ideas presented in these books mislead the children.
They impart false views of life and beget and foster a
desire for the unreal.
“The widespread use of such books at this time is
one of the cunning devices of Satan. He is seeking to
divert the minds of old and young from the great work of
character building. He means that our children and
youth shall be swept away by the soul-destroying
deceptions with which he is filling the world.
Therefore he seeks to divert their minds from the word
of God and thus prevent them from obtaining a
knowledge of those truths that would be their
safeguard.” Ministry of Healing, 444,445,447.

Flood Protection.—
“When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow thee.” Isaiah 43:2.
“When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the
Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against
him.” Isaiah 59:17.
“Man was created a free moral agent. Like the
inhabitants of all other worlds, he must be subjected to
the test of obedience; but he is never brought into such
a position that yielding to evil becomes a matter of
necessity. No temptation or trial is permitted to come to
him which he is unable to resist. God made such ample
provision that man need never have been defeated in
the conflict with Satan.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 331.

REVELATION 12:16
And the earth helped the woman, and
the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed
up the flood which the dragon cast out of his
mouth.
Earth.—
“‘Earth’ represents areas where there was a
scarcity of peoples, in contrast with ‘waters,’ which
sometimes represent ‘peoples,’ ‘nations,’ and
‘tongues.’ (ch. 17:15).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 812.
The Earth Helped the Woman By Swallowing Up the
Flood.—
“Two specific times of persecution are brought
to view during the long life of the dragon of Rev. 12: (1)
during the 1260 years (vs. 6,14,15), and (2) in the final
conflict with the remnant church (v.17). In between v.
15, where the dragon puts forth his greatest effort to
destroy God’s people, and v. 17, is the pronouncement
that ‘the earth helped the woman, and the earth
opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which
the dragon cast out of his mouth’ (v.16). In between
these verses takes place the rise of the United States and
the spread of Protestant principles of religious and civil
liberty.
“…The period of comparative calm brought to
view briefly in Rev. 12:16 between the two persecutions
is enlarged upon in Rev. 13 with the rise of the Lamblike
beast that brings about the spread of democratic
principles among the governments of the earth, and the
temporary peace afforded to the church, which is
intimated in Rev. 12:16, is also again referred to in
Rev. 17 where the persecuting beast is said to be in a
state of inactivity, seemingly dead and buried.” Were,
WATB, 134.
“These new lands were used as a place of refuge
for those who were persecuted in the old world. To

310

REVELATION 12
these shores fled men of the Mayflower, the Quakers,
and others from the tyranny of Europe to find a place
of refuge. And from these same shore came a new
conception of the rights and liberties of men that they
might worship God according to the dictates of their own
conscience.” Straw, SR, 80.
“Out of the cities, is my message at this time. Be
assured that the call is for our people to locate miles
away from the large cities. One look at San Francisco
as it is today would speak to your intelligent minds,
showing you the necessity of getting out of the cities. . . .
“The Lord calls for His people to locate away
from the cities, for in such an hour as ye think not, fire
and brimstone will be rained from heaven upon these
cities. Proportionate to their sins will be their visitation.
When one city is destroyed, let not our people regard
this matter as a light affair, and think that they may, if
favorable opportunity offers, build themselves homes in
that same destroyed city….
“Let all who would understand the meaning of
these things read the eleventh chapter of Revelation.
Read every verse, and learn the things that are yet to
take place in the cities. Read also the scenes portrayed
in the eighteenth chapter of the same book.” MR 1518
(May 10, 1906); Last Day Events, 95.
“And the earth open her mouth, and swallowed
them up, and their houses, and all the men that
appertained unto Korah, and all their goods.”
Numbers 16:32.
“Coal and oil frequently ignite and burn beneath
the surface of the earth. Thus rocks are heated,
limestone is burned, and iron ore melted. The action of
the water upon the lime adds fury to the intense heat, and
causes earthquakes, volcanoes, and fiery issues. As the
fire and water come in contact with ledges of rock and
ore, there are heavy explosions underground, which
sound like muffled thunder. The air is hot and
suffocating. Volcanic eruptions follow; and these often
failing to give sufficient vent to the heated elements, the
earth itself is convulsed, the ground heaves and swells
like the waves of the sea, great fissures appear, and
sometimes cities, villages, and burning mountains are
swallowed up. These wonderful manifestations will
be more and more frequent and terrible just before
the second coming of Christ and the end of the world,
as signs of its speedy destruction.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 108,109.

REVELATION 12:17
And the dragon was wroth with the
woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.

The Dragon Was Wroth with the Woman.—
“The condition of the world at the time of Christ is
well described by the prophet Isaiah. He says that the
people were found ‘transgressing and lying against the
Lord, and departing away from our God.’ [Isa.
59:13-17 quoted.]
“The condition of the world previous to the first
appearing of Christ is a picture of the condition of the
world just previous to His second advent. The same
iniquity will exist, Satan manifests the same delusive
power upon the minds of men. He is setting his trained
agents at work, and moving them to intense activity. He
is securing his army of human agents to engage in the
last conflict against the Prince of life, to overthrow
the law of God, which is the foundation of His throne.
Satan will work with miraculous presentations to
confirm men in the belief that he is what he claims to
be—the prince of this world, and that victory is his. He
will turn his forces against those who are loyal to God,
but though he may cause pain, distress, and human
agony, he cannot defile the soul. He may cause
affliction to the people of God as he did to Christ, but he
cannot cause one of Christ’s little ones to perish. The
people of God in these last days must expect to enter
into the thick of the conflict; for the prophetic Word
says, ‘[Rev. 12:17 quoted.]’” (Letter 43, 1895). 4BC,
1153.
“[Rev. 12:17 quoted.] The forces of darkness will
unite with human agents who have given them-selves
into the control of Satan, and the same scenes that
were exhibited at the trial, rejection, and crucifixion
of Christ will be revived. Through yielding to satanic
influences, men will be trans-formed into fiends; and
those who were created in the image of God, who were
formed to honor and glorify their Creator, will become
the habitation of dragons, and Satan will see in an
apostate race his masterpiece of evil—men who reflect
his own image.” (Review & Herald, 4/14/1896). 7BC,
974.
“Rev. 12:17 declares that the dragon will make
war upon God’s remnant people, whereas Rev. 17:12-17
declares that the ‘kings’ will give their strength to the
persecuting beast in making war upon God’s people.”
Were, WATB, 148.
“Kings and rulers and governors have placed
upon themselves the brand of anti-christ, and are
represented as the dragon who goes to make war with
the saints—with those who keep the commandments of
God and who have the faith of Jesus. In their enmity
against the people of God, they show themselves guilty
also of the choice of Barabbas instead of Christ.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 39.
Went to Make War.—
“‘Went away to make war,’ (R.V.). “Went
elsewhere,’ (Weymouth). ‘Went off to make war,’

311

GEMS FROM REVELATION
(Moffatt). ...These different translations give evidence
that a new battlefield with a new foe is described. It
indicates that after the dragon’s defeat in Europe,
there would be a transfer of the seat and center of
conflict to a new battlefield.
“The first battlefield was in heaven around the
throne of God where the dragon and his angels were
defeated by Michael and his angels and driven from
heaven. The second battle field was in Pales-tine in
Asia during the earthly visit of the ‘man child’ in which
the dragon was again defeated. The center of the
conflict during the third phase was in Europe during
the Middle Ages while the church was in her wilderness
retreat. Not only was the dragon again thwarted in his
efforts to destroy true Christianity, but the Reformation
gave to him a crushing defeat and brought triumph to the
church of Christ.
“Then follows another struggle in which the chief
weapon of the dragon is a flood of false doctrines by
which he hopes to break the power of Protestantism and
silence her protests. In this plan he largely succeeds for
a time until the remnant with the weapons of the Word
of God and the discoveries of true science bring the
attacks of the dragon to naught. In the last phase of the
struggle before the close of probation the dragon centers
his attacks on the remnant who are so successfully
meeting his false theories and defeating his purpose. He
‘went away’ or ‘went elsewhere’ to make this attack
which doubtless indicates a new battlefield the center of
which will be in another part of the earth. The last
struggle over the possession of this earth will center
in the New World or Protestant America. The first
reason is that America became a new place of refuge for
the pursued and persecuted woman or church and many
thousands of the most godly of the Old World came to
the new land of promise where they could ‘establish a
church without a pope and a state without a king.’”
Bunch, TR, 153,154.
“Tidings out of the east and out of the north [the
loud cry of the Rev. 18:1-4] shall trouble him: therefore
he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly
to make away many.” Dan. 11:44.
“Those who apostatize are voicing the words of the
dragon. We have to meet the satanic agencies who went
to make war with the saints. (Rev. 12:17 quoted).
Those who apostatize leave the true and faithful people
of God, and fraternize with those who represent
Barabbas. ‘By their fruits ye shall know them’ (Matt.
7:20).” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 395.
The Remnant of Her Seed.—
“It [the church] teaches the same doctrines as
the woman ‘clothed with the sun in verse 1 of this
chapter. In other words, it has the same faith and
teachings as the church of the apostles. The true church
is one throughout history. The name that a certain
church has adopted now may mean nothing more than a
coat of paint. Look beneath the surface, and test the

teachings and practice with the church which Christ
and His apostles founded. If we see a train enter a
tunnel, we will see the same train emerge at the other
end of the tunnel. The church of the apostles went into
the ‘tunnel’ at the beginning of the 1260 years of
persecution [and 1335 years of darkness], as it fled into
the ‘wilderness.’ When it emerges again in full view
before the world, it will be the same church in spirit and
in faith as it was originally. It holds the same body of
truth through the centuries.
“The word translated as ‘the rest of her offspring’
is rendered as ‘the remnant’ in the King James Version.
It means the last part of the descendants of the apostolic
church—Christ’s true followers in the very end of time.
If we buy a piece of cloth from the beginning of a bolt, it
will have a certain pattern and color. If we later should
buy the ‘remnant’ of that bolt of cloth, it will have
exactly the same pattern and color as the first piece we
bought.
Many churches have added so many
teachings borrowed from paganism and traditions of
men [the trinity, immortality of the soul, eternal torment
in hell, Sunday keeping, etc.] that the apostles would
never be able to recognize the ‘pattern’ color.”
Wieland, GIR, 89, 90.
“A contextual study of Revelation 12:17 shows that
‘the remnant of her seed’ stands in contrast with the
‘man child’ who is also a seed of the woman (vs. 5). In
other words, the woman has children (other than the
Christ) against whom Satan now directs his wrath.
‘The close identification of the seed of the woman as
first of all Jesus and then also those who become His
brethren through faith agrees with other NT teaching
(Matthew 25:40; Heb. 2:11-12).’
“Secondly, these children are not to be identified as
Christians in general, living throughout the Christian
Era. The fact that the war against the remnant is
mentioned after the 1260-year persecution of the
woman, indicates that the war on the remnant is carried
on after that earlier era has expired. The remnant,
therefore, refers to those who are living after 1798,
the date the prophetic 1260 days came to an end; [and
after 1843, the year that the 1335 days came to an end].
“Thus we conclude that sperma in 12:17 refers to
the faithful believers in the time of the end, who are
identified by two characteristics: 1. They keep the
commandments of God. 2. They have the testimony of
Jesus. A study of these marks, therefore, is imperative
for arriving at the correct identification of who compose
the ‘remnant of her seed.’” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 302.303.
“The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor
speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in
their mouth.” Zephaniah 3:13.
“We stand as the remnant people in these last
days to promulgate the truth and swell the cry of the
third angel’s wonderful distinct message, giving the
trumpet a certain sound.” Letter 121, 1900.

312

REVELATION 12

War on the Remnant.—
“Verse 17 brings to view another and a final
outburst of his wrath, this time against the last
generation of Christians to live on the earth. We say the
last generation, for the war of the dragon is directed
against the remnant of the woman’s seed, the true
church, and no generation but the last can truth-fully
be represented by the remnant.” Smith, DR, 559.
“The fourth of these commandments the dragon has
attempted to change. It is because the saints are
keeping all the commandments of God that the
dragon makes war upon them.
This prophecy
(Rev.12:17) doubtless refers to the scene described in the
conclusion of Rev. 13.” Andrews, TAM, 114.
“There are only two parties upon the earth—those
who stand under the blood-stained banner of Jesus Christ
and those who stand under the black banner of rebellion.
Those who stand under Christ’s banner bear the sign
of obedience spoken of in Ex. 31:12-18. Please read
this Scripture carefully. In the twelfth chapter of
Revelation is represented the last great conflict between
the obedient and the disobedient.” Manuscript Releases,
Vol. 14, 161.
“In vision I saw two armies in terrible conflict.
One army was led by banners bearing the world’s
insignia; the other was led by the bloodstained banner of
Prince Immanuel. Standard after standard was left to
trail in the dust as company after company from the
Lord’s army joined the foe and tribe after tribe from the
ranks of the enemy united with the commandmentkeeping people of God. An angel flying in the midst of
heaven put the standard of Immanuel into many hands,
while a mighty general cried out with a loud voice:
‘Come into line. Let those who are loyal to the
commandments of God and the testimony of Christ now
take their position. Come out from among them, and be
ye separate, and touch not the unclean, and I will
receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall
be My sons and daughters. Let all who will come up to
the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the
mighty.’
“The battle raged. Victory alternated from side to
side. Now the soldiers of the cross gave way, ‘as when
a standard-bearer fainteth.’ Isaiah 10:18. But their
apparent retreat was but to gain a more
advantageous position. Shouts of joy were heard. A
song of praise to God went up, and angel voices united
in the song, as Christ’s soldiers planted His banner on
the walls of fortresses till then held by the enemy. The
Captain of our salvation was ordering the battle and
sending support to His soldiers. His power was
mightily displayed, encouraging them to press the battle
to the gates. He taught them terrible things in
righteousness as He led them on step by step,
conquering and to conquer.
“At last the victory was gained. The army
following the banner with the inscription, ‘The

commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus,’ was
gloriously triumphant. The soldiers of Christ were close
beside the gates of the city, and with joy the city
received her King. The kingdom of peace and joy and
everlasting righteousness was established.
8
Testimonies, 41.
“Clad in the armor of Christ’s righteousness, the
church is to enter upon her final conflict. ‘Fair as the
moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with
banners’ (Song of Solomon 6:10), she is to go forth
into all the world, conquering and to conquer.
“The darkest hour of the church’s struggle with the
powers of evil is that which immediately precedes the
day of her final deliverance. But none who trust in God
need fear; for ‘when the blast of the terrible ones is as
a storm against the wall,’ God will be to His church ‘a
refuge from the storm.’ Isaiah 25:4.” Prophets &
Kings, 725.
“[Rev. 12:17 quoted.] We can see from this
scripture that it is not the true church of God that makes
war with those who keep the commandments of God and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ. It is the people who
make void the law, who place themselves on the side of
the dragon, and persecute those who vindicate God’s
precepts.” Signs, 4/22/1889.
“As the storm approaches, a large class who have
professed faith in the third angel’s message, but have
not been sanctified through obedience to the truth,
abandon their position and join the ranks of the
opposition. By uniting with the world and par-taking of
its spirit, they have come to view matters in nearly the
same light; and when the test is brought, they are
prepared to choose the easy, popular side. Men of
talent and pleasing address, who once rejoiced in the
truth, employ their powers to deceive and mislead souls.
They become the most bitter enemies of their former
brethren. When Sabbath-keepers are brought before the
courts to answer for their faith, these apostates are the
most efficient agents of Satan to misrepresent and
accuse them, and by false reports and insinuations to
stir up the rulers against them.” Great Controversy,
608
Ploys Satan Uses in the War on the Remnant.—
“Those who honor the Bible Sabbath will be
denounced as enemies of law and order, as breaking
down the moral restraints of society, causing anarchy
and corruption, and calling down the judgments of
God upon the earth. Their conscientious scruples will
be pronounced obstinacy, stubbornness, and contempt of
authority. They will be accused of disaffection toward
the government. Ministers who deny the obligation of
the divine law will present from the pulpit the duty of
yielding obedience to the civil authorities as ordained of
God.
In legislative halls and courts of justice,
commandment keepers will be misrepresented and
condemned. A false coloring will be given to their

313

GEMS FROM REVELATION
words; the worst construction will be put upon their
motives.
“…The dignitaries of church and state will unite to
bribe, persuade, or compel all classes to honor the
Sunday. The lack of divine authority will be supplied by
oppressive enactments. Political corruption is destroying
love of justice and regard for truth; and even in free
America, rulers and legislators, in order to secure public
favor, will yield to the popular demand for a law
enforcing Sunday observance. Liberty of conscience,
which has cost so great a sacrifice, will no longer be
respected. In the soon-coming conflict we shall see
exemplified the prophet’s words: (Revelation 12:17
quoted).” Great Controversy, 592.
“And he had power to give life unto the image of
the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak,
and cause that as many as would not worship the
image of the beast should be killed.” Rev. 13:15.
“As we near the close of time, Satan comes down
with great power, knowing that his time is short.
Especially will his power be exercised upon the remnant.
He will war against them, and seek to divide and
scatter them, that they may grow weak and be
overthrown.
The people of God should move
understandingly, and should be united in their efforts.
They should be of the same mind, of the same judgment;
then their efforts will not be scattered, but will tell
forcibly in the upbuilding of the cause of present truth.
Order must be observed, and there must be union in
maintaining order, or Satan will take the advantage.”
1 Testimonies, 210.
“False reports will be circulated, and some will
be taken in this snare. They will believe these rumors
and in their turn will repeat them, and thus a link will
be formed connecting them with the arch-deceiver. This
spirit will not always be manifested in an open defiance
of the messages that God sends, but a settled unbelief is
expressed in many ways. Every false statement that is
made feeds and strengthens this unbelief, and through
this means many souls will be balanced in the wrong
direction.” 5 Testimonies, 295.
War on Remnant Similar to That in Esther’s Day.—
“The decree that will finally go forth against the
remnant people of God will be very similar to that
issued by Ahasuerus against the Jews. Today the
enemies of the true church see in the little company
keeping the Sabbath commandment, a Mordecai at
the gate. The reverence of God's people for His law is a
constant rebuke to those who have cast off the fear of the
Lord and are trampling on His Sabbath. …Today, as in
the days of Esther and Mordecai, the Lord will
vindicate His truth and His people.” Prophets &
Kings, 605.
Keep the Commandments of God.—
“This points to a Sabbath reform to be
accomplished in the last days, for on the Sabbath alone
as pertaining to the commandments, is there a difference

of faith and practice among those who accept the
Decalogue as the moral law. This is more particularly
brought to view in the message of Revelation 14:6-12.”
Smith, DR, 559.
“From the very beginning of the great controversy
in heaven it has been Satan’s purpose to overthrow
the law of God. It was to accomplish this that he
entered upon his rebellion against the Creator, and
though he was cast out of heaven he has continued the
same warfare upon the earth. To deceive men, and thus
lead them to transgress God’s law, is the object which
he has steadfastly pursued.
Whether this be
accomplished by casting aside the law altogether, or by
rejecting one of its precepts, the result will be ultimately
the same. He that offends ‘in one point,’ manifests
contempt for the whole law; his influence and example
are on the side of transgression; he becomes ‘guilty of
all.’ James 2:10.
“In seeking to cast contempt upon the divine
statutes, Satan has perverted the doctrines of the Bible,
and errors have thus become incorporated into the faith
of thousands who profess to believe the Scriptures. The
last great conflict between truth and error is but the
final struggle of the longstanding controversy
concerning the law of God. Upon this battle we are
now entering—a battle between the laws of men and
the precepts of Jehovah, between the religion of the
Bible and the religion of fable and tradition. Great
Controversy, 582.
“The great conflict is between the commandments
of God and the requirements of the beast. It is because
the saints are keeping all ten of the commandments
that the dragon makes war upon them. If they will
lower the standard and yield the peculiarities of their
faith, the dragon will be at peace; but they excite his ire
because they have dared to raise the standard and unfurl
their banner in opposition to the Protestant world, who
are worshiping the institution of papacy.” 1 Testimonies,
223.
“When the final test shall be brought to bear
upon men, then the line of distinction will be drawn
between those who serve God and those who serve Him
not. While the observance of the false sabbath in
compliance with the law of the state, contrary to the
fourth commandment, will be an avowal of allegiance to
a power that is in opposition to God, the keeping of the
true Sabbath, in obedience to God’s law, is an evidence
of loyalty to the Creator. While one class, by accepting
the sign of submission to earthly powers, receive the
mark of the beast, the other choosing the token of
allegiance to divine authority, receive the seal of
God.” Great Controversy, 605.
“For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments: and his commandments are not
grievous.” 1 John 5:3.

314

REVELATION 12
Have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.—
“The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy.” Rev. 19:10. (For additional comments, go
to Rev. 19:10.)
“The second characteristic of these last-day
Christians against whom the dragon wages his war is
that they ‘have the testimony of Jesus Christ.’
“In Revelation 19:10 this term is explained to mean
‘the spirit of prophecy.’ Obviously the plain meaning
is that the true church, which is preaching the gospel of
the coming kingdom just before the second advent, will
cherish a high regard for the prophecies of such
books as Daniel and the Revelation, in which the perils
and obligations of the last days are clearly defined and in
which the second advent is forcefully taught.
“Another conclusion from these facts is inevitable.
Since the people of this remnant church have a high
respect for the Spirit of Prophecy, they will necessarily
obey the admonition not to quench the Spirit and not
to despise ‘prophesyings.’ (1 Thess. 5:19,20.) In other
words, if they happen to know of contemporary
manifestations of the ‘spirit of prophecy,’ they will not
reject them offhand without investigation, but will have
enough true spiritual discernment to ‘prove all things;
hold fast that which is good.’ (Verse 21.) All this
means that they will not only cherish the old, longrecognized prophecies of Daniel and the Revelation, but
will also give heed to whatever contemporary results of
the prophetic spirit may appear among them which prove
to be worthy of holding fast as ‘good,’ or of divine
origin, after complete tests have been intelligently
applied, as given in Isaiah 8:20 and elsewhere.
“This line of reasoning makes it crystal clear that
the Christians of the last days against whom the dragon
makes his campaign will not be liberals or modernists
in theology, for the latter have no confidence in the
prophecies of Daniel and the Revelation and deny that
these books have given history in advance for the
guidance of the church. Neither will they be futurists
in their interpretation of these prophecies, for the
futurists by their ‘gap theory,’ or ‘post-ponement
theory,’ also deny that Daniel and the Revelation give
the Christian church important guiding waymarks along
the pathway between Calvary and the second coming.”
Price, Time of the End, 129,130.
The Testimony of Jesus (The Spirit of Prophecy)
includes the writings of Ellen G. White.—
“Though the gift of prophecy was long silent, it is
in the Remnant church.” Haskell, SSP, 223.
”The light that I have received, I have written out,
and much of it is now shining forth from the printed
page. There is, throughout my printed works, a harmony
with my present teaching. Some of the instruction found
in these pages was given under circumstances so
remarkable as to evidence the wonder-working
power of God in behalf of his truth. Sometimes while
I was in vision, my friends would approach me, and

exclaim, ‘Why, she does not breathe!’ Placing a mirror
before my lips, they found that no moisture gathered on
the glass. It was while there was no sign of any
breathing, that I kept talking of the things that were
being presented before me.
“These messages were thus given to substantiate
the faith of all, that in these last days we might have
confidence in the spirit of prophecy. I thank God that he
has preserved my voice, which in my early youth
physicians and friends declared would be silent within
three months. The God of heaven saw that I needed to
pass through a trying experience in order to be prepared
for the work he had for me to do. For the past half
century my faith in the ultimate triumph of the third
angel’s message and everything connected with it, has
been substantiated by the wonderful experiences
through which I have passed. This is why I am
anxious to have my books published and circulated in
many languages. I know that the light contained in these
books is the light of heaven.
“I ask you to study the instruction that is written in
these books. To John, the aged apostle, came the
message, ‘Write the things which thou hast seen, and the
things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter.’ The Lord has bidden me write that which
has been revealed to me. This I have done, and it is
now in printed form. Review & Herald, 6/14/1906.
Three Mountain Peaks Seen By John.—
“Where are the time periods located in this
chapter? Are they found in the early, middle, or end
phase of the woman’s pilgrimage on earth? If the time
periods were found in the first segment, they would
favor the preterist position. If they were found in the
final phase, they would favor the futurist position. But
they are found in neither. Rather, the time periods are
located in the middle segment of that church history.
They are found in connection with the segment which
extends through the heart of the age. This is most
compatible with the historical view of this prophecy.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 350.
“Only the mountain peaks, in the history of the
Christian church, are revealed in this view. …There
are three steps from the moonlight of the typical
sanctuary service until the day of triumph and salvation
is completed; but oh, what those steps imply! The
emptying of heaven in the gift of its Prince; the crushing
of the light under the feet of him who thought to exalt
his throne above that of the Most High, and lastly, the
gathering of a little company with whom the dragon is
still wroth, but who keep the commandments of God and
cherish the light of His Spirit.” Haskell, SSP, 217.
“The first phase of the church with the devil (vss.15) should refer to the early beginnings of the church.
The final conflict (vs. 17) should refer to the final phase
of the church here on earth. Between these two poles
we encounter the church in the wilderness, the

315

GEMS FROM REVELATION
persecuted church. Given the intermediate position of
this phase of the church in the narrative, this should be
the church of the Middle Ages, that is to say, the true
or pure church of that period—the church that was
persecuted and driven into the wilderness and the
more remote portions of the earth for protection.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 349.
“Though the church is battling now with the forces
of atheism, secularism, worldliness, and evolutionism of
the 6th head of Rev. 17, the final attack from Satan
would come through the combined forces of the
beast, and the image of the beast (also known as the
false prophet). These two final powers are pictured in
the last half of chapter 13. They also are the 7th and 8th
heads of Rev. 17 and will last a ‘short space.’” PJ.

Revelation 12
The dragon
wages war
against the
woman of God
(1-5).

The woman
flees into the
wilderness for
1,260 days or
31/2 times
(6,14)

Revelation 13

Revelation 14

--

--

The dragon
employs a sea
beast [papacy]
to make war
against the
saints and to
conquer them
for 42 months

--

(1-7).

The dragon
wages war
against the rest
of her
offspring—
“those who
obey God’s
commandments
and hold to the
testimony of
Jesus” (17).

A land beast
emerges that
supports the
sea beast by
enforcing its
worship
through a
mark of the
beast on a
global scale
(13-18).

The 3-fold
message of 14:612 creates a
faithful church
that refuses the
mark of the
beast, because
her saints “keep
the commandments of God and
the faith of Jesus”
(12).

“Chapters 12-14 comprise an indivisible unit in
which each chapter expands upon the content of the
previous one, with an increasing focus on the end-time
church. The following chart gives a brief overview of
these central chapters and how they relate to each other:

Relationship of the Beginning and End of Rev. 12.—
“There is a certain thematic link between the
beginning and the end of Revelation 12. Both deal with
the dragon’s attack upon the woman’s offspring. In the
first case, it is her principal offspring, the man-child, that
is attacked; and in the latter case, it is the remnant of her
offspring, that is his target. Further-more, the manchild
at the beginning of the narrative should be
interpreted as referring to Jesus, with the remnant at
the end of the narrative bearing testimony to Jesus.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 348,349.

316

REVELATION 13

REVELATION 13
above all that is called God or that is worshiped, who
have taken upon themselves the attributes of Satan in
oppressing the loyal and true who keep the
commandments of God. This persecuting power will
compel the worship of the beast by insisting on the
observance of the sabbath he has instituted. Thus he
blasphemes God, ‘sitting in the temple of God,
shewing himself that he is God’ [2 Thess. 2:4].”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 14, 91,92.

REVELATION 13:1-18
1 And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up
out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his
horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.
2 And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his
feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a
lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great
authority.
3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and
his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after
the beast.
4 And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the
beast: and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the
beast? who is able to make war with him?
5 And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things
and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty
and two months.
6 And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to
blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven.
7 And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to
overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and
tongues, and nations.
8 And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world.
9 If any man have an ear, let him hear.
10 He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity: he that
killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the
patience and the faith of the saints.
11 And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and
he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.
12 And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him,
and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship
the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
13 And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come
down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men,
14 And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of
those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast;
saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an
image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live.
15 And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast,
that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the beast should be
killed.
16 And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free
and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads:
17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
18 Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the
number of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his
number is Six hundred threescore and six.

“The thirteenth chapter of Revelation presents
a power that is to be made prominent in these last
days. Let all understand that it is Christ, the Captain
of the Lord’s host, who gave these visions to John.
Christ came in person to the lonely isle of Patmos, and
showed John the things that must be, [things] that were
of the highest importance to His people. ...This
message is to come to God’s people, straight, sharp, and
clean from all mixture of human wisdom and tradition.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol.18, 33.

THE BEAST
SECTION ONE: REVELATION 13:1-4.—

“We will divide this portion of the prophecy into
its two major sections.... Verse 1-4 form the first
section; verses 5-10 form the second. The shift in the
use of verbs between these two passages is one indicator
that they are distinct; the nature of the contents
described is also different.
“The first section describes what John saw—the
vision proper. The second describes actions that took
place thereafter. The verb ‘I saw’ (eidon) occurs twice
in the first section (vss. 1-2); it does not occur at all in
the second. Both sections close with a verse that tells
about the worship of the world toward the beast.
This occurs in verse 4 in the first section and in verse 8
in the second section....
“While the first section in this passage is
descriptive (visual) in emphasis, the second section is
didactic in its emphasis. This arrangement makes these
two sections relate to each other as vision and audition,
or vision and explanation. When this functional
relationship is understood, it can be seen that the second
section explains what was seen in the first section.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 354,355.

INTRODUCTION to CHAPTER 13.—

“The Lord of heaven permits the world to choose
whom they will have as ruler. Let all read carefully
the thirteenth chapter of Revelation, for it concerns
every human agent, great and small. Every human
being must take sides, either for the true and living
God, who has given to the world the memorial of
creation in the seventh-day Sabbath, or for a false
sabbath, instituted by men who have exalted themselves

REVELATION 13:1
And I stood upon the sand of the sea,
and saw a beast rise up out of the sea,
having seven heads and ten horns, and upon
317

GEMS FROM REVELATION
years (1260 days). The beast, mimicking Christ, comes
out of the water to begin a long dominion of 1260
prophetic days (years).” PJ

his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads
the name of blasphemy.
On the edge of the sea.—
“John was standing on the edge of the sea, facing a
mass of humanity—the symbolic sea (Rev. 17:15).” PJ

Seven Heads and Ten Horns.—
“The seven heads are seven forms of civil power
which successively bear rule. These seven heads
belong alike to the dragon of Rev. 12, the beast of chap.
13, and that of chap. 17. This shows conclusively that
the dragon and these two beasts are symbols of the
same power under different heads; for there are not
three sets of seven heads, but it is evident that the heads
are successive forms of its power, one of them
bearing rule at a time, and then giving place to
another. Rev. 17: 9,10. It appears that the dragon of
chap. 12 and the beast of chap. 13 and that of chap. 17
each represents some one or more of the seven heads;
yet as each is seen with the seven heads, they must
each in a certain sense extend over all the period
covered by the three symbols; for there are not
twenty-one heads. The proper period of each seems to
be this: the dragon before the 1260 years, the beast
of chap. 13 during that period, and the beast of chap.
17 since the deadly wound and captivity at the close of
that period.” Andrews, TAM, 77,78.

A Beast.—
“In Daniel we see that a beast is the Bible symbol
of a nation or power: ‘The fourth beast shall be the
fourth kingdom upon earth.’ Daniel 7:23.” PJ
Rise Up.—
“At this point of its surfacing or rising, the Papal
power was not fully established. This was not the
538 AD date. It was just prior to that time, because
in the 2nd verse we see the dragon, which primarily
represents Satan, but more specifically in this vision
‘Pagan Rome,’ giving it SEAT to the Papal Rome
Beast, [which occurred in 538 AD].” Michaelson, Write
the Vision, Vol. 2, 48.
“Revelation 13 begins around AD 476.” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 73.
Rise Up Out of the Sea.—
“The sea is a symbol of ‘peoples, and multitudes,
and nations, and tongues.’ Rev. 17:15. Whenever a
beast is seen to come up out of the sea, it denotes that
the power arises in a thickly populated territory.”
Smith, DR, 561.

Ten Horns.—
“And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten
kings that shall arise….” Daniel 7:24.
“Both Daniel and John emphasized the ten
horns—the subsequent divisions of Rome.” Anderson,
UR, 123.
“The ten horns are the ten kingdoms of the
fourth empire. They are distinct from the seven heads,
and hence the ten kingdoms are not to be counted as one
of the heads as some have done. The horns are
contemporary, that is, all reign at the same time;
while the heads are successive, but one existing at a
time.” Andrews, TAM, 78.
“Named in order from the northern to the southern
limits of the Western Empire, these ten, as they stood in
476 at the extinction of the Empire, were as follows: –
“1. The Angles and Saxons in Britain.
“2. The Franks in all Gaul north and west of the
River Moselle.
“3. The Alemanni in North Switzerland, Swabia,
Alsace, and Lorraine.
“4. The Burgundians in west Switzerland and the
valleys of the Rhone and Saone in southeast Gaul.
“5. The Visigoths in southwest Gaul and Spain.
“6. The Suevi in that part of Spain which is now
Portugal.
“7. The Ostrogoths in Pannonia – what is now
Austria.
“8. The Lombards in Noricum, between the
Ostrogoths and the Alemanni.
“9. The Heruli in Italy.

The Beast (Papacy) Rises Out of the Sea.
“In the 1st verse, you can view the Beast initially
‘rising’ out of the sea [amongst the nations of Western
Europe].” Michaelson, Write the Vision, Vol. 2, 48.
“In symbolic prophecy, beasts that rise out of the
great sea of humanity represent world or universal
powers.” Bunch, TR, 158.
The Beast Mimics Jesus.—
“Jesus, after His baptism, came out of the water to
begin His public ministry for three and a half literal

318

REVELATION 13
“10. The Vandals in North Africa, with capital at
Carthage.
“The details of this anyone can trace out, any day,
on any map that he will but hold before him, and mark
as he reads the history of the fall of the Roman Empire.
These ten kingdoms were first mentioned in the
prophecy of Daniel, especially in that ‘the fourth beast,
which represented Rome, was seen to have ten horns:’
and these ten horns, ‘out of this [fourth] kingdom,’
are distinctly said by the angel to be ‘ten kings
[kingdoms] that shall arise.’ Also, in the prophecy of
Daniel, it is related that there would come up among
these ten another one; and that by it three of the ten
would be ‘plucked up by the roots.’ Dan. 7:8, 20, 24.
The three which were plucked up, were the Heruli, who
occupied Italy, in 493; the Vandals, who occupied North
Africa, in 534; and the Ostrogoths, who had been
instrumental in rooting up the Heruli, and who occupied
Italy in their place, in 538. That ‘other one,’ before
whom these three were rooted up, is described as having
‘eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking
great things;’ and it was, and is, the papacy.
“Three taken from ten leaves seven. And these
seven of the original ten kingdoms that divided Western
Rome are in that territory today, and are the Powers of
Western Europe today….
“Of these seven, some are very powerful, such
as Britain, France, and Germany; while others are
weak, such as Switzerland, Spain, and Portugal;
while Italy stands, as it were, between strong and
weak. So these seven of the original ten stand just
where Daniel, from the dream that was given to
Nebuchadnezzar, said they would stand. Dan. 2:40-43.
They stand there in precisely the condition in which that
prophecy said they would stand—‘partly strong, and
partly broken,’ or weak. Britain, France, and
Germany have spread their power over the whole
world; and have so intertwined themselves in the
affairs of the whole world that what touches the
world touches them, and what touches them touches
the world.
“Thus the first effect of the first four of the Seven
Trumpets was the blotting out of the Western Empire of
Rome; and the second effect was the planting of the
modern nations of Western Europe, and among
them the great nations of today. Dan. 7:7, 24. They
are referred to later, in the book of Revelation, in the
description of the dragon, and also of the Beast having
‘seven heads and ten horns.’” Jones, GNOT, 32,33.

the arrival of the sea beast in Revelation 13 announced a
departure from the era of the Roman Empire and an
entrance into the era of the invading tribes. Whereas
Rev. 12 began with the birth of Jesus, Revelation 13
begins around AD 476.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 73.
“This sea beast carries ten royal crowns on its ten
horns, a clear allusion to the ten kings or kingdoms
that would emerge from the fourth world empire (the
Roman Empire) in Daniel 7:7,24. The feature of the
ten simultaneous horns leads us beyond the collapse of
the ancient Roman Empire in AD 476. Both Daniel 7
and Revelation 13, therefore, lead into the Middle
Ages.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR,166.
“In Rev. 13 the crowns are upon the horns because
that prophecy focuses upon the time of Papal supremacy
in the dark ages when the nations of Europe obeyed
the behest of the beast and made war upon the saints
(Rev. 13:5).” Were, WATB, 133.
And Upon His Heads the Name of Blasphemy.—
“And the scribes and the Pharisees began to
reason, saying, Who is this which speaketh
blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?”
Luke 5:21.
“Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed?
and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and
lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy
One of Israel.” 2Kings 19:22.
“The name of blasphemy denotes that this beast is
a state joined to a religious power.” PJ.
(See comments in verse 6.)

REVEALTION 13:2
And the beast which I saw was like unto
a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a
bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion:
and the dragon gave him his power, and his
seat, and great authority.
The Leopard Beast.—
“We now come to the leopard beast of chapter 13.
What does that symbolize? The answer still is, The
Roman empire. But the dragon symbolized the Roman
empire, and why does not the same symbol represent it
still? Ah! there has been a change in the religious
character of the empire; and this beast symbolizes
Rome in its professedly Christian form. And it is this
change of religion, and this alone, which makes a
change in the symbol necessary. This beast differs
from the dragon only in that it presents a different
religious aspect. Hence it would be altogether wrong to

And Upon His Horns Ten Crowns.—
“These crowns on the horns confirm the
identification of the horns as political powers.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 817.
“We note the location of the crowns when the
great red dragon gave these elements of authority to the
beast. The dragon had crowns on its seven heads and
none on its ten horns; the beast, however, had crowns
on its ten horns and none on its seven heads. Thus

319

GEMS FROM REVELATION
affirm that it denotes simply the Roman civil power.”
Smith, DR, 563.

sophisticated societies of the ancient Mediterranean
world. The success and popularity of Hellenism
stemmed from the fact that it was open to what other
cultures had to offer. It would avoid the appearance of
eradicating the cultural attributes, thus forming one
synthesized ‘super-culture.’ And, as Rome would
eventually conquer Greece, it would ‘Latinize’ Greek
Hellenism into ‘paganism.’ Thus, ‘paganism’ would
essentially consist of a ‘Latinized’ version of Greek
Hellenism, and, as the backbone of Roman society, it
would later have a tremendous influence on papal
roman theology.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 37.

Like a Leopard, Feet as a Bear, Mouth as a Lion.—
“And four great beasts came up from the sea,
diverse one from another.
“The first was like a lion (Babylon), …And behold
another beast, a second, like to a bear (Medo-Persia),
…After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard
(Greece),….
“After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a
fourth beast (Pagan Rome), dreadful and terrible, and
strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it
devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue
with the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the beasts
that were before it; and it had ten horns. Dan. 7:3-7.

Mouth Like a Lion.—
“ ‘It has been known all along that popery was
baptized paganism; but God is now making it manifest
that the paganism which Rome has baptized is, in all
its essential elements, the very paganism which
prevailed in the ancient literal Babylon.’ The Two
Babylons, Alexander Hislop, p. 2.” Straw, SR, 83.

“Leopard, bear, lion. We have run across this list
before. In a vision six centuries earlier, Daniel saw a
lion, a bear, a leopard—and a fourth, indescribable
animal—emerge out of the sea.... The four beasts of
Daniel 7 rose out of the sea, out of a stormy sea. The
leopard-bodied beast, which was composed of
Daniel’s four beasts, also rose out of the sea.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 325,341.

“This means that when the Papacy speaks, it is
Babylon speaking.” Cooke, #29-UR, 7
And The Dragon (Pagan Rome) Gave to Him (Papal
Rome).—
“A new thing happened to the Roman Empire
which had never before happened in history: midstream
in its history it changed its official religion, and its
character changed from a political to a religious
power. As the emperors became weaker, they moved
their capital from Rome to Constantinople. This left an
empty place which the Bishop of Rome was quick to
fill. Soon he began to lord it over the other bishops, and
to take to himself the prestige which the former
emperors of Rome had exclusively enjoyed.” Wieland,
GIR, 93.

“Some have noted that John alludes to these
powers in the reverse order of their appearance in
history, as he looks backward from his day.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 817.
“It is a well known fact that the papal religion is
a combination of the religious systems of Babylon,
Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome. For this reason the
beast is a combination of the four beasts of Daniel 7
which symbolizes those four powers.” Bunch, TR, 161.
“The beast is made up of the characteristics of the
nations that preceded it. Rev. 13:2. It has the feet of a
bear. It carries the same dualistic ideas as MedoPersia. It has the body of a leopard. It’s body is made
up of the Greek philosophy. It has the ten horns of
Rome. It wields the same political power as the
empire of Rome. It has the mouth of a lion. It still
speaks the religion and philosophy of Babylon that
apostatized from God in the beginning. Further, we are
told that this beast gets its authority from Satan himself.
It says, ‘And the dragon gave him his power, and his
seat, and great authority.’ Rev. 13:2. The city of
Rome in Italy was the seat of the dragon when Christ
was born. This the prophecy says was to be given to
this beast, the Papacy, the political phase of the
apostate church.” Straw, SR, 82.

“In chapter 13 (verses 1-10) is described another
beast, ‘like unto a leopard,’ to which the dragon gave
‘his power, and his seat, and great authority.’ This
symbol, as most Protestants have believed, represents
the papacy, which succeeded to the power and seat
and authority once held by the ancient Roman
empire.” Great Controversy, 439.
“Behind this activity was Satan, seeking to
exterminate the church. When he found that his efforts
to annihilate the followers of Christ through persecution
proved unavailing, he altered his tactics and sought to
lure the church away from Christ through the
establishment of a vast counterfeit religious system.
Instead of working directly through paganism the
dragon now worked behind the façade of a
professedly Christian organization, hoping thereby
to disguise his identity.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
817.

Like Unto a Leopard.—
“We must… understand Alexander’s policy of
Hellenism, i.e. the practice of inculcating Greek culture
into the conquered territories of his empire. Because
Hellenism was such a powerful cultural force, it would
eventually gain tremendous popularity among the

“To this beast the dragon gives his seat, his power,
and great authority. By what power was pagan Rome

320

REVELATION 13
succeeded? We all know that it was by Papal Rome....
But two phases of empire are here recognized; and in
the prophecy, Rome is pagan until Rome is papal.
The statement that the dragon gave to the leopard
beast his seat and power, is further evidence that the
dragon of Revelation 12:3 is not a symbol of Satan
personally; for Satan has not abdicated in favor of
any other malevolent being; and he has not given up
his seat to any earthly power.” Smith, DR (1897),
452,453.

His Vicar on earth, in this city of Rome which, from
being the capital of the wonderful Roman Empire,
was made by Him the capital of the whole world,
because He made it the seat of a sovereignty which,
since it extends beyond the confines of nations and
States, embraces within itself all the peoples of the
whole world.”’—Translated by the Very Rev. James H.
Ryan in The Encyclicals of Pius XI (St. Louis: Herder,
1927), p.44….” Nelson, TA, 45.

The Dragon Gave Him His Power.—
“And power was given unto him to continue forty
and two months.” “And it was given unto him to make
war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power
was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and
nations.” Rev. 13:5,7.
“The Church of Rome willingly accepts the fact
that she received her temporal power from the
Caesars who ruled pagan Rome. We read from her
writers the following:
“ ‘Long ages ago, when Rome through the neglect
of the Western emperors was left to the mercy of the
barbarous hordes, the Romans turned to one figure for
aid and protection, and asked him to rule them; and
thus, in this simple manner, the best title of all to kingly
right, commenced the temporal sovereignty of the
popes. And meekly stepping to the throne of Caesar,
the vicar of Christ took up the scepter to which the
emperors and kings of Europe were to bow in
reverence through so many ages.’—Rev. James Conroy,
American Catholic Quarterly Review, April, 1911.”
Nelson, TA, 44..

Pagan Rome Gave the Seat of Rome to the Papacy
“A throne is a symbol of authority. But because
this passage already contains the words ‘power’ and
‘authority,’ we expect ‘throne’ here to convey a more
literal meaning. Basically, a throne is a place where an
important person sits. Other words for throne are the
Greek cathedra, and the Latin sedes which shows up in
English as see. In the Catholic church, the building in
which a bishop’s throne (or cathedra) is located is
called his ‘cathedral.’ The city in which his throne is
located is called his ‘see.’ The ultimate see in
Catholicism is the Holy See, the city where the
Pope’s throne is located.
This city is Rome.
(Specifically, since the 1929 Treaty of the Lateran with
Italy, the Holy See has been Vatican City, a 108.7 acre
tract on Vatican Hill, lying wholly within the city of
Rome.)” Maxwell, God Cares, 327.

The Beast Mimics Jesus Christ.—
“All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth.” Matthew 28:18.
The Dragon Gave Him His Seat.—
“The dragon was the world power the devil
worked through at the time of Christ. Rev. 12:4,5.
Matt. 2:16. This was pagan Rome. Since the beast
receives its seat from the dragon, Rev. 13:2, the beast
must have arisen after the decline and fall of pagan
Rome, AD 300-538. The beast receives it’s ‘seat’
from pagan Rome, therefore its headquarters will be
in Rome, the ‘Roman see,’ or seat.” Burnside, RWU,
156,157.

“In the sixth century the papacy had become
firmly established. Its seat of power was fixed in the
imperial city, and the bishop of Rome was declared
to be the head over the entire church. Paganism had
given place to the papacy. The dragon had given to
the beast ‘his power, and his seat, and great
authority.’ Revelation 13:2. And now began the 1260
years of papal oppression foretold in the prophecies of
Daniel and the Revelation. Daniel 7:25; Revelation
13:5-7.” Great Controversy, 54.

“In the year AD 330 the capital of the Roman
Empire was moved to Constantinople, which left the
Western Church to pick up her leadership from the
very seat of the Caesars. Let’s read the quotation from
an article quoting the pope himself in 1922: ‘What the
Pope himself thinks of the relationship of Rome to the
Papacy is quite different. In his first Encyclical Ubi
Arcano (Dec. 23, 1922) he wrote of “Italy, our own dear
native land, the country where the hand of God, who
guides the course of history, has set down the Chair of

The Dragon Gave Him Great Authority.—
“…And power (authority) was given unto him to
continue forty and two months.” Rev. 13:5.
“Many writers reveal the way the transference
from pagan Rome to papal Rome was made. Eusebius

321

GEMS FROM REVELATION
in his Life of Constantine declares, ‘In order to render
Christianity more attractive to the Gentiles, the priests
adopted the exterior vestments and ornaments used
in the pagan cult.’
“ ‘Destroy the idols, never the temples. Sprinkle
them with holy water, place in them relics, and let the
nations worship in the places they are accustomed
to.’ Cardinal Baronius is said to have made the
statement, ‘The Holy Church was permitted to
appropriate the rites and ceremonies used by the
pagans in their idolatrous cult since she [the Church]
expiated them by her consecration.’
These are
indicative of the attitude of the Roman Church at that
time. Compromise was its constant characteristic, while
truth was tragically sacrificed on the altars of form
and liturgy.” Anderson, UR, 123,124.

rejected Christ, she was induced to yield allegiance to
the representative of Satan—the bishop of Rome.
“It is one of the leading doctrines of Romanism
that the pope is the visible head of the universal
church of Christ, invested with supreme authority
over bishops and pastors in all parts of the world.
More than this, the pope has been given the very titles
of Deity. He has been styled ‘Lord God the Pope,’ and
has been declared infallible. He demands the homage
of all men. The same claim urged by Satan in the
wilderness of temptation is still urged by him
through the Church of Rome, and vast numbers are
ready to yield him homage.” Great Controversy, 50.
“The papacy exercised control in matters
political and religious, and over the consciences of
men.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 817.

“The bishop of Rome, seeing an opportunity to
exalt his dignity, assumed the title and vestments of
Pontifex Maximus. ...This was the historic title of the
high priest of paganism. These titles and vestments
perpetuated paganism in the church, but always under
the disguise of Christianity. ...All the vestments of
paganism became a part of the so-called Christian
system. For example, the ‘keys of St. Peter,’ found on
the papal coat of arms and worn by the pope, the head
of the system, are not the keys of St. Peter, but are the
modern counterpart of the pagan keys of Janus and
Cybele.” Anderson, UR, 124,129.

How It Happened in History.—
“How did the dragon, the Roman Empire, give its
power, its authority, and the place of its rulership (it’s
‘throne,’ or see, or city) to the Roman Church? The
empire was named for the city of Rome. A proverb
claimed that all roads led to Rome. Rome was by far
the West’s largest city. Revered as the Eternal City, it
pulsed with tremendous power and mystery.
“Much of this formidable secular prestige was
inherited by the Roman pope. Just being the pope of
Rome gave him enormous influence. In addition,
Emperor Constantine contributed hugely to the pope’s
prestige when in 330 he left Italy and founded
Constantinople (now Istanbul) as the empire’s new
capital. Constantinople was some 1300 kilometers or
about 800 miles away to the east, more than a month’s
marching time for an army. ...The abandonment of
Rome was the ‘liberation’ of the pontiffs.
“Several other emperors besides Constantine also
conceded or offered power to the papacy. Step by step,
the Roman Empire (the dragon) did indeed give its
power, throne, and great authority to the Catholic
Church (the leopard-bodied beast). A climax came in
538, when the armies of the Empire drove the Arian
Ostrogoths out of Rome.... By 538, therefore, the
1260 years could begin.” Maxwell, God Cares, 328.

“Gradually this new power was able to change
almost every Christian doctrine by adulterating it with
paganism. (Christmas and Easter noted.)
“…We appreciate the candid admission of
Cardinal Newman in his book Development of Christian
Doctrine in which he notes the origin of the doctrines of
the Catholic Church by saying:
“‘...The use of temples, and these dedicated to
particular saints, and ornamented on occasions with
branches of trees, incense, lamps and candles; votive
offerings on recovery from illness; holy water; asylums,
holy days and seasons, use of calendars, processions,
blessings on the fields; sacerdotal vestments, the tonsure
(shaving of the head), the ring in marriage, turning to
the East, images at a later date, perhaps the
ecclesiastical chant, ...are all of pagan origin, and
sanctified by their adoption into the Church.’—pp.371373.” Nelson, TA, 37,38.

“The cross, that had hitherto been the sign of the
greatest ignominy, now became a sign of honor and
victory.
It glittered on the imperial crown of
Constantine, and was displayed in Rome—till then the
principal seat of paganism—on the pinnacle of the
temple of Jupiter, the Capitol… In a short time
paganism was completely overthrown throughout
the Roman Empire, and the Christian Religion was
permanently established.” Thiele, OSIR, 205.

“Satan once endeavored to form a compromise
with Christ. He came to the Son of God in the
wilderness of temptation, and showing Him all the
kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, offered to
give all into His hands if He would but acknowledge the
supremacy of the prince of darkness. Christ rebuked the
presumptuous tempter and forced him to depart. But
Satan meets with greater success in presenting the
same temptations to man. To secure worldly gains
and honors, the church was led to seek the favor and
support of the great men of earth; and having thus

“As Christianity spread ‘to all the world’ from
apostolic times, it gradually replaced the widespread
practice of paganism. On November 8, AD 392, came
Emperor Theodosius’ edict banning pagan practices
under penalty of death. This law was paganism’s

322

REVELATION 13
next several years but very greatly reduced ‘from tens of
thousands to a few men, survivors who had’ suffered the
ravages both of the pestilence and of the enemy….
“The turning point for the history of Rome came in
538, when the Catholic army of the Roman Empire
drove the fatally enfeebled Arian Ostrogoths away from
the ‘Eternal City.’ ...By 538, therefore, the stipulations
of prophecy had been met and the prophetic 1260 years
could begin. The ten horns were in place and crowned;
three of them had subsequently been uprooted, and the
great red dragon of Revelation 12 and 13 had
effectively handed over to the leopard-bodied sea
beast its power, seat, and great authority.” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 75,76.

death knell; paganism was legislated out of existence
with Theodosius’ decree.” Heiks, Source, 1.
“By living elsewhere, the Emperors allowed a
capable pope to become the most visible leader in the
city. In addition, several emperors offered specific
elements of authority to the papacy. For example, when
Bishop Hilary of Arles (in what we call France today)
refused to obey a command issued by Pope Leo I (440461), Pope Leo persuaded the Roman Emperor
Valentinian III (425-455) to issue a decree requiring
governors of provinces to enforce the Pope’s
commands:
“‘Nothing shall be attempted by the Gallican
bishops, or by those of any other province, contrary to
the ancient custom, without the authority of the
venerable pope of the Eternal City. But whatsoever
the authority of the Apostolic See has enacted, or
shall enact, let that be held as law for all. So that if
any bishop summoned before the pope of Rome shall
neglect to attend, let him be compelled to appear by the
governor of the province.’
“There was another factor influencing the future,
the estates in Italy, France, and north Africa which
various emperors and Roman nobles bestowed on the
pope. Income from these estates enabled popes to
provide significant welfare benefits to the poor in times
of distress, thereby considerably increasing their own
popularity and influence.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 74,75.

REVELATION 13:3
And I saw one of his heads as it were
wounded to death; and his deadly wound
was healed: and all the world wondered
after the beast.
One of His Heads.—
“The head that was wounded to death was the
papal head. We are held to this conclusion by the very
obvious principle that whatever is spoken in prophecy
of the symbol of any government, applies to that
government only while it is represented by that
symbol.” Smith, DR, 567.

“In AD 533 …the imperial Code of Justinian
…legalized the pope’s ecclesiastical supremacy as
‘head over all churches’ in the east and the west and
placed the civil sword at his disposal.” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 171.

“Since the seven heads are successive, and we
have already learned that the fifth of the series is the
one here mentioned, this head was all of the beast then
existing; therefore when this head received its deadly
wound, it was the beast itself that was put out of action.
In other words, the head and the beast are here
synonymous.” Price, Time of the End, 63.

“...Thus far the dragon had not yet delivered
Rome into the pope’s hands. But Eastern Emperor
Justinian (527-565), a devout Catholic and nephew of
Justin I, sent his General Belisarius from
Constantinople with a Roman army to eliminate the
Arian Vandals in North Africa. By 534 that job was
done and the second horn was uprooted.... Then
Justinian ordered Belisarius to enter Italy and wipe out
the third horn, the Arian Ostrogoths.
“The Ostrogoths made a strategic retreat. As
Belisarius and his small army entered Rome in
December 536 by one gate, the Ostrogothic garrison
guarding the city marched out by a different gate. But
soon the Ostrogothic army arrived, in great numbers.
Thus as late as the end of 537, Belisarius’s army was
dramatically outnumbered by the Ostrogoths and was, in
fact, held captive within the city of Rome, besieged by
the Ostrogoths they had come to conquer. However,
disease and inadequate generalship decimated the
Goths, while brilliance and daring aided Belisarius. In
the spring of 538 the Gothic army, largely
demoralized, withdrew from Rome, its numbers
adequate to cause considerable damage to Italy over the

“Head #1—Babylon, #2—Medo-Persia; #3—
Greece; #4—Pagan Rome; #5—Papal Rome.” PJ
“It is important to recognize that it was the head of
the beast that received the deadly wound. It is not the
Roman Catholic Church as such that was wounded or
slain. The Catholic Church has continually functioned.
The beast represents the political aspect of the
Papacy. The Papacy is a union of church and state, of
religious and civil power. In Revelation 17, which is an
enlargement of chapter 13, the religious element is
symbolized as the harlot, and the civil or political
element, is symbolized by the 7-headed beast on
which the harlot rides.” Cooke, #19-UR, 20.
How Wounded to Death.—
“We read in verse 14 that the mortal wound
referred to in verse 3 ...was inflicted by a ‘sword.’ So
linking verses 3, 10, and 14 together, we see that the
blow that was intended to be fatal was (a) inflicted by
a sword—by a military power of some sort—and that

323

GEMS FROM REVELATION
it (b) involved a captivity.” Maxwell, God Cares, 326.

Directory dated 13 Pluviose of the year V, signed by La
Revelliere-Lepeaux, Barras, and Reubell, saying that
‘the Roman religion [italics supplied] would always be
the irreconcilable enemy of the Republic.’ It must be
struck in France; but ‘there is one thing more essential,
to the attainment of the end desired, and that is to
destroy, if possible, the centre of unity of the Roman
Church; and it is for you [Napoleon] ...to realize this
aim if you consider it practicable.’
“How the pope was arrested while celebrating the
twenty-third anniversary of his coronation, then hurried
off to one place after another; and how he died in exile a
year or so later, his body left lying around for some time
unburied, has often been told.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 77.

When the Wound Would Occur.—
“We now inquire respecting the time when the
beast received its deadly wound. That this event took
place at the close of the 1260 years, and not before the
commencement of that period, or during its
continuance, we think evident from the following facts:
“1. A head wounded before that period would
not be a head of the beast, but a head of the dragon.
The prophecy does not relate to the wounding of a head
of the dragon, to make way for the rise of the beast, as
some suppose, but to the wounding of a head of the
beast.
“2. Nor could it take place during the 1260 years;
for it is said that the beast receives his power and seat
from this dragon, and that from that time he was to
have power for 1260 years, so that he should be able to
overcome the saints, and should have power over all
kindreds and tongues and nations. This 1260 years’ rule
began with the act of the dragon in giving his seat, the
city of Rome, unto the beast, in 538, and ended in 1798,
when the city of Rome was taken from the beast, and his
power was wrested from him. During this period,
therefore, the deadly wound and overthrow of the
beast could not take place.
“3. The time when the beast received this deadly
wound seems to be clearly marked in verse 10. It is
there stated that he that leadeth into captivity and killeth
with the sword, must be led into captivity and killed
with the sword. That is, the papal power, which had
thus acted for 1260 years, must at the close of that
period of triumph be thus used. Such were the facts
in 1798.” Andrews, TAM, 78,79.

“It came as the climax of several centuries of
decline in the influence of Catholicism on the minds of
Europeans, and it was not merely a military coup but
was a stroke deliberately intended to terminate the
papacy forever.
“During the French Revolution and under orders
from the revolutionary French government, General
Alexander Berthier issued a proclamation in Rome on
February 15, 1798, informing Pope Pius VI and the
people of Rome that the pope should no longer
‘exercise any function.’ John Adolphus, The History of
France, vol. 2 (London: George Kearsley, 1803), p.365.
“Richard Duppa, a British writer who was in
Rome at the time, says that the pope was arrested in the
Sistine Chapel while he was celebrating the twenty-third
anniversary of his coronation. Citizen Haller, the
French commissary-general, and Cervoni, who
commanded the French troops in Rome under General
Berthier, ‘gratified themselves in a peculiar triumph
over this unfortunate potentate. During that ceremony
they both entered the chapel, and Haller announced to
the sovereign Pontiff on his throne that his reign was
at an end. The poor old man seemed shocked at the
abruptness of this unexpected notice, but soon recovered
himself with becoming fortitude.’ The pope’s Swiss
guards were dismissed, and Republican soldiers were
installed in their place. (Richard Duppa, A Brief
Account of the Subversion of the Papal Government.
1798, 2d ed. [London: G.G. and J. Robinson, 1799], pp.
46,47.)
“In spite of the pope’s advanced age and frail
health (he was in his 80’s), he was hustled off by French
soldiers to a string of different addresses in Italy and
southern France. He died in prison in the fortress city
of Valence on August 29, 1799.” Maxwell, God Cares,
328,329.

How The Wound Occurred in History.—
“It was France that had supported the Papacy
during the period of the Reformation and following.
But during the French Revolution, when Pope Pius
joined the coalition of European powers against France
and put an army in the field, France turned against the
Papacy. She sent an army against the Pope....”
Straw, SR, 84.

General Berthier takes the Pope captive.
The papacy loses civil power—1798.

“Not only this, but the French Revolution seized
church property, abolished the work of the priests, and
put the church under a ban.” Straw, SR, 84.

“General Berthier was carrying out an order issued
by the central French government. When the armies of
France were enjoying victories in Italy in 1797,
Napoleon received a communication from the

“The final stroke of the sword of the state, which
was made possible by the Reformation, was wielded by
Napoleon through General Berthier in 1798 when the

324

REVELATION 13
pope was taken prisoner and deprived of his throne and
dominion. This important event marked the close of
the 1260 years. All the world thought the papacy
was dead and its career ended. Speaking of this event,
George Trevor, canon of York, said: ‘The papacy was
extinct; not a vestige of its existence remained; and
among all the Roman Catholic powers not a finger was
stirred in its defense. The Eternal City had no longer
prince or pontiff; its bishop was a dying captive in
foreign lands; and the decree was already announced
that no successor would be allowed in his place.’—
Rome and Its Papal Rulers, p. 440. Napoleon had
decreed that in case of the pope’s death no successor
should be elected to fill the office. Is it any wonder
that the prophet also thought that the wound was fatal?”
Bunch, TR, 171.

History of How the Wound is Slowly Healing.—
“…The papacy was re-established, though with a
diminution of its former power, by the election of a
new pope, March 14, 1800.” Smith, DR, 567.
“In 1814 the pope was given liberty to settle his
own policy, and the property of the Church was
restored to the Papacy again. With the urgent wish of
all nations to restore peace and religion after the
revolution the majority looked to the Pope for help. In
1820 the Ultra-montanism arose to assist Papal
supremacy. The Oxford Movement led many back
into the church. The Vatican Council in 1870
declared Papal infallibility. Pope Pius X (1893-1914)
stamped out modernism, and Pius XI made the Lateran
Pact (1929) with Mussolini and restored again the
States Church.” Straw, SR, 84.

“Speaking of this crushing blow to the papacy,
George Trevor, Anglican clergyman and canon of York,
…said: ‘The Papacy was extinct: not a vestige of its
existence remained: and among all the Roman
Catholic powers not a finger was stirred in its
defense. The Eternal City had no longer prince or
pontiff; its bishop was a dying captive in foreign lands;
and the decree was already announced that no successor
would be allowed in his place.’ [George Trevor, Rome:
From the Fall of the Western Empire, p. 440.]”
Mansell, OSOA, 35.

“The most important single date in the healing
of the deadly wound and the restoration of the
papacy is Feb. 11, 1929. On that day the Lateran
Pact was signed by representatives of the Vatican and
the Italian government, ending a virtual war which had
existed between them since 1870, during which time the
pope termed himself ‘the prisoner of the Vatican.’ The
signing of the treaty restored to the pope the temporal
sovereignty which had been taken away by Napoleon in
1798, and again by Italy in 1870. Once more he
became king of a state as well as supreme pontiff of
the church. The morning after the signing of the
Lateran Pact, the pope appeared on the balcony of St.
Peter’s church, and thousands of Catholics led by the
priests, cried out: ‘Long live the pope-king.’” Bunch,
TR, 173.

“‘Power was given unto him to continue forty
and two months.’ And, says the prophet, ‘I saw one of
his heads as it were wounded to death.’ And again:
‘He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity:
he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the
sword.’ The forty and two months are the same as the
‘time and times and the dividing of time,’ three years
and a half, or 1260 days, of Daniel 7—the time during
which the papal power was to oppress God’s people.
This period, as stated in preceding chapters, began with
the supremacy of the papacy, A.D. 538, and terminated
in 1798. At that time the pope was made captive by
the French army, the papal power received its deadly
wound, and the prediction was fulfilled, ‘He that
leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity.’” Great
Controversy, 439.
The Beast Mimics Christ’s Deadly Wound.—
“The word for ‘wound’ which the head of the
beast receives in a ‘deadly’ form according to verse 3
(sphazo) [is] the same word… used for Christ as the
slain lamb (5:6,9,12). Those who are excluded from
the heavenly kingdom are those who are not written in
the book of the Lamb who was ‘slain’ (wounded) from
the foundation of the world (13:8). The same word is
used in both passages, and thus a contrast is drawn
between the beast and the ‘Lamb.’ Both received a
wound that was deadly, but came back to life—One to
work for the redemption of mankind, the other for its
destruction.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 358.

Cardinal Gaspari signs the Lateran
Concordat as Mussolini looks on—1929.
“To commemorate the treaty, Mussolini
constructed a special street leading from Rome to the
Vatican called, ‘The Avenue of Reconciliation’. This
treaty was recognized and published as a HEALING.

325

GEMS FROM REVELATION
…‘In affixing their autographs to the memorable
document, HEALING THE WOUND which festered
since the 1700’s, extreme cordiality was displayed on
both sides.’ The San Francisco Chronicle, Feb.12,
1929.” Cooke, #19-UR, 23.

her own ends when the time shall come for her to
strike. All that she desires is vantage ground, and this
is already being given her. We shall soon see and shall
feel what the purpose of the Roman element is.
Whoever shall believe and obey the word of God will
thereby incur reproach and persecution.”
Great
Controversy, 581.

“The world today has largely forgotten the bitter
lessons taught in the Dark Ages. It has forgotten that
the noontide of the papacy was the world’s midnight.
Today the papacy is making a remarkable comeback in
world power. Through all the new nations of the Third
World and in the Western nations, her tremendous
rising to power is plain to be seen. In many countries
she controls education. …And other churches outside
the Roman fold are looking to her for leadership.
..Although the Roman Church once was wounded, the
wound is being healed today.” Wieland, GIR, 96.

“The National Reform movement, exercising the
power of religious legislation, will, when fully
developed, manifest the same intolerance and
oppression that have prevailed in past ages. Human
councils then assumed the prerogatives of Deity,
crushing under their despotic power liberty of
conscience; and imprisonment, exile, and death
followed for those who opposed their dictates. If
popery or its principles shall again be legislated into
power, the fires of persecution will be rekindled
against those who will not sacrifice conscience and the
truth in deference to popular errors. This evil is on the
point of realization.” 5 Testimonies, 712.

Deadly Wound is Totally Healed When Power to
Oppress God’s People is Regained and Excercised.—
“We have already mentioned that this deadly
wound was inflicted on the Papacy in 1798, when Pope
Pius VI was taken prisoner and led into exile. The
prophecy could not have stated the event more clearly:
(Rev. 13:10 quoted.) But who could have predicted a
renewal of papal power as does the prophecy of
Revelation when it specifies that the ‘deadly wound’
would be healed and that ‘all the world... [would
wonder] after the beast’ (13:3)?” Zurcher, COR, 102.

“Heretofore those who presented the truths of the
third angel's message have often been regarded as mere
alarmists. Their predictions that religious intolerance
would gain control in the United States, that church
and state would unite to persecute those who keep
the commandments of God, have been pronounced
groundless and absurd. It has been confidently declared
that this land could never become other than what it has
been--the defender of religious freedom. But as the
question of enforcing Sunday observance is widely
agitated, the event so long doubted and disbelieved is
seen to be approaching, and the third message will
produce an effect which it could not have had before.”
Great Controversy, 605.

“Some have thought that when the pope was given
the right to rule the Vatican State of nearly 109 acres, by
the signing of the Lateran Treaty in 1929, that Rome’s
power was restored. God pictures a much greater
restoration. It would appear that there must be a
complete healing of the deadly wound which would
restore the papal power to the place of prominence
she once held.” Metcalf, GPDR, 120.

“Since the deadly wound and its healing are
spoken of in the same sentence, many have drawn the
conclusion that the two events follow in comparatively
quick succession. Instead, a century and a half have
already elapsed since the deadly wound was inflicted,
and we do not know how much more time is involved,
for the deadly wound is still not completely healed.”
Price, Time of the End, 29.

“Protestants little know what they are doing when
they propose to accept the aid of Rome in the work of
Sunday exaltation. While they are bent upon the
accomplishment of their purpose, Rome is aiming to
re-establish her power, to recover her lost
supremacy. Let the principle once be established in the
United States that the church may employ or control the
power of the state; that religious observances may be
enforced by secular laws; in short, that the authority of
church and state is to dominate the conscience, and
the triumph of Rome in this country is assured.
“God’s word has given warning of the impending
danger; let this be unheeded, and the Protestant world
will learn what the purposes of Rome really are, only
when it is too late to escape the snare. She is silently
growing into power. Her doctrines are exerting their
influence in legislative halls, in the churches, and in the
hearts of men. She is piling up her lofty and massive
structures in the secret recesses of which her former
persecutions will be repeated. Stealthily and
unsuspectedly she is strengthening her forces to further

All The World Wondered After the Beast.—
“The prophet envisioned a much greater
restoration. He saw the wound completely healed, as
the Greek implies. Following the healing he saw ‘all
that dwell upon the earth,’ except a faithful few,
worshiping the beast (vs.8; cf. Great Controversy,
579.). This is still future. Though the papacy receives
homage from certain groups, vast populations show it
no deference. But that is to change. The beast of v.11
‘causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to
worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was
healed.’ (v.12).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 817,818.
“The influence of Rome in the countries that once

326

REVELATION 13
acknowledged her dominion is still far from being
destroyed. And prophecy foretells a restoration of her
power. ‘I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to
death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the
world wondered after the beast.’ Verse 3. The
infliction of the deadly wound points to the downfall of
the papacy in 1798. After this, says the prophet, ‘his
deadly wound was healed: and all the world
wondered after the beast.’ Paul states plainly that the
‘man of sin’ will continue until the second advent. 2
Thessalonians 2:3-8. To the very close of time he will
carry forward the work of deception. And the revelator
declares, also referring to the papacy: ‘All that dwell
upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life.’ Revelation 13:8. In
both the Old and the New World, the papacy will
receive homage in the honor paid to the Sunday
institution that rests solely upon the authority of the
Roman Church.” Great Controversy, 579.

instead of looking to Christ for themselves. The
people were wholly deceived. They were taught that the
popes and priests were Christ’s representatives, when in
fact they were the representatives of Satan, and
those who bowed to them worshiped Satan.” Early
Writings, 213,214.
“The beast receives its power from, and is
controlled by, the spirit of the dragon or Satan. Obeying
one is obedience to the other, and obedience is
worship. See Rom. 6:16. ...The real ruler of this world
is Satan. He is ‘the prince of this world’ and his spirit
controls all of ‘the children of disobedience.’
Obedience to any person or power antagonistic to God
is in reality obedience to Satan and is therefore the
worship of Satan ‘the god of this world.’” Bunch, TR,
167.

REVELATION 13:4
And they worshipped the dragon which
gave power unto the beast: and they
worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like
unto the beast? Who is able to make war
with him?
And They Worshipped the Dragon.
And They
Worshipped the Beast.—
“The accession of the Roman Church to power
marked the beginning of the Dark Ages. As her power
increased, the darkness deepened.
Faith was
transferred from Christ, the true foundation, to the
pope of Rome. Instead of trusting in the Son of God
for forgiveness of sins and for eternal salvation, the
people looked to the pope, and to the priests and
prelates to whom he delegated authority. They were
taught that the pope was their earthly mediator and that
none could approach God except through him; and,
further, that he stood in the place of God to them and
was therefore to be implicitly obeyed. A deviation from
his requirements was sufficient cause for the severest
punishment to be visited upon the bodies and souls of
the offenders. Thus the minds of the people were
turned away from God to fallible, erring, and cruel
men, nay, more, to the prince of darkness himself,
who exercised his power through them.” Great
Controversy, 55.

Pope Benedict XVI standing before a
painting of people bowing down to him.
Who is Like Unto the Beast?—
“Perhaps a parody on similar expressions about
God.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 818.
“Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods?
Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders?” Exodus 15:11.
“Who is like unto the Lord our God, who
dwelleth on high, who humbleth Himself to behold the
things that are in heaven, and in the earth!” Ps. 113:5,6.

“It has ever been the design of Satan to draw
the minds of the people from Jesus to man, and to
destroy individual accountability. Satan failed in his
design when he tempted the Son of God; but he
succeeded better when he came to fallen man.
Christianity became corrupted. Popes and priests
presumed to take an exalted position, and taught the
people to look to them for the pardon of their sins,

“Christ’s name, Michael, means, ‘Who is like
God?’ As people worship the beast, they ask, ‘Who is
like unto the beast?’” Maxwell, God Cares, 444.
Who is Able to Make War With Him?—
“The answer to this question is found in Rev.
12:17 and Rev. 15:2.” PJ

327

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“And the dragon was wroth with the woman and
went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which
keep the commandments of God and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.” Rev. 12:17.
“And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with
fire: and them that had gotten the victory over the
beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over
the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass,
having the harps of God.” Rev. 15:2.

Dan. 7. Among the parallels the following may be
noted: (1) The beast of Rev. 13 had a ‘mouth speaking
great things and blasphemies’ (vs.5); the little horn of
Dan. 7 also had a ‘mouth speaking great things’
(vs.8).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 818.
“Neither the popes of the Middle Ages nor the
Counter-Reformation had dared to articulate what was
announced in the nineteenth century as ‘Catholic truth,’
‘truth from which no one can deviate without damage to
one’s faith and one’s salvation,’ namely, ‘the immutable
(irreformabilis) Dogma revealed by God of the
‘jurisdictional primacy’ of the pope over ‘the whole
globe of the earth’ and his ‘infallibility’ in ‘ex
cathedra’ decisions in question of ‘faith and morals.’
With this the papacy was entrusted with an ‘unbridled
power’ over the testimony of the Scriptures and
tradition, and the ‘Vatican’s sacrilege’ was heightened
to arrogance.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 341.

SECTION TWO:REVELATION 13:5-10.—

“John goes over the history of the beast twice.”
Andrews, TAM, 79.
(See Section One at the beginning of this chapter
for further explanation why there are two sections.)
“The second section is distinctive in terms of its
verbal contents. It contains four phrases that start in
exactly the same form in the original Greek, kai edothe
auto (‘and there was given unto him….’) The phrase
occurs twice in verse 5 and twice in verse 7. Each time
the phrase introduces something that is given to the
beast. The first ‘given’ is a mouth speaking great things
and blasphemies. The second is authority. The third
thing given is the ability to make war on the saints. The
fourth ‘given’ is authority over the nations. Then the
passage concludes, as did the first one, with a
statement of worship by the world.”
Biblical
Research Inst., 1SOR, 355.

And Blasphemies.—
“The dictionary defines blasphemy as ‘indignity
offered to God in words, writing, or signs; also, act of
claiming attributes or prerogatives of deity.’ Blasphemy
has to do with religion, not politics. Therefore the
‘beast’ is a religious power, that is, a church which
has grown out of a kingdom.” Wieland, GIR, 92.
(See more comments in Rev. 13:6).
Power (Authority) Was Given Unto Him.—
“The statement that (verse 5 quoted) indicates that
the authority was delegated and empowered by another.
What was the source of the power and authority of the
beast? ‘And the dragon gave him his power, and his
seat, and great authority.’ The prophet Daniel said:
‘And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own
power,’ (Dan. 8:24).” Bunch, TR, 167.

Hebrew Parallelism.—
“The question may now be asked, Why does the
passage operate in this manner? Why does it come back
to some of these themes over and over again? Why
doesn’t it just treat each theme once and then move on
to another in a linear fashion? The matter for study in
this connection is again one of literary structure. The
organizing principle is parallelism of thought. This is
very common in the Bible.
“One third of the OT is written in poetry; all
Hebrew poetry exercises parallelism of thought. One
cannot have Hebrew poetry without it. It also spills
over into biblical prose, both in the OT and in the NT.
Examples of this are too numerous to mention. So it is
not unexpected to find that same principle operating
here.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 354.

“The word ‘authority’ ...is found first in verse 2
where the dragon gives to the sea beast several things
including ‘great authority.’ Then in verse 5 it is stated
that the sea beast is allowed to exercise authority for
42 months. If we take the strictly chronological
approach, then we have two different authorities here.
The more logical connection is that the authority given
in verse 2 is the same authority that is allowed to
continue for 42 months according to verse 5.”
Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 353.

REVELATION 13:5
And there was given unto him a mouth
speaking great things and blasphemies; and
power was given unto him to continue forty
and two months.

“What was it given authority to do? …According
to verse 7a that authority was to make war on the
saints.... The beast’s authority was to be exercised
especially in making war against the saints. This feature
of the text brings it into line with ...Daniel 11-12 and
Revelation 12. In both passages this same time period
was especially and above all one of persecution of the
saints.
“... According to 13:2 the dragon gave to the sea
beast power, seat, and great (megalen) authority

A Mouth Speaking Great Things.—
“The specifications of Rev. 13:5-7 clearly identify
the power symbolized by the beast with that
represented by the little horn of the fourth beast of

328

REVELATION 13
(exousia). Then, according to verse 5, the sea beast
goes on to exercise that authority (exousia) for 42
months. Indeed, the length of time that the beast
exercises that authority is one reason why it is
great.” Biblical Research Inst., 1SOR, 357.

appearance of the Beast was at Justinian’s recovery of
the Western empire, from which time to about the year
1800 will be about 1,260 years.’
“On the next page of his book, Cressener is even
more precise. He says that this period will end ‘a
little before the year 1800.’ It ended in late February
1798—exactly 1,260 years from the time the
Ostrogothic ‘horn’ was laid low and driven from the
city of Rome in March 538!” Mansell, OSOA, 36.

Forty and Two Months.—
“The forty and two months are the same as the
‘time and times and the dividing of time,’ three years
and a half, or 1260 days, of Daniel 7—the time during
which the papal power was to oppress God’s people.
This period, as stated in preceding chapters, began with
the supremacy of the papacy, A.D. 538, and
terminated in 1798. At that time the pope was made
captive by the French army, the papal power received its
deadly wound, and the prediction was fulfilled, ‘He that
leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity.’” Great
Controversy, 439.

REVELATION 13:6
And he opened his mouth in blasphemy
against God, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven.
Opened His Mouth in Blasphemy.—
“Verse 5 says that the sea beast is given a mouth
uttering blasphemies. Then, at the end of that verse the
42 months of its authority are mentioned. Verse 6
begins by identifying what is blasphemed: the name of
God, His sanctuary in heaven, and those of earth who
have placed their faith there. If these two verses are
read in a strictly chronological order, then the
blasphemy of verse 6 occurs 42 months or 1260 years
later than the blasphemy spoken in verse 5.
“But this is not really the case. Verse 1 notes that
the name of blasphemy was on the heads of the
beast; verse 5 notes that the beast was given a mouth
uttering those blasphemies; and verse 6 gives the
content of some of those blasphemies. These are all
contemporaneous and interrelated actions; they are not
separate and distinct and occurring later in time than the
previous ones. The development upon the theme of
amplifying the matter of blasphemy is supplemented by
each additional reference.” Biblical Research Inst.,
1SOR, 353,354.

“The 1260 days are mentioned seven times in
Daniel and Revelation. There are not (as some have
supposed) several 1260-day periods. There is only one.
It is mentioned seven times because it is so very
important.” Maxwell, God Cares, 326.
Power to Continue Forty and Two Months.—
“The apostle Paul warned the church not to look
for the coming of Christ in his day. ‘That day shall not
come,’ he says, ‘except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed.’ 2 Thess. 2:3.
Not till after the great apostasy, and the long period of
the reign of the ‘man of sin,’ can we look for the advent
of our Lord. The ‘man of sin,’ which is also styled ‘the
mystery of iniquity,’ ‘the son of perdition,’ and ‘that
wicked,’ represents the papacy, which, as foretold in
prophecy, was to maintain its supremacy for 1260
years. This period ended in 1798. The coming of
Christ could not take place before that time. Paul
covers with his caution the whole of the Christian
dispensation down to the year 1798. It is this side of
that time that the message of Christ’s second coming
is to be proclaimed.” Great Controversy, 356.

“He shall speak great words against the Most
High.” Daniel 7:25.

“The persecution of the church did not continue
throughout the entire period of the 1260 years. God in
mercy to His people cut short the time of their fiery
trial. In foretelling the ‘great tribulation’ to befall the
church, the Saviour said: ‘Except those days should
be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for
the elect's sake those days shall be shortened.’
Matthew 24:22.
Through the influence of the
Reformation the persecution was brought to an end prior
to 1798.” Great Controversy, 266,267.

“In verse 5 in this chapter of Revelation similar
words are used, for he had ‘a mouth speaking great
things.’ Here, however, the word ‘blasphemy’ is
added, and this evidently points to the fact that the great
words will be blasphemous enunciations against the
God of heaven.
“In the Gospels we find two indications of what
constitutes blasphemy. In John 10:33 we read that the
Jews falsely charged Jesus with blasphemy because,
said they, ‘Thou, being a man, makest Thyself God.’
This in the case of the Saviour was untrue, because He
was the Son of God. He was ‘Immanuel, God With
Us.’ But for man to assume the prerogatives of God
and to take the titles of deity—this is blasphemy.
“Again in Luke 5:21 we see the Pharisees
endeavoring to catch Jesus in His words. ‘Who is this
which speaketh blasphemies?’ said they. ‘Who can

End of 42 Months (1260 Years) Predicted.—
“In 1689, more than a century before the
termination of the 1260 years, Drue Cressener, an
Anglican cleric and student of Bible prophecy, on the
basis of the prophecies in Daniel 7 and Revelation 13,
made the following ‘uncanny’ prediction: ‘The first

329

GEMS FROM REVELATION
forgive sins, but God alone?’ Jesus could pardon
transgressions, for He was the divine Saviour. But for
man, mortal man, to claim such authority is
blasphemy indeed.
“We might ask if the power represented by this
symbol has fulfilled this part of the prophecy.
...Observe what is said regarding the claim of the
priesthood to forgive sins:
“ ‘The priest holds the place of the Saviour
Himself, when, by saying, “Ego te absolve” [I thee
absolve], he absolves from sin. ...To pardon a single
sin requires all the omnipotence of God. ...But what
only God can do by His omnipotence, the priest can also
do by saying “Ego te absolve a percatis tuis.’
...Innocent III has written: “Indeed, it is not too much to
say that in view of the sublimity of their offices the
priests are so many gods.”’ (Alphonsus de Liguori,
Dignities and Duties of the Priest, pp. 34-36).
“Note still further the blasphemous utterances of
this power:
“ ‘But our wonder should be far greater when we
find that in obedience to the words of His priests—HOC
EST CORPUS MEUM [This is My body]—God
Himself descends on the altar, that He comes wherever
they call Him, and as often as they call Him, and places
Himself in their hands, even though they should be His
enemies. And after having come, He remains, entirely
at their disposal; they move Him as they please, from
one place to another; they may, if they wish, shut Him
up in the tabernacle, or expose Him on the altar, or carry
Him outside the church; they may, if they choose, eat
His flesh, and give Him for the food of others. “Oh,
how very great is their power,” says St. Laurence
Justinian, speaking of priests. “A word falls from their
lips and the body of Christ is there substantially formed
from the matter of bread, and the Incarnate Word
descended from heaven, is found really present on the
table of the altar!” ’
“‘Thus the priest may, in a certain manner, be
called the creator of his Creator.... “The power of the
priest,” says St. Bernardine of Sienna, “is the power of
the divine person; for the transubstantiation of the bread
requires as much power as the creation of the world.” ’
“Thus the beast power blasphemes the temple in
heaven by turning the attention of his subjects to his
own throne and palace instead of to the tabernacle of
God; by diverting their attention from the sacrifice of
the Son of God to the sacrifice of the mass.
“He blasphemes them that dwell in heaven by
assuming to exercise the power of forgiving sins, and so
turns away the minds of men from the mediatorial
work of Christ and His heavenly assistants in the
sanctuary above.” Smith, DR, 569-571.

“At the Fifty Lateran Council in 1512, just before
the Reformation began, Christopher Marcellus
addressed Pope Julius II, ‘Thou art the Shepherd, thou
art the Physician, thou art the Governor, thou art the
Husbandman, finally, thou art another God on earth
(tu enim pastor, ...tu denique alter Deus in terries).’”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 72.
“The
following
extracts
from
Ferraris’
Ecclesiastical Dictionary (R.C.) article on the pope
shows clearly that the authority and position given the
pope is blasphemy against God.
“’The Pope is of so great dignity and so exalted
that he is not a mere man, but as it were God, and the
vicar of God.
“’The Pope is of such lofty and supreme dignity
that, properly speaking, he has not been established in
any rank of dignity, but rather has been placed upon the
very summit of all ranks of dignities.
“’…The Pope is as it were God on earth, sole
sovereign of the faithful of Christ, chief king of kings,
having plenitude of power, to whom has been entrusted
by the omnipotent God direction not only of the earthly
but also of the heavenly kingdom.
“’The Pope is of so great authority and power that
he can modify, explain, or interpret even divine
laws.’” Metcalf, GPDR, 121.

Auricular Confession to the Priest.
‘Who can forgive sins, but God alone?’ Lk. 5:21.
“Jesus said He would send the Holy Spirit as
His representative, or vicar, after He left the earth.
John 14:26. But the Roman Catholic Church says
the pope is Christ’s vicar. Here we have a man taking
to himself prerogatives which belong to God. That is
blasphemy.” Straw, SR, 83.

Blaspheme God.—
“Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you
before the judgment seats? Do not they blaspheme that
worthy name by the which ye are called?” James 2:6,
7.

“Dan. 7:25. This power claims to be able to
change the law of God.” Burnside, RWU, 157.

330

REVELATION 13
“The papacy would blaspheme God by forcing
upon the world a false god—the papal doctrine of the
Trinity:
One mega-god with three continual
manifestations, all of one substance. The true view of
the Godhead, three distinct eternal Beings, was
subverted. The Trinity doctrine became the centerpiece
of its whole theology.
“God is also blasphemed when people, by keeping
Sunday, trample upon the fourth commandment that
contains God’s name.” PJ.

48.” Cooke, #19-UR, 10.
“And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven;
and it cast down some of the host and of the stars to
the ground, and stamped upon them.” Daniel 8:10.
“By faith God’s people also dwell in heavenly
places: ‘But God who is rich in mercy, for His great
love wherewith He loved us, hath quickened us together
with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) And hath raised us
up together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus.’ Eph. 1:4-6.
“Who hath delivered us from the power of
darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of
his dear Son.” Colossians 1:13.
“By
bulls,
interdicts,
excommunications,
proclamations against, persecutions, the papacy has
blasphemed God’s people that sit with Christ in
heavenly places.” PJ

Blaspheme His Tabernacle.—
“This is the second object of his blasphemy. This
power presumes to set up his temple on earth, and
thus draws the attention of the people away from the
sanctuary in heaven, the ‘true tabernacle,’ where
Jesus ministers as high priest (Heb.8:1,2). But this
power seeks to cast down the work of this sanctuary
(see Dan. 8:11; cf. vs.12,13). The heavenly ministry of
the sacrifice of Christ is discounted, and the sacrifice of
the mass on earth is substituted.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 818.

REVELATION 13:7
And it was given unto him to make war
with the saints, and to overcome them: and
power was given him over all kindreds, and
tongues, and nations.

“It has trodden under foot and blasphemed God’s
sanctuary, or tabernacle, Rev. 13:6; Heb. 8:2, by calling
its own sanctuary the temple of God, and by turning
away the worship of them that dwell on the earth
from the temple of God in Heaven to the sanctuary
of Satan at Rome.” White, James, Bible Adventism,
135.

Two Groups of People.—
“A pair of phrases which begin ‘and there was
given to him’ (dai edothe auto) occurs in verse 7.
There they describe two groups of people. The first
consists of the saints. The beast was permitted to make
war against them and defeat them. The second group
consists of the rest of the world’s populations. In
contrast to the saints who attempted to withstand the
beast, this group acquiesced to it and eventually will go
so far as to worship it. Hence the contrast between the
two groups: those opposed to it and those who agree
to side with it and even worship it.” Biblical
Research Inst., 1SOR, 356.

“Another blasphemous thing this power has done
is the taking away of the priesthood of Christ in the
heavenly sanctuary and in His place has instituted a
counterfeit and mediatorial system in which the
priest is the mediator between God and man. This is
assuming prerogatives belonging only to Christ.”
Metcalf, GPDR, 122.
Blaspheme Them That Dwell in Heaven.—
“ How does the Papacy blaspheme ‘them that
dwell in heaven’? Apart from the Godhead, the
dwellers in heaven are the millions of angels, the
messengers of God. The Papacy blasphemes against
them by claiming that the priests are greater than the
angels and that the Pope can even excommunicate
angels.
“ ‘The sacerdotal [priestly] dignity also surpasses
the dignity of the angels…. All the angels in heaven
cannot absolve from a single sin…. The holy archangel
can chase away devils, but he cannot free his client from
their claims till a priest comes to absolve him…. If I
saw an angel and a priest, I would bend my knee first to
the priest and then to the angel.’ Liguori, Dignities and
Duties of the Priest, p. 31.
“ ‘The Pope is crowned with a triple crown, as
king of heaven and of earth and of the lower regions…
so that if it were possible that the angles might err in the
faith, they could be judged and excommunicated by
the Pope.’ Ferraris, Prompta Bibliotecha, Vol. VI, p.

Power Given to Make War with the Saints.—
“I beheld, and the same horn made war with the
saints, and prevailed against them.” “And he shall...
wear out the saints of the most High.” Daniel 7:21,25.
“And now began the 1260 years of papal
oppression foretold in the prophecies of Daniel and the
Revelation. Daniel 7:25; Revelation 13:5-7. Christians
were forced to choose either to yield their integrity
and accept the papal ceremonies and worship, or to
wear away their lives in dungeons or suffer death by
the rack, the fagot, or the headsman’s ax. Now were
fulfilled the words of Jesus: ‘Ye shall be betrayed both
by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends;
and some of you shall they cause to be put to death.
And ye shall be hated of all men for My name’s
sake.’ Luke 21:16, 17. Persecution opened upon the
faithful with greater fury than ever before, and the world

331

GEMS FROM REVELATION
became a vast battlefield. For hundreds of years the
church of Christ found refuge in seclusion and
obscurity.” Great Controversy, 54,55.

carrying out its persecutions Catholic Rome as late as
the twelfth century adopted from pagan Rome the
practice of judicial torture. Under the empire, Roman
civil law (jus civile) allowed suspects to be tortured in
court in order to get them to confess their assumed
crimes.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 71.

“The pious Waldenses, hiding in the caves,
reading the Bible, keeping the Sabbath, were hunted
down like animals. In the year 1208 a crusade was
organized against them. In one year, one million
were killed. Their only crime was to study the Word of
God and obey it.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 116.

“Pope Martin V (AD 1417-1431) said to the king
of Poland regarding the Christian followers of John
Huss: ‘Make it a duty to exterminate the Hussites.
Remember that these impious persons dare to proclaim
the principles of liberty.” Wieland, GIR, 95

“As a result of this power and her attempt to force
everyone to accept the teachings of the state church,
Europe was bathed continually in a wave of persecution.
History has recorded these conditions for us as follows:
“ ‘That the Church of Rome has shed more
innocent blood than any other institution that has
ever existed among mankind, will be questioned by
no Protestant who has a competent knowledge of
history. The memorials, indeed, of many of her
persecutions are now so scanty that it is impossible to
form a complete conception of the multitude of her
victims, and it is quite certain that no powers of
imagination can adequately realize their sufferings.’—
W.E.H. Lecky, History of the Rise and Influence of the
Spirit of Rationalism in Europe, vol. II, p. 32.” Nelson,
TA, 53.

“Note the official attitude of the Papacy toward
those who dissent.
“ ‘Much more can heretics [dissenters] after
they are convicted of heresy, be not only forthwith
excommunicated, but as surely put to death.’ St.
Thomas Aquinas. ‘Summa Theologica’.
“…Has the Papacy employed physical force
against dissenters? Let Prof. Baudrillart, rector of the
Catholic Institute of Paris and later a cardinal, reply.
“ ‘The Catholic Church …loudly proclaims that
she has, a ‘horror of blood.’ Nevertheless when
confronted by heresy she …has recourse to force, to
corporal punishment, to torture.
She creates
tribunals like those of the Inquisition …encourages a
crusade, or a religious war… Especially did she act
thus in the sixteenth century with regard to
Protestants…. She lit in Italy, in the Low Countries and
above all in Spain the funeral piles of the Inquisition. In
France …and in England …she tortured the heretics
whilst both in France and Germany …she encouraged
and actively aided, the religious wars. No one will deny
that we have here a great scandal to our
contemporaries….’ Prof. Baudrillart, ‘The Catholic
Church, The Renaissance and Protestantism’, pp.182184, London, 1908.” Cooke, #19-UR, 11,12.
(See comments also for Daniel 7: 25, and Rev. 17:6)
Power Over All Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations.—
“Many of us have forgotten that back in the year
1620 Europe was dominated by the Papacy. There
was no freedom of worship. Religious persecution was
a common practice. State and church were united. The
pope was the supreme ruler. Of this the Papacy herself
writes:
“ ‘Catholic Europe before the Reformation
regarded the Pope as the Supreme Court of
international law.’—The Question Box, p. 164.”
Nelson, TA, 53.

“It was given unto him to make war
with the saints.”
“Of persecutions—actually far more severe than
the pagan empire inflicted on Christians—that Christian
[papal] Rome inflicted on persons it suspected of
‘heresy.’ The crusades against the Cathari and the
Albigenses, brutal suppression of Protestantism in the
Netherlands, and the shameful massacre of St.
Bartholomew’s Day, all come to mind. And the socalled Spanish Inquisition.
“...Particularly painful is the observation that in

“This refers to the sphere of its operations, and
applies to the heyday of the papacy …during the Middle
Ages, when it exercised almost undisputed sway over
Europe, but especially when, in the future, the power
of the papacy will be more fully revived (see on Rev.
13:3; 17:8).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 819.

332

REVELATION 13
“I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great
whore that sitteth upon many waters. …The waters
which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are
peoples, multitudes, and nations, and tongues.” Rev.
17:1,15.

parallel the account of the sea beast’s depredations.”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 11.

REVELATION 13:8
And all that dwell upon the earth shall
worship him, whose names are not written
in the book of life of the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world.

Leopard Beast Identical To Little Horn of Dan. 7.—
“The leopard beast alone, therefore, symbolizes
the Roman empire in its papal form, the controlling
influence being ecclesiastical. To show this more fully,
we have but to draw a parallel between the little horn of
Daniel 7:8,20,24,25, and this power. From this
comparison it will appear that the little horn referred to
and the leopard beast symbolize the same power; but
the little horn is acknowledged on all hands to be a
symbol of the papacy. There are six points of identity,
as follows:—
“1. The little horn was a blasphemous power.
‘He shall speak great words against the Most High.’
Daniel 7:25. The leopard beast of Revelation 13:6 does
the same. “He opened his mouth in blasphemy against
God.”
“2. The little horn made war with the saints, and
prevailed against them. Daniel 7:21. This beast also
(Revelation 13:7) makes war with the saints, and
overcomes them.
“3. The little horn had a mouth speaking great
things. Dan7:8,20.
And of this beast we read,
Revelation 13:5: ‘And there was given unto him a
mouth speaking great things and blasphemies.’
“4. The little horn arose on the cessation of the
pagan form of the Roman Empire. The beast of
Rev13:2 arises at the same time; for the dragon, pagan
Rome, gives him his power, his seat, and great
authority.
“5. Power was given to the little horn to continue
for a time, times, and the dividing of time, or 1260
years. Daniel 7:25. To this beast also power was given
for forty-two months, or 1260 years. Revelation 13:5.
“6. At the end of that specified period, the
dominion of the little horn was to be taken away.
Daniel 7:26. At the end of the same period, the leopard
beast was himself to be ‘led into captivity.’ Rev. 13:10.
Both these specifications were fulfilled in the captivity
and exile of the pope, and the temporary overthrow of
the papacy by France in 1798.” Smith, DR (1897),
418,419.

All That Dwell Upon the Earth.—
(Those whose thoughts are on earthly pleasures
and occupations. See comments under Revelation
13:14 and Rev. 11:10.)
“The Jews misinterpreted and misapplied the word
of God, and they knew not the time of their visitation.
The years of the ministry of Christ and His apostles—
the precious last years of grace to the chosen people—
they spent in plotting the destruction of the Lord’s
messengers. Earthly ambitions absorbed them, and
the offer of the spiritual kingdom came to them in vain.
So today the kingdom of this world absorbs men's
thoughts, and they take no note of the rapidly fulfilling
prophecies and the tokens of the swift-coming kingdom
of God.” Desire of Ages, 235.
All That Dwell Upon the Earth Shall Worship Him.—
“And they that dwell on the earth shall wonder,
whose names were not written in the book of life from
the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast
that was, and is not, and yet is.” Rev. 17:8 last part.
“And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast
before him, and causeth the earth and them which
dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed.” Rev. 13:12.
“We believe... that verse 8—(quoted)—has never
yet been fully accomplished. It is certain that the time
never yet has been when all except true Christians
worshiped the beast. But this time is yet to be
witnessed in the fulfillment of the prophecy respecting
the two-horned beast. We expect this in the hour of
temptation that shall come on all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth. It is in view of this scene that
the third angel utters his voice of warning.” Andrews,
TAM, 79,80.

“Of the leopardlike beast it is declared: (Rev.
13:5-7 quoted). This prophecy, which is nearly
identical with the description of the little horn of
Daniel 7, unquestionably points to the papacy.” Great
Controversy, 439.

“To the very close of time he (the papacy) will
carry forward the work of deception. And the revelator
declares, also referring to the papacy: ‘All that dwell
upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life.’ Rev. 13:8. In both the
Old and the New World, the papacy will receive
homage in the honor paid to the Sunday institution,
that rests solely upon the authority of the Roman
Church.” Great Controversy, 578.

Leopard Beast Parallel to “Little Horn” of Daniel 8.—
“The explicit descriptions of the Daniel 8 horn’s
defiance of God—not only blasphemy but standing up
against ‘the prince of the host’ (vs. 11), attacking the
sanctuary (vss. 11-13), and causing large-scale
apostasy from true worship (vss. 12, 24)—closely

333

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Whose Names Are Not Written in Book of Life.—
“The Spirit of God, with its vivifying power, must
be in every human agent, that every spiritual muscle and
sinew may be in exercise. Without the Holy Spirit,
without the breath of God, there is torpidity of
conscience, loss of spiritual life. Many who are
without spiritual life have their names on the church
records, but they are not written in the Lamb’s book
of life. They may be joined to the church, but they are
not united to the Lord. They may be diligent in the
performance of a certain set of duties, and may be
regarded as living men; but many are among those who
have ‘a name that thou livest, and art dead.’” 4BC,
1166.

blemish...; who verily was foreordained before the
foundation of the world’ (1 Peter 1:19,20). Inasmuch
as the decision that Christ would die for the guilty race
was reached before this world was created, and
confirmed at the time man fell (see Patriarchs &
Prophets, 63,64), He may in that sense be regarded as
though slain from the foundation of the world.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 819.
“The plan of salvation had been laid before the
creation of the earth; for Christ is ‘the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world’ (Rev. 13:8).” Patriarchs
& Prophets, 63.
“Every sacrifice pointed to Him as the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world, that all might
understand that the wages of sin is death. In Him was
no sin, yet He died for our sins.” Selected Messages,
Vol. 1, 114.

“He that overcometh shall be clothed in white
raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the
book of life.” Rev. 3:5.
“It is a life of obedience which will please God
and be acceptable to him. Delay not to make an entire
consecration to God, that your names may be
recorded in the Lamb’s book of life.” Appeal to
Youth, 70.

REVELATION 13:9,10
If any man have an ear, let him hear.
He that leadeth into captivity shall go
into captivity: he that killeth with the sword
must be killed with the sword. Here is the
patience and the faith of the saints.

“All who choose Christ’s kingdom of love and
righteousness and peace, making its interest
paramount to all other, are linked to the world
above, and every blessing needed for this life is
theirs. In the book of God’s providence, the volume of
life, we are each given a page. That page contains every
particular of our history; even the hairs of the head are
numbered. God’s children are never absent from His
mind.” Desire of Ages, 313.

If Any Man Have an Ear, Let Him Hear.—
“Christ calls upon us to hear His words, that we
may know Him. ‘He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.’ We are not to hear as did those of whom the
apostles said, ‘The Word preached did not profit
them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard
it.’ Those who hear savingly are those who hear in
faith, and who give earnest heed to the things which
they have heard, lest at any time they should let them
slip.” Signs, 1/27/1898.

Slain From the Foundation of the World.—
“Rev. 13:8 refers to names being ‘written in the
Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world’, while Rev. 17:8 refers to those ‘whose
names’ were ‘written in the Book of Life from the
foundation of the world’. In Rev. 13:8 the emphasis
is upon ‘the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world’; in Rev. 17:8 the emphasis is upon the people
‘whose names’ ‘were written in the Book of Life
from the foundation of the world.” Were, WATB, 41.

“Seven times in chapters two and three we read:
‘He that hath an ear, let him hear.’ It should be
carefully observed that we do not read this expression
anywhere else in the Apocalypse except in Rev. 13:9….
“The Revelator employs this expression, calling
upon each believer to give ear to what is being said, in
connection with his solemn statement that ‘all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names
are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world. If any man have
an ear, let him hear’ (Rev. 13:8,9).” Were, WATB, 39.

“This phrase may be connected with either
‘written’ or ‘slain.’ Both ideas are supported in the
Bible. The viewpoint that names are recorded from the
foundation of the world is found in ch. 17:8: [‘They
that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names
were not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world.’], and amplified in statements
such as, ‘Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world’ (Mt. 25:34), and, ‘He
hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world.’ (Eph. 1:4).
“On the other hand, the idea that the Lamb was
slain from the foundation of the world is closely related
to Peter’s statement, ‘...as of a lamb without

He who Leads into Captivity will Go into Captivity.—
“At that time the pope was made captive by the
French army, the papal power received its deadly
wound, and the prediction was fulfilled, ‘He that
leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity.’” Great
Controversy, 439.

334

REVELATION 13
“This wounding is the same as the going into
captivity. Revelation 13:10. It was inflicted when the
pope was taken prisoner by Berthier, the French
general, and the papal government was for a time
abolished, in 1798. Stripped of his power, both civil
and ecclesiastical, the captive pope, Pius Vl, died in
exile at Valence in France, Aug. 29, 1799.” Smith, DR,
567.

papacy). Verses 13-14 tell how the second beast will
accomplish this. Miracles will be performed which
seduce the people, and persuade them to form an image
to the beast. What is the reason for the image? Why
form an image to bring about the restoration of the
Papacy? Undoubtedly there are many people in the
world who could never be persuaded to accept Roman
Catholicism as such. There are many non-Catholics
who, while not bigoted, could never accept the Pope or
priests, the mass, Mary, or the concept of purgatory etc.
In order, therefore, to capture their support,
deception will be employed, another organization
will be formed; not a Catholic organization but a
replica of the Papacy which will be supportive of
papal policy. In this way the non-Catholic groups will
be led into submission to the Papacy.” Cooke, #20-UR,
1.

“He who has long led men into captivity, who
has claimed the right to rule the hearts of men, and who
has attempted to overthrow the eternal God of heaven,
will finally be destroyed.” Haskell, SSP, 233.
He That Killeth With the Sword Must Be Killed With
the Sword.—
“The cruel power that had so long persecuted the
saints and punished the nations with the sword, was to
be punished by the same weapon. ...The papal weapons
are described in Dan. 11:33 as the sword, flame,
captivity and spoil. The same persecutor that led
millions into captivity during the Dark Ages must go
into captivity.
“…Divine retribution is the Golden Rule in the
reverse. Jesus said to Peter, ‘They that take the sword
shall perish with the sword.’ [Mt. 26:52]. This is the
principle of eternal justice.
Its truthfulness is
demonstrated in the history of man and nations. It is
often stated in the Scriptures. See Matt. 7:1,2; Rom.
2:1. What we mete out to others will eventually come
back upon our own heads and often in this life. The
treatment we give others will sooner or later come back
to us with interest. ‘Reward her as she hath rewarded
you, and double unto her double,’ is the decree of
heaven regarding the papacy. See Rev. 18:6.” Bunch,
TR, 169.

REVELATION 13:11
And I beheld another beast coming up
out of the earth; and he had two horns like
a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.
Another Beast.—
“At the time when the Papacy, robbed of its
strength, was forced to desist from persecution, John
beheld a new power coming up to echo the dragon’s
voice, and carry forward the same cruel and
blasphemous work. This power, the last that is to
wage war against the church and the law of God, is
represented by a beast with lamblike horns. The
beasts preceding it had risen from the sea; but this came
up out of the earth, representing the peaceful rise of the
nation which it symbolized—the United States.”
Signs, 2/8/1910.

The Patience of the Saints.—
“The Greek word implies more than a passive
resignation; it denotes an active endurance. During the
warfare of the beast the saints steadfastly endure.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 819.

“John calls it ‘another beast.’ It therefore is no
part of the first beast;.” Smith, DR, 575.
Coming Up.—
“Gr. anabaino, ‘to ascend,’ ‘to rise,’ ‘to spring
up.’ In Matt. 13:7 anabaino is used of growing plants.
The form of the Greek word calls attention to the
process of emergence. The prophet sees the action as
going on.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 819.

“We glory in tribulations also: knowing that
tribulation worketh patience.” Rom. 5:3.
“My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into
divers temptations; Knowing this, that the trying of
your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing.” James 1:2-4.

Another Beast Coming Up Out of the Earth
(Chronology).—
“When was this power to arise? Not prior to the
first beast, certainly. Not at the same time; for then
there would be no propriety in designating either as the
first beast. It is said that it shall exercise all the power
of the first beast before it. Then we may look for it to
come on the stage of action about the close of the
first beast’s dominion, at the end of the 1260 years.
Again, it is to cause the world to worship the first beast,
whose deadly wound was healed, which shows that its
period of action is this side of 1798.” Andrews, TAM,

THE TWO-HORNED BEAST
INTRODUCTION

“Verses 11-17 tell how Rome’s power would be
restored. Another beast or kingdom rises and compels
the world to worship or obey the first beast (the

335

GEMS FROM REVELATION
populations, we perceive that ‘earth’ represents an
area with a very limited population.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 341.

82.
“Mr. Wesley, in his notes on Revelation 14,
written in 1754, says of the two-horned beast:—‘He has
not yet come, though he cannot be far off; for he is to
appear at the end of the forty-two months of the first
beast.’” Smith, DR (1897), 459.

“Since this is ‘another’ beast, ‘coming up out of
the earth,’ it must be found in some territory not
covered by any other symbols. Babylon and MedoPersia covered all the civilized part of Asia. Greece
covered Eastern Europe, including Russia. Rome, with
the ten kingdoms into which it was divided, as
represented by the ten toes of the image of Daniel 2, the
ten horns of the fourth beast of Daniel 7, the ten horns
of the dragon of Revelation 12, and the ten horns of the
leopard beast of Revelation 13, covered all Western
Europe. In other words, all the Eastern Hemisphere
known to history and civilization, is covered by
prophetic symbols, respecting the application of which
there is scarcely any room for doubt.
“But there is a mighty nation in the Western
Hemisphere, worthy, as we have seen, of being
mentioned in prophecy, which is not yet brought in;
and there is one symbol remaining, the application of
which has not yet been made. All the symbols but one
are applied, and all the available portions of the Eastern
Hemisphere are covered by the applications. Of all the
symbols mentioned, one alone, the two-horned beast of
Revelation 13, is left; and of all the countries of the
earth respecting which any reasons exists why they
should be mentioned in prophecy, one alone, the United
States of America, remains….
“Another consideration pointing to the locality of
this power is drawn from the fact that John saw it
arising from the earth. If the sea, from which the
leopard beast arose (Revelation 13:1), denotes peoples,
nations, and multitudes (Revelation 17:15), the earth
would suggest, by contrast, a new and previously
unoccupied territory.
“Being thus excluded from eastern continents, and
impressed with the idea of looking to territory not
previously known to civilization, we turn of necessity to
the Western Hemisphere.” Smith, DR, 575,577.

“At what period in this world’s history is the rise
of this power placed in the prophecy? …It was at the
time when this beast went into captivity, or was
killed (politically) with the sword (verse 10), or
(which we suppose to be the same thing) had one of
its heads wounded to death (verse 3), that John saw
the two-horned beast coming up. …The expression
“coming up” must signify that the power to which it
applies was but newly organized, and was then just
rising into prominence and influence. The power
represented by this symbol must, then, be some
power which in 1798 stood in this position before the
world.” Smith, DR (1897), 458.
“Can anyone doubt what nation was actually
‘coming up’ in 1798? Certainly it must be admitted
that the United States of America is the only power that
meets the specifications of the prophecy on this point of
chronology.
“The struggle of the American colonies for
independence began in 1775. In 1776, they declared
themselves a free and independent nation. In 1777,
delegates from the thirteen original States—New
Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware,
Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
and Georgia—in Congress assembled, adopted Articles
of Confederation. In 1783, the War of the Revolution
closed with a treaty of peace with Great Britain,
whereby the independence of the United States was
acknowledged, and territory ceded to the extent of
815,615 square miles. In 1787, the Constitution was
framed, and by July 26, 1788, it was ratified by eleven
of the thirteen original States; and on the 1 st of March,
1789, it went into effect. The United States thus
began with less than one million square miles of
territory, and less than four million citizens. Thus
we come to the year 1798, when this nation is
introduced into prophecy.” Smith, DR, 573,574.

“It does not arise by the strife of the winds upon
the sea, that is, by the overthrow of other nations and
empires, but it arises where no other beast exists, and
acts its part in the presence of its predecessors. This
shows that it must arise from a new and previously
unoccupied territory.” Andrews, TAM, 82.

“1776—Declaration of Independence.
1783—Independence Acknowledged.
1787—U.S. Constitution written.
1791—Bill of Rights Added.
1798—France, the power that gives the beast
its deadly wound, becomes the first nation to
recognize the U.S.A.” Walter Veith video on Rev. 13.

“ ‘Earth’ in verse 11 is the complement of ‘sea’ in
verse 1, both together signifying the universal sphere
of the draconic depredations. Such a view is supported
by 12:12—‘Woe to you, O earth and sea, for the devil
has come down to you in great wrath, because he
knows that his time is short!’” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 28.

Another Beast Coming Up Out of the Earth
(Location).—
“When in closely related prophecies ‘earth’ is
contrasted with ‘sea’ and ‘sea’ represents vast

“This power is evidently the last one with which
the people of God are connected; for the Third
Angel’s Message, which immediately precedes the

336

REVELATION 13
coming of Jesus on the white cloud, pertains almost
entirely to the action of the two-horned beast.
Compare Rev. 14:9-11 with 13:11-18. And it is a fact
which ought not to be overlooked, that those powers
with which the people of God are connected, are the
only ones noted in prophecy. It is also plain that the
march of civilization and of Christianity, like the
course of the natural sun, has ever been westward; and
it is evident that the territory of this last power is to
be the field of the angel’s messages, the land where the
crowning truths of the gospel, as it finishes its course,
are to be brought out.” Andrews, TAM, 84.

literally signifies ‘to grow or spring up as a plant.’
And, as we have seen, the nation must arise in territory
previously unoccupied. A prominent writer, describing
the rise of the United States, speaks of ‘the mystery of
her coming forth from vacancy,’ and says: ‘Like a
silent seed we grew into empire.’—G. A. Townsend,
The New World Compared With the Old, pg. 462. A
European journal in 1850 spoke of the United States as
a wonderful empire, which was ‘emerging,’ and ‘amid
the silence of the earth daily adding to its power and
pride.’—The Dublin Nation.” Great Controversy, 439441.

“It seems likely that we are to understand ‘earth’
in 13:11 from the description of the dragon’s attacks on
the woman in chapter 12. Here we read that ‘the earth
came to the help of the woman’ (vs. 16). The fact that
the beast of Revelation 13:11 arises out of the land,
then, would be in keeping with its deceptive character.
The vision is saying, in the region of apparent safety
the dragon will work deceptively to continue its
warfare against the woman.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 28.

Two-horned beast from North America. Did John
see the distinctive North American Buffalo?
The Buffalo on U.S. nickel from 1913-1938, 2005.

(The Manner of Its) Coming Up Out of the Earth —
“Both the appearance of this beast and the manner
of its rise indicate that the nation which it represents
is unlike those presented under the preceding
symbols. The great kingdoms that have ruled the world
were presented to the prophet Daniel as beasts of prey,
rising when the ‘four winds of the heaven strove upon
the great sea.’ Dan. 7:2. In Revelation 17, an angel
explained that waters represent ‘peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues.’ Rev. 17:15.
Winds are a symbol of strife. The four winds of heaven
striving upon the great sea, represent the terrible scenes
of conquest and revolution by which kingdoms have
attained to power.
“But the beast with lamb-like horns was seen
‘coming up out of the earth.’ Instead of overthrowing
other powers to establish itself, the nation thus
represented must arise in territory previously
unoccupied, and grow up gradually and peacefully. It
could not, then, arise among the crowded and struggling
nationalities of the Old World—that turbulent sea of
‘peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.’
It must be sought in the Western Continent.
“What nation of the New World was in 1798 rising
into power, giving promise of strength and greatness,
and attracting the attention of the world?
The
application of the symbol admits of no question. One
nation, and only one, meets the specifications of this
prophecy; it points unmistakably to the United States of
America. Again and again the thought, almost the exact
words, of the sacred writer has been unconsciously
employed by the orator and the historian in describing
the rise and growth of this nation. The beast was seen
‘coming up out of the earth;’ and, according to the
translators, the word here rendered ‘coming up’

Two Horns Like a Lamb.—
“The youth, as well as the apparent mildness of
this power, seems to be indicated by its lamblike
horns. What do these horns mean? Thy symbol of
horns like those of a lamb is not elsewhere used in the
prophetic scriptures, with the exception of those texts
which represent Christ as a lamb having seven horns,
etc. Rev. 5:6. The idea appears to be generally
prevalent that a horn is used only to designate civil
power. This is certainly a mistake.
“…The two horns of the ram in Dan. 8 denoted the
union of the two powers of Media and Persia in one
empire. The great horn of the Grecian goat was the
symbol of the first form of that power. The ten horns of
the fourth beast denoted the ten distinct powers into
which the fourth empire was divided. Dan. 7:23-25.
And the little horn which came up after the ten,
represented the papacy, a purely ecclesiastical power.
It was a horn before the three were plucked up. See
Dan. 7:8,24. This was accomplished in 538, but the
papacy did not become possessed of temporal dominion
until 755.
“Says Goodrich: ‘As a reward to the Roman
pontiff, Pepin, in the year 755, conferred on Stephen,
the successor of Zachary, several rich provinces in Italy,
by which gift he was established as a temporal
monarch.’
“Hence it is certain that ecclesiastical as well as
civil power is represented by a horn. And it is evident
that the horns of these beasts symbolize the entire
power of the beasts. From these facts we may learn
that the horns of Daniel’s fourth beast (the first beast of
Rev. 13) denoted civil and religious power. Hence we
regard the horns of the last beast of Rev. 13 as

337

GEMS FROM REVELATION
symbolizing the civil and religious power of the nation
represented by that beast. A plurality of horns is not
always the symbol of a power divided; for the two horns
of the ram in Dan. 8 symbolize the union of Media and
Persia in one government. In appearance, if we may
judge from the symbols used, this beast represents the
mildest power that ever rose; for in the prophetic
history of the governments that have preceded this, no
one has been represented by symbols so mild. We
understand these horns to denote the civil and
religious power of this nation—its Republican civil
power, and its Protestant ecclesiastical.
“…No civil power could ever compare with
Republicanism in its lamb-like character. The grand
principle recognized by this form of power is thus
expressed: ‘That all men are created equal; that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights;
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness.’ Hence all should have a right to participate
in making the laws, and in designating who shall
execute them. Was there ever a development of civil
power so lamb-like before? And what, in religious
matters, can be compared with Protestantism? Its
leading sentiment is the distinct recognition of the right
of private judgment in matters of conscience. ‘The
Bible is the only religion of Protestants.’ Was there
ever in the religious world anything to equal this in
its lamb-like professions?
“The symbol of the beast with two horns like a
lamb fitly represents this new power. Observe the
combination of the lamb and the dragon. Both these
symbols had been previously seen by John. There is an
evident reference to them in this description of the beast
with two horns. He had seen a Lamb with seven horns
and a dragon with ten horns. Rev. 5:6; 12:3. The Lamb
represents Jesus Christ in his office of King of kings.
Rev. 17:14. The dragon represents the Roman power
animated by Satan. Rev. 12. In fact, if we omit the
heads and horns which represent that empire in its
several forms, we shall find that the real dragon, or
serpent, is Satan himself. Rev. 20:2,3,7. The kingdom
of Christ and the kingdom of Satan are opposite in
character. Christ’s kingdom is one and indivisible; but
the kingdom of Satan is full of confusion and division.
For this reason the horns of the Lamb and the horns
of the dragon, though alike symbolic, are by the
Spirit of God interpreted very differently. The horns
of the dragon are the same as the horns of the beast to
whom the dragon gave his power. They are the ten
kingdoms, into which the kingdom of the dragon or
beast has been divided. Rev. 17:12; Dan. 7:24. But the
horns of the Lamb, who is King of kings, are the
seven spirits of God. Rev. 5:6. The seven horns must
therefore represent the nature of Christ’s dominion as
King of kings, and not that his kingdom should be
divided; for his title, King of kings, indicates not one
kingdom broken up into many, but rather many united
under him. (Matt. 19:28; Luke 22:30; Rev. 20:4;
21:24); and He, as King over an undivided kingdom,
will wear many crowns. Rev. 19:12.

“In the symbol of the two-horned beast, the
character of the horns, and not merely the number, is
intended to be expressed by the words, ‘two horns
like a lamb’; for there is nothing peculiar to a lamb
with respect to the number of its horns, but here is
something peculiar in the character of these horns. It is
important to notice this fact; for the interpretation of the
horns of a lamb in John’s vision is essentially different
from that of the horns of the dragon, or of the beast.
Thus the horns of the beast represent the division of
his kingdom; but the horns of the lamb represent the
nature of his power, and do not signify that his
kingdom is to be divided. We therefore understand the
two horns like those of a lamb to represent the nature of
the power symbolized, and not that it should be divided
into two parts.
“The Spirit of God, in giving us the symbol of the
ten-horned beast, thought proper to place crowns upon
each of those horns. But in giving us the symbol of the
beast with two horns like those of a lamb, it placed no
crowns upon those horns. Now these two symbols are
not only given in immediate connection, but they are
joined in the same work, according to this prophecy.
Rev. 13:1,11,12,14; 16:13; 19:20. It cannot, therefore,
be without design that crowns are placed upon the horns
of the first beast, and omitted in the case of the second.
We know that the horns with crowns represent kingly
governments (Rev. 17:12); and we think it a necessary
conclusion that these horns like those of a lamb, and
without crowns, represent a government in which
the people bear rule.
“In some form, the two kinds of power everywhere exist. These are, the civil power, as seen in the
State; and the spiritual power as seen in the Church. In
almost every country these powers are blended together
in one, and both are in the hands of the rulers, and not in
those of the people. But the American Republic
presents the first instance in the history of the world
in which these two powers are separated, and both
are reserved by the people in their own hands. It is a
government by the people and for the people, and it
acknowledges them as the fountain of all authority.
Here we have a State without a king and a Church
without a pope; and Church and State are separate.
The civil power recognized the equality of all men
before the law; and the spiritual power acknowledges
the right of every man to worship God according to his
own convictions of what God requires. Here are the
two horns like those of a lamb.” Andrews, TAM, 8792.
“Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.”
2Cor. 3:17.
“The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.” Rom. 5:5.
“Love is the fulfilling of the law.” Rom. 13:10.
“Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. And the second is like unto it, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” Matt. 22:37,39.

338

REVELATION 13
“All thy commandments are righteousness.”
Psalms 119:172.
“He that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as
he is righteous.” 1 Jn. 3:7.
“Righteousness exalteth a nation.” Pr.14:34.
“The two lamb-like horns are the principles of
civil and religious liberty. Because the culture of the
American citizenry in the 1700’s was to a great
degree, built upon God’s Word, and because that
Word dwelt richly in their hearts, the people could
rule themselves. And few laws were needed. The
United States government gave the people liberty in
civil and religious affairs. God could bless and exalt
this nation above all the rest in the world. In fact, no
other nation in the history of the world up till this time
gave its citizens religious liberty. It was the first
country without a king, and the first that separated
the churches from the state.” PJ

Colonial America, Scribner’s, NY, 1942.]” Rafferty, PI,
111.
“The Religious Freedom and Restoration Act
became law November 16, 1993 when it was signed by
the President [Clinton, who called it a ‘miracle’]. The
RFRA may well be the most important piece of
religious legislation since the Bill of Rights. This new
law actually overturns the peyote ruling: reinstating the
‘compelling interest’ test for general laws that restrict
religious liberty.” Rafferty, PI, 96
“…To this day the principles of religious liberty
are brought to mind in the Supreme Court of the
United States. There, above the seats [steps] of the
court, one will see an etched representation of the tables
of stone, the ten commandments of God.
“With a little scrutiny you will notice that the last
six commandments are visible to the eye, but the side
with the first four are partially obscured by the leg of
one of the engraved justices.
And the fourth
commandment is not visible.
A continual
representation that American government was not to
judge any man according to their observance of the
first four commandments, which pertain to our
relationship to God; but that they were to judge
concerning the last six commandments and our
relationship to our neighbor.” Rafferty, PI, 97.

“The lamblike horns indicate youth, innocence,
and gentleness, fitly representing the character of the
United States when presented to the prophet as ‘coming
up’ in 1798. Among the Christian exiles who first fled
to America and sought an asylum from royal
oppression and priestly intolerance were many who
determined to establish a government upon the broad
foundation of civil and religious liberty. Their views
found place in the Declaration of Independence, which
sets forth the great truth that ‘all men are created equal’
and endowed with the inalienable right to ‘life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness.’ And the Constitution
guarantees to the people the right of self-government,
providing that representatives elected by the popular
vote shall enact and administer the laws. Freedom of
religious faith was also granted, every man being
permitted to worship God according to the dictates of
his conscience. Republicanism and Protestantism
became the fundamental principles of the nation.
These principles are the secret of its power and
prosperity.
The oppressed and down-trodden
throughout Christendom have turned to this land with
interest and hope. Millions have sought its shores, and
the United States has risen to a place among the most
powerful nations of the earth.” Great Controversy, 441.

Like a Lamb (The Age of This Power). —
“There is good evidence to show that the
government symbolized by the two-horned beast is
introduced into prophecy in the early part of its
career; that it is, when first brought to view, a
youthful power. John’s words are, ‘And I beheld
another beast coming up out of the earth, and he had
two horns like a lamb.’ Why does not John simply say,
‘He had two horns’? Why does he add ‘like a lamb’? It
must be for the purpose of denoting the character of this
beast, showing that it is not only of a very innocent and
harmless demeanor, ostensibly, but also that it is a
very youthful power; for the horns of a lamb are
horns that have but just begun to grow. Bear in mind
that by the preceding argument on chronology, our gaze
is fixed to the year 1798; and the power symbolized was
then a youthful power, according to the present
argument. Question: What notable power was at that
time coming into prominence, but still in its youth?
England was not, nor was France, nor Russia, nor any
European power. For a young and rising power at that
epoch, we are obliged to turn our eyes to the New
World. But as soon as we return them to this continent,
they rest inevitably upon this country as the power in
question. No other power this side of the ocean is
entitled to any mention in comparison with it.” Smith,
DR (1897), 459,460.

Freedom of Religion.—
“In 1688 John Locke wrote on the principles of
religious liberty as they relate to the Bible. ‘The
Church,’ he contended, ‘was a voluntary society, and
no man was bound by nature to any particular sect, but
every man joined himself voluntarily to the profession
and worship which he thought acceptable to God. The
Church had no right to avail itself of force or
compulsion, because no such power was granted to it by
its founder, and also because no man can be saved by
any other religion except the one in which he believes
freely.’ Therefore, Locke demanded ‘absolute liberty,
just and true liberty, equal and impartial liberty; for
all dissenters, not as a favor or an act of indulgence
but as a right.’ [William Warren Sweet, Religion in

History of the Two-Horned Beast’s Identification.—
“It is by his [the lamb-like beast’s] intervention
that ‘the image of the beast’ will be created—this

339

GEMS FROM REVELATION
politico-religious institution in which the church will
dominate the state in order to sustain its dogmas. In the
late 1600’s Thomas Goodwin, vice chancellor of Oxford
University, advanced the idea that this could refer to a
state Protestantism of which England was then an
example.
“However, as John Wesley very well re-marked, in
1755, ‘But he is not yet come, though he cannot be far
off; for he is to appear at the end of the forty-two
months of the first beast’ (Explanatory Notes Upon the
New Testament, p. 1010). Recognizing the certainty of
this chronological detail, numerous commentators of
the first half of the nineteenth century held, then, that
Revelation 13 referred to a Protestant power of the
future whose two characteristics would be civil and
religious liberty as symbolized by the ‘two horns like
a lamb’ (13:11).
“John N. Andrews in The Review and Herald,
May 19, 1851, identified the United States of
America as being the Protestant power symbolized
in this prophecy. Three months later Joseph Bates
endeavored to prove that only the United States of
America could fit the facts of Revelation 13:11 (The
Review and Herald, August 19, 1851.) James White
confirmed this point of view. But it was not without
emotion that he wrote: ‘The rise of our own nation,
with its two leading principles, Protestantism and
Republicanism, answers the prophetic description of the
beast “coming up out of the earth” having “two horns
like a lamb”’ (p.12). From then on, this interpretation
became that of the heralds of the threefold message of
Revelation 14.
“Ellen G. White approved of this understanding
when she wrote: ‘The application of the symbol admits
of no question. One nation, and only one, meets the
specifications of this prophecy; it points
unmistakably to the United States of America.’ (The
Great Controversy, p.440).” Zurcher, COR, 105.

such action it will give the lie to those liberal and
peaceful principles which it has put forth as the
foundation of its policy. The prediction that it will
speak ‘as a dragon’ and exercise ‘all the power of the
first beast’ plainly foretells a development of the
spirit of intolerance and persecution that was
manifested by the nations represented by the dragon and
the leopard-like beast. And the statement that the beast
with two horns ‘causeth the earth and them which
dwell therein to worship the first beast’ indicates that
the authority of this nation is to be exercised in
enforcing some observance which shall be an act of
homage to the papacy.” Great Controversy, 442.
“[Revelation 13:11-13, quoted.] Religious powers,
allied to heaven by profession, and claiming to have the
characteristics of a lamb, will show by their acts that
they have the heart of a dragon, and that they are
instigated and controlled by Satan. The time is coming
when God’s people will feel the hand of persecution
because they keep holy the seventh day. Satan has
caused the change of the Sabbath in the hope of carrying
out his purpose for the defeat of God's plans. He seeks
to make the commands of God of less force in the
world than human laws.” 14MR 152.
“If men will not agree to trample under foot the
commandments of God, the spirit of the dragon is
revealed. They are imprisoned, brought before
councils, and fined.” Manuscript Releases, Vol.14,
162.
“With all these lamb-like appearances, the real
spirit by which he is actuated is that of the dragon—the
Devil. ‘For out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh.’ Mt. 12:34.” Andrews, TAM, 92.
“Beware of false prophets, which come to you in
sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves.” Matthew 7:15.

“It is important to notice that this interpretation
of the prophecy originated before the political and
religious events that confirm it more and more in our
day. Besides, have we not reached the time for the
healing of the Papacy’s deadly wound, which occurs
just before the starting point for the working of the
power destined to ‘make an image to the beast’
(13:14)?
It is even surprising to note that the
restoration of papal power coincides with the
elevation of the United States as a leader of world
politics. Furthermore, since the last world war there has
been a systematic agreement over the world politics of
the Vatican and of the United States.” Zurcher, COR,
106.

Two-Horned Beast is Apostate Protestantism.—
“Prophecy represents Protestantism as having
lamb-like horns, but speaking like a dragon. Already
we are beginning to hear the voice of the dragon. There
is a satanic force propelling the Sunday movement, but
it is concealed. ...The National Reform movement, that
the world and the church have linked hands to bring
about, will manifest the same oppression, haughtiness,
arrogance, and intolerance which have prevailed in
past ages. The powers of human councils then assumed
the prerogatives of Deity, crushing under their despotic
will, liberty of conscience and the right of individual
responsibility; and imprisonment, exile, and death
followed for all who opposed their dictates.” Review &
Herald, 1/1/1889.

Spake As a Dragon.—
“The lamblike horns and dragon voice of the
symbol point to a striking contradiction between the
professions and the practice of the nation thus
represented. The ‘speaking’ of the nation is the
action of its legislative and judicial authorities. By

“Religious powers, allied to heaven by profession,
and claiming to have the characteristics of a lamb,
will show by their acts that they have the heart of a

340

REVELATION 13
dragon and that they are instigated and controlled by
Satan. The time is coming when God’s people will feel
the hand of persecution because they keep holy the
seventh day.” 9 Testimonies, 229.

power; and under the influence of this threefold union,
this country will follow in the steps of Rome in
trampling on the rights of conscience.” Great
Controversy, 588.

“The churches, represented by Babylon, are
represented as having fallen from their spiritual state
to become a persecuting power against those who
keep the commandments of God and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ. To John this persecuting power is
represented as having horns like a lamb, but as
speaking like a dragon....” Testimonies to Ministers,
117.

“Let the principle once be established in the
United States that the church may employ or control
the power of the state; that religious observances
may be enforced by secular laws; in short, that the
authority of church and state is to dominate the
conscience, and the triumph of Rome in this country
is assured.” Great Controversy, 581.
Two Powers Work Together.--

REVELATION 13:12
And he exerciseth all the power of the
first beast before him, and causeth the earth
and them which dwell therein to worship
the first beast, whose deadly wound was
healed.
The Fruits of the Dragon Spirit.—
“This verse is an amplification of the clause,
‘spake as a dragon’ (vs. 11).”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 820.

US President George W. Bush speaks with Cardinal
Theodore McCarrick, Archbishop of Washington,
as new Chief Justice John Roberts looks on,
after the 52nd Annual Red Mass
at St. Matthews Cathedral October 2, 2005
in Washington, DC.

“The prophet in describing this lamb and his
accomplishments uses seven strong verbs of action.
What does it do?
“1. He exerciseth all the power of the first beast.
“2. He causeth worship of the first beast.
“3. He doeth great wonders.
“4. He maketh fire come down from heaven.
“5. He deceiveth.
“6. He gives life unto the image of the beast.
“7. He causeth all to receive a mark.”
Metcalf, GPDR, 123.

“The fact that the deadly wound of the Papacy will
be healed, means that it will be the eighth head of the
beast of Rev. 17. (It is of the seven, having been the
fifth head.) The fact that the United States will exercise
‘all of the power of the first beast (the Papacy) before
him’ means that the United States is also one of the
heads of the beast of Rev. 17—the seventh and last
head. As is plain in Rev. 13 and 17, it works together
with the eighth head for a ‘short space.’ Rev. 17:10.”
PJ

Exerciseth All Power of First Beast Before Him.—
“Not only does this nation speak as a dragon, but it
is declared that he also ‘exerciseth all the power of the
first beast before him.’ Looking back a little, we find
that the first beast before him is the leopard, a symbol of
the papacy. The only conclusion that can be drawn is
that a so-called Protestant nation will exercise the
persecuting power of the papacy, and thereby become
pseudo-Protestant, that is, the ‘false prophet’
mentioned in Revelation 19:20.” Smith, DR, 583.

“Romanism in the Old World [#8 head of Rev. 17]
and apostate Protestantism in the New [#7 head of
Rev. 17] will pursue a similar course toward those who
honor all the divine precepts.” Great Controversy, 615.
Causeth the Earth and Them Which Dwell Therein to
Worship the First Beast.—
“The exercise of this power takes the form of
causing the people in his jurisdiction to ‘worship the
first beast,’ the papacy.” Smith, DR, 584.

“Through the two great errors, the immortality
of the soul and Sunday sacredness, Satan will bring
the people under his deceptions. While the former lays
the foundation of spiritualism, the latter creates a bond
of sympathy with Rome. The Protestants of the
United States will be foremost in stretching their hands
across the gulf to grasp the hand of spiritualism; they
will reach over the abyss to clasp hands with the Roman

“The restoration of papal power coincides with
the elevation of the United States as a leader of world
politics. Furthermore, since the last world war there has
been a systematic agreement over the world politics of
the Vatican and of the United States.

341

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Already in 1948 Frederic Hoffet had deplored
this fact in his book Protestant Imperialism. ‘American
politics itself has in this indirect way suffered by the
influence of the Roman church, ...which has succeeded
thus in tarnishing the image of the great Protestant
republic before the world.’
“ ‘There is something tragic to see the
descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers today support a
Franco and perhaps other candidates for
dictatorship also, who will stifle liberty once they
gain power.” (1980 AD). Zurcher, COR, 106,107.

Revelation 11:10.)
To Worship.—
“The Greek word for ‘worship’ used here is a very
significant one. It is from the simple verb kuneo, ‘I
kiss,’ compounded with a preposition to indicate that
the kiss is directed toward someone—in this case the
papacy, or its titular head the pope. It is ordinarily
translated ‘do obeisance to, bow down to,’ and is used
by the Septuagint in Nebuchadnezzar’s decree to all
‘people, nations, and languages’ to ‘fall down and
worship the golden image’ he had set up in the plain of
Dura. Daniel 3:4,5. Such ‘worship’ must mean to
submit to the authority and decree of the one to
whom obeisance is made. This is the picture given in
the prophecy of the ‘worship’ given to the papacy by a
so-called Protestant people.” Smith, DR, 584.

“The statement that the beast with two horns
‘causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to
worship the first beast’ indicates that the authority of
this nation is to be exercised in enforcing some
observance which shall be an act of homage to the
papacy. Such action would be directly contrary to
the principles of this government, to the genius of its
free institutions, to the direct and solemn avowals of the
Declaration of Independence, and to the Constitution.
The founders of the nation wisely sought to guard
against the employment of secular power on the part of
the church, with its inevitable result—intolerance and
persecution. The Constitution provides that ‘Congress
shall make no law respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,’ and
that ‘no religious test shall ever be required as a
qualification to any office of public trust under the
United States.’ Only in flagrant violation of these
safeguards to the nation’s liberty, can any religious
observance be enforced by civil authority. But the
inconsistency of such action is no greater than is
represented in the symbol. It is the beast with
lamblike horns—in profession pure, gentle, and
harmless—that speaks as a dragon.”
Great
Controversy, 442.

“The object of worship is god. The god of the
beast system is the Trinity—one god with three
manifestations, all of the identical substance.” PJ.
Whose Deadly Wound Was Healed.—
“Whereas Daniel 7:26, 27 told us that after the
1260 days the judgment would sit and take away the
power of the Roman Church, Revelation 13 provides
the startling additional information that before the
completion of the judgment the church’s deadly
wound is to be temporarily healed and everyone
whose name is not registered in the book of life will
worship it.” Maxwell, God Cares, 331.
“The reason for this healing, or revival, in the
papacy is the corresponding apostasy of God’s true
protestant church.” PJ
“After the second beast comes into being the two
exist at the same time and continue together till the
end when they are both cast alive into the lake of fire
and destroyed together. See Rev. 19:20. The second
beast performs miracles in the presence of the first beast
by which the whole world is deceived into making an
image to the beast whose deadly wound was healed and
compelling the inhabitants of the earth to worship the
first beast. The second beast plays a subordinate
part. It is the first beast that is the chief object of
worship to the very end. See Verses 8,12.” Bunch,
TR, 175.

“The work of the two-horned beast in performing
miracles, and causing those that dwell upon the earth,
by means of those miracles, to form an image to the
beast which all men must worship, certainly pertains to
the future. The Third Angel’s Message is a warning
to prepare the church for this fearful scene. In proof
of this fact, we place the prophecy respecting the twohorned beast, and the warning of the third angel, in
contrast: (Rev. 13:12-17 and 14:9-11 quoted.)
“A comparison of these scriptures shows us what
an hour of temptation and anguish there is yet before
us. If men worship the beast and his image, they will
receive of the wine of the wrath of God; and if they
refuse, it is at the peril of their lives at the hands of men.
This doubtless refers to the time when all who dwell
upon the earth, whose names are not written in the
book of life, shall worship the beast. Rev. 13:8.”
Andrews, TAM, 74,75.

HISTORY OF THE TWO-HORNED BEAST
TWICE PRESENTED.—
“The history of this symbol is in part, at least,
twice presented, each time ending with its oppressive
acts, first, with its power represented by horns like a
lamb, and subsequently exercising all the dragonic
power of the first beast; and, secondly, as a power
working miracles to deceive the dwellers upon the
earth; and when this deception is accomplished, it is to
cause them to unite in making an image that should
have power to put everyone to death who would not

Them Which Dwell Therein.—
(Those whose focus and thoughts are on earthly
pleasures and occupations. See comments under

342

REVELATION 13
worship it.” Andrews, TAM, 104,105.

is not. That our dead friends do not return to us is
shown in 2 Samuel 12:23, where David says of his dead
child, ‘Now he is dead, ...I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me.’ Any such intelligence that
comes to us cannot be a good angel, for angels of God
do not lie. Spirits of devils do lie, and this has been
their work ever since the first lie about dying was
told by their leader in Eden, ‘Ye shall not surely die,’
when the Lord had said plainly to Adam, ‘Thou shalt
surely die.’ Gen. 3:4; 2:17.
“...Spiritism answers accurately to the prophecy
in the exhibition of great signs and wonders. …Many
well-attested cases of healing have been presented.
Persons have been carried through the air by spirits in
the presence of spectators. Tables have been suspended
in the air with several persons upon them. Spirits also
have presented themselves in bodily form and talked
with audible voices.
“The power represented in this prophecy is to
make ‘fire come down from heaven on the earth in
the sight of men.’
But this as well as other
manifestations of its power are for the purpose of
deceiving ‘them that dwell on the earth.’ The
miracles that are wrought are by ‘the spirits of devils.’
Rev. 16:14. And many are the warnings in the word of
God against making contact with evil spirits. In the
days of the early church solemn warnings were given to
the church of God:
‘Now the Spirit speaketh
expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils.’ 1 Timothy 4:1. God’s counsel to
His people in these last days is, ‘When they shall say
unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits,
and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should
not a people seek unto their God? For the living to
the dead? To the law and to the testimony: if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them.’ Is. 8:20.” Smith, DR, 584587,589,590.

REVELATION 13:13
And he doeth great wonders, so that he
maketh fire come down from heaven on the
earth in the sight of men,
He Doeth Great Wonders.—
“The wonders to which the prophet had
reference are evidently wrought for the purpose of
deceiving the people, as we read in verse 14:
‘Deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the
means of those miracles which he had power to do in
the sight of the beast.’
“We should now ascertain by what means the
miracles in question are wrought, for Revelation
16:13,14 refers to ‘the spirits of devils working
miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth
and of the whole world.’
“In predicting events to occur just before His
second coming, the Saviour says: ‘There shall arise
false christs, and false prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible,
they shall deceive the very elect.’ Matt. 24:24. Here
again are wonders foretold, wrought for the purpose of
deception, so powerful that were it possible even the
very elect would be deceived by them.
“Thus we have a prophecy (and there are many
others) setting forth the development in the last days of
a wonder-working power, manifested to a startling and
unprecedented degree to propagate falsehood and error.
The ‘spirits of devils’ were to go forth to ‘the whole
world,’ but the nation with which this development
is especially connected in Revelation 13, is that
represented by the two-horned beast, or false
prophet. We must therefore conclude that the prophecy
calls for such a work as this in America. Do we find
anything like it at the present time?
“There is a widespread belief and teaching current
among all classes of society, that when a man dies and
his body is laid away in the grave, an immortal ‘spirit’
or ‘soul’ within him does not really die, but soars
away to its place of reward or punishment. This belief
naturally leads one to ask, ‘If disembodied spirits are
alive, why may they not communicate with us?’
There are thousands who believe that they can and do,
and who claim to have communication with departed
friends.
“But the Bible, in the most explicit terms, assures
us that the dead are wholly inactive and unconscious
until the resurrection; that the dead know not anything
(Ec. 9:5); that every operation of the mind has ceased
(Ps. 146:4); that every emotion of the heart is suspended
(Ec. 9:6); and that there is neither work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, where they lie (Ec.
9:10). Whatever intelligence, therefore, comes to us
professing to be one of our dead friends, comes
claiming to be what from the word of God we know he

“It is impossible to give any idea of the experience
of the people of God who will be alive on the earth
when past woes and celestial glory will be blended.
They will walk in the light proceeding from the throne
of God. By the means of the angels there will be
constant communication between heaven and earth.
And Satan, surrounded by evil angels, and claiming
to be God, will work miracles of all kinds to deceive,
if possible, the very elect. God’s people will not find
their safety in working miracles, for Satan would
counterfeit any miracle that might be worked. God’s
tried and tested people will find their power in the
sign spoken of in Ex. 31:12-18. They are to take their
stand on the living Word—‘It is written.’ This is the
only foundation upon which they can stand securely.”
Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 54.
“It was by the display of supernatural power, in
making the serpent his medium, that Satan caused the
fall of Adam and Eve in Eden. Before the close of time

343

GEMS FROM REVELATION
observance—the mark of the beast—see Rev. 19:20.”
Were, WATB, 78.

he will work still greater wonders. So far as his
power extends, he will perform actual miracles. Says
the Scripture: ‘He ...deceiveth them that dwell on the
earth by the means of those miracles which he had
power to do,’ not merely those which he pretends to do.
Something more than mere impostures is brought to
view in this scripture. But there is a limit beyond which
Satan cannot go, and here he calls deception to his aid
and counterfeits the work which he has not power
actually to perform. In the last days he will appear in
such a manner as to make men believe him to be Christ
come the second time into the world. He will indeed
transform himself into an angel of light. But while he
will bear the appearance of Christ in every
particular, so far as mere appearance goes, it will
deceive none but those who, like Pharaoh, are seeking
to resist the truth.” 5 Testimonies, 698.

REVELATION 13:14
And deceiveth them that dwell on the
earth by the means of those miracles which
he had power to do in the sight of the beast;
saying to them that dwell on the earth, that
they should make an image to the beast,
which had the wound by a sword, and did
live.
Two-Horned Beast Identical to “ False Prophet”.—
“And the beast was taken, and with him the false
prophet that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image….” Rev.
19:20.

Maketh Fire Come Down From Heaven.—
“And when the day of Pentecost was fully come,
they were all with one accord in one place. And
suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a
rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting. And there appeared unto them
cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of
them.” Acts 2:1-3.

“This identifies the two-horned beast with the false
prophet of Rev. 19:20; for this false prophet is the
power that works miracles before the beast, ‘with
which he deceived them that had received the mark
of the beast, and them that worshiped his image,’—
the identical work of the two-horned beast. We can
now ascertain by what means the miracles in question
are wrought; for Rev. 16:13,14 speaks of spirits of
devils working miracles ...and these miracle-working
spirits go forth out of the mouth of certain powers, one
of which is this very false prophet, or two-horned
beast.” Smith, DR, 578.

“You know that Satan will come in to deceive if
possible the very elect. He claims to be Christ, and he is
coming in, pretending to be the great medical
missionary. He will cause fire to come down from
heaven in the sight of men, to prove that he is God.
We must stand barricaded by the truths of the Bible.
The canopy of truth is the only canopy under which we
can stand safely.” Medical Ministry, 87-88.

“In the Scripture under consideration the twohorned beast is given no name. It is described only as
having the two horns of a lamb and the voice of a
dragon. A name is given, however, in later Scriptures.
See Rev. 16:13,14; 19:20; 20:10. In all three of these
texts the two-horned beast is designated ‘the false
prophet.’ There can be no question regarding the
identity of the false prophet as the miracle working twohorned beast. The same statements are made regarding
both.” Bunch, TR, 175.

“As we near the close of time, there will be
greater and still greater external parade of heathen
power; heathen deities will manifest their signal
power, and will exhibit themselves before the cities
of the world, and this delineation has already begun to
be fulfilled. By a variety of images the Lord Jesus
represented to John the wicked character and seductive
influence of those who have been distinguished for their
persecution of God’s people.
All need wisdom
carefully to search out the mystery of iniquity that
figures so largely in the winding up of this earth’s
history. God’s presentation of the detestable works
of the inhabitants of the ruling powers of the world
who bind themselves into secret societies and
confederacies, not honoring the law of God, should
enable the people who have the light of truth to keep
clear of all these evils. More and more will all false
religionists of the world manifest their evil doings; for
there are but two parties, those who keep the
commandments of God and those who war against
God's holy law.—Ms 139, 1903.” 8MR 322.

“And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come
out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles,
which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the
whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great
day of God Almighty.” Rev. 16:13,14.
“A false prophet ...is Satan’s mouthpiece and
appropriately represents a false and counterfeit system
of religion. It carries the idea of a prophet who was
once true and had turned traitor as did Balaam.”
Bunch, TR, 176.

“This calling down of fire from heaven is done to
convince people of the supposed sanctity of Sunday

344

REVELATION 13
“Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God: because many false
prophets are gone out into the world. 1 John 4:1.
“How are we to try the spirits? How are we to
discern the false prophets? John continues: ‘Hereby
know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: And
every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit
of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should
come; and even now already is it in the world.’ 1
John 4:2,3
“The word ‘flesh’ [Gr., sarx] means our fallen
human flesh. It is interesting to note that the fallen
Protestant churches follow Roman Catholicism in
teaching that Jesus Christ did not come in our flesh,
but rather came in sinless flesh, like Adam before the
fall. This denies the plain teaching of Scripture in
Hebrews 2, and 1 John 4:4. Any church system
teaching this view of Jesus is identified as the ‘false
prophet.’” PJ.

promising what God alone can do and contrary to what
He has foretold in the Bible. In effect it is like the work
of the false disciples of old who tried to take Jesus by
force to make Him king (John 6:15), the kind of king
they wanted. All utopian or messianic planning for the
world’s future through human organizations are
foredoomed to utter failure and are in reality a defiance
of God’s plans. ‘Every plant, which my heavenly
Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.’
Matthew 15:13.” Price, Time of the End, 52,53.

“The false prophet had the two horns of a lamb,
but the voice of a dragon. His profession was Christian
but his character was satanic. Jesus warned of the ‘false
prophets, which come unto you in sheep’s clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves.’ Matt. 7:15.
Protestantism, which was the mouthpiece of God during
the Reformation, becomes the spokesman of the
dragon and is dominated by the same dragon spirit
that controls the first beast. ‘The same spirit which
actuated papists in ages past will lead Protestants to
pursue a similar course toward those who will maintain
their loyalty to God.’ 5 Testimonies, 449.” Bunch, TR,
179.

“[2 Thess. 2:9,10 and Rev. 13:13,14 quoted.] No
mere impostures are here foretold. Men are deceived by
the miracles which Satan’s agents have power to do,
not which they pretend to do. Great Controversy,
553.

Deceiveth.—
“Even him, whose coming is after the working of
Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,
And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish; because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause
God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie: And that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.” 2 Thess. 2:9,10.

“I was pointed back to the time of Moses and saw
the signs and wonders which God wrought through him
before Pharaoh, most of which were imitated by the
magicians of Egypt; and that just before the final
deliverance of the saints, God would work powerfully
for His people, and these modern magicians would be
permitted to imitate the work of God.” Early
Writings, 59.

“The deceptive influence of this false prophet
must be worldwide, for a divine warning is issued
against it in chapter 14 that goes ‘to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people.’ Its religious
influence must be different from Roman Catholicism,
which is symbolized by the leopard beast. Obviously it
must be some aspect of Protestantism. And since it is
an evil influence, not a good one, it must be an
apostate form of Protestantism. What has been
termed the ‘Americanization of religion’ must be what
is meant, and the United States would be its typical
representative.” Price, Time of the End, 30,31.

“Satan will have power to bring before us the
appearance of forms purporting to be our relatives
or friends now sleeping in Jesus. It will be made to
appear as if these friends were present; the words that
they uttered while here, with which we were familiar,
will be spoken, and the same tone of voice that they had
while living will fall upon the ear. All this is to deceive
the saints and ensnare them into the belief of this
delusion.
“I saw that the saints must get a thorough
understanding of present truth, which they will be
obliged to maintain from the Scriptures. They must
understand the state of the dead; for the spirits of devils
will yet appear to them, professing to be beloved friends
and relatives, who will declare to them that the Sabbath
has been changed, also other unscriptural doctrines.
They will do all in their power to excite sympathy
and will work miracles before them to confirm what
they declare. The people of God must be prepared to
withstand these spirits with the Bible truth that the dead
know not anything, and that they who appear to them
are the spirits of devils. Our minds must not be taken
up with things around us, but must be occupied with

“Why is this seemingly gentle and harmless
creature branded as a ‘false prophet’? …Briefly, the
reason is that while God is restraining tyranny and
persecution in this time-of-the-end period, granting
freedom for His church to preach the gospel of the
coming kingdom, the evil one employs this false
prophet to use these two freedoms to teach instead
visions of world progress and continuous human
development, promising that we shall soon outgrow
war and the other pains and evils of life by mere
human wisdom and planning. This is a false gospel,

345

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the present truth and a preparation to give a reason of
our hope with meekness and fear. We must seek
wisdom from on high that we may stand in this day of
error and delusion.
“We must examine well the foundation of our
hope, for we shall have to give a reason for it from the
Scriptures. This delusion will spread, and we shall
have to contend with it face to face; and unless we
are prepared for it, we shall be ensnared and
overcome. But if we do what we can on our part to be
ready for the conflict that is just before us, God will do
His part, and His all-powerful arm will protect us. He
would sooner send every angel out of glory to the
relief of faithful souls, to make a hedge about them,
than have them deceived and led away by the lying
wonders of Satan.
“I saw the rapidity with which this delusion was
spreading. A train of cars was shown me, going with
the speed of lightning. The angel bade me look
carefully. I fixed my eyes upon the train. It seemed that
the whole world was on board, that there could not be
one left. Said the angel, ‘They are binding in bundles
ready to burn.’ Then he showed me the conductor, who
appeared like a stately, fair person, whom all the
passengers looked up to and reverenced. I was
perplexed and asked my attending angel who it was. He
said, ‘It is Satan. He is the conductor in the form of an
angel of light. He has taken the world captive. They
are given over to strong delusions, to believe a lie,
that they may be damned. This agent, the next highest
in order to him, is the engineer, and other of his agents
are employed in different offices as he may need them,
and they are all going with lightning speed to perdition.’
“I asked the angel if there were none left. He bade
me look in an opposite direction, and I saw a little
company traveling a narrow pathway. All seemed to be
firmly united, bound together by the truth, in
bundles, or companies. Said the angel, ‘The third
angel is binding, or sealing, them in bundles for the
heavenly garner.’” Early Writings, 87,88.

the truth in righteousness. Let these be proclaimed over
and over again, until the close of this earth’s history.”
Review & Herald, 8/9/1906.
Them That Dwell on the Earth.—
“The book of Revelation makes a distinction
between those who dwell on the earth, and those who
dwell in heaven.
“Notice the following contrast of the two groups of
people in Revelation 13:6,8: “And he opened his mouth
in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.” “And
all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose
names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world.”
“Those that dwell on the face of the earth are those
whose focus and attention is on earthly things. To this
class of people the gospel is preached. “And I saw
another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on
the earth.” Rev. 14:6.
“The true Christian dwells by faith with Christ in
heavenly places. “But God ...hath quickened us
together with Christ, ...and hath raised us up
together and made us sit together in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus.” Eph. 2:4-6. “If ye then be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set
your affection on things above, not on things on the
earth.” Col. 3:1,2. (See also Ps. 16:11 and Ps. 91.)
“The Spirit of Prophecy makes the same
distinction: ‘Upon all who dwell on the face of the
whole earth, upon all who make this world their
home, the day of God will come as a snare. It comes to
them as a prowling thief.’ Desire of Ages, 635.
‘By profession you say to the world:
My
citizenship is not here but above; while your works
decidedly say that you are a dweller on the earth.’ 4
Testimonies, 51.
“Those that dwell on the earth put the martyrs of
Rev. 6:9,10 to death: ‘How long, O Lord, holy and
true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth?’ Rev. 6:9,10. The Old
and New Testaments ‘tormented them that dwell on
the earth’ by condemning their life of sin. Rev. 11:10.”
PJ

“There is a wonder-working power to appear, and
it will be when men are claiming sanctification, and
holiness, lifting themselves up higher and higher and
boasting of themselves.
“Look at Moses and the prophets; look at Daniel
and Joseph and Elijah. Look at these men and find one
sentence where they ever claimed to be sinless. The
very soul that is in close relation to Christ, beholding
His purity and excellence, will fall before Him with
shamefacedness.” Sermons & Talks, Vol. 1, 21.

“The ones deceived are the last generation of
mankind, obviously the most sophisticated and the
most scientifically educated of all the long line of
humanity—a most surprising situation.” Price, Time of
the End, 96.

“The time is at hand when Satan will work
miracles to confirm minds in the belief that he is
God. All the people of God are now to stand on the
platform of truth as it has been given in the third angel’s
message. All the pleasant pictures, all the miracles
wrought, will be presented in order that, if possible,
the very elect shall be deceived. The only hope for
anyone is to hold fast the evidences that have confirmed

By Means of Those Miracles.—
“It was by the display of supernatural power, in
making the serpent his medium, that Satan caused the
fall of Adam and Eve in Eden. Before the close of time
he will work still greater wonders. So far as his power
extends, he will perform actual miracles. Says the
Scripture: ‘He ...deceiveth them that dwell on the earth

346

REVELATION 13
by the means of those miracles which he had power to
do,’ not merely those which he pretends to do.
Something more than mere impostures is brought to
view in this scripture. But there is a limit beyond which
Satan cannot go, and here he calls deception to his aid
and counterfeits the work which he has not power
actually to perform. In the last days he will appear in
such a manner as to make men believe him to be Christ
come the second time into the world. He will indeed
transform himself into an angel of light. But while he
will bear the appearance of Christ in every particular, so
far as mere appearance goes, it will deceive none but
those who, like Pharaoh, are seeking to resist the truth.”
5 Testimonies, 698.

most striking evidence that the United States is the
nation denoted in the prophecy.” Great Controversy,
443.

In the Sight of the Beast.—
“In 1984 the United States abandoned its
Protestant heritage when for the first time in its
history, it sent an ambassador to the Vatican City, thus
acknowledging this church/state as an equal. Since that
time it has been performing its deeds ‘in the sight of
the Beast’—acting in close and open cooperation with
the papacy.” PJ
“On October, 1951, President Harry Truman
asked the Senate to approve his nomination of an
Ambassador to the State of Vatican City. There was a
wave of protest. Hardly a Protestant church group in
the country failed to express its opposition. The
President withdrew his proposal.
“In March, 1984, President Ronald Reagan
nominated William A. Wilson as Ambassador to
Vatican city. It was approved by the Senate 81 to 13.
Very few objections were heard.” Feyerabend, RVBV,
126.

“Babylon will make all nations drink of the wine
of the wrath of her fornication. Every nation will be
involved.” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 1, 296.

“This two-horned beast is not a totalitarian state.
It is a democracy, for she tells the people ‘that they
should make an image to the beast.’” Straw, SR, 87.
“Rev. 14:8 and 18:3 predict that ‘all nations’ will
drink of the wine of Babylon’s doctrine of fornication
(union of church and state, or making an ‘image of the
beast’). The Papacy and the United States (Apostate
Protestantism) working together—with all the world
submitting—is the New World Order. PJ.

Make an Image to the Beast.—
“Closely associated with this working of miracles
is the erection of an image to the beast. The prophet
thus connects the two in verse 14. ...The deception
accomplished by the working of the miracles
prepares the way for compliance with this demand
for the formation of an image to the beast.
“To understand what would constitute an image of
the papal beast, we must first gain some definite idea of
what constitutes the papacy itself. The full development
of the beast, or the establishment of papal supremacy,
dates from the famous letter of Justinian, which was
made effective in AD 538, constituting the pope the
head of the church and the corrector of heretics. The
papacy was a church clothed with civil power—an
ecclesiastical body having authority to punish all
dissenters with confiscation of goods, imprisonment,
torture, and death. What would be an image of the
papacy?—Another
ecclesiastical
establishment
clothed with civil power, in other words, a union of
church and state. How could such an image be formed
in the United States? Let the Protestant churches be
clothed with power to define and punish heresy, to
enforce their dogmas under the pains and penalties of
the civil law, and should we not have an exact
representation of the papacy during the days of its
supremacy? To be sure we would.” Smith, DR,
590,591.

“There is nothing in the prophecy to indicate that
Catholicism and Protestantism will become one fold.
They will simply clasp hands for the purpose of
cooperation to bring about the fulfillment of a mutual
purpose.” Bunch, TR, 185.

“The beast was the papacy clothed with power to
put to death the saints of God. Rev. 13:5-8; Dan. 7: 2326. An image to the beast, then, must be another
ecclesiastical body clothed with power and authority
to put the saints to death. This can refer to nothing
else but the corrupt and fallen Protestant Church.”
Andrews, TAM, 105.

Pope John II with US President Ronald Reagan.

“What is the ‘image to the beast’? and how is it to
be formed? The image is made by the two-horned
beast, and is an image to the beast. It is also called an
image of the beast. Then to learn what the image is like,

Saying to Them that THEY Should Make.—
“Here is clearly presented a form of government
in which the legislative power rests with the people, a

347

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and how it is to be formed, we must study the
characteristics of the beast itself—the papacy. When
the early church became corrupted by departing from
the simplicity of the gospel and accepted heathen rites
and customs, she lost the Spirit and power of God;
and in order to control the consciences of the people,
she sought the support of the secular power. The
result was the papacy, a church that controlled the
power of the state, and employed it to further her
own ends, especially for the punishment of ‘heresy.’
In order for the United States to form an image of the
beast, the religious power must so control the civil
government that the authority of the state will also be
employed by the church to accomplish her own ends.
“It was apostasy that led the early church to
seek the aid of the civil government, and this prepared
the way for the development of the papacy—the beast.
Said Paul: ‘There’ shall ‘come a falling away,... and
that man of sin be revealed.’ 2 Thessalonians 2:3.
So apostasy in the church will prepare the way for
the image to the beast.” Great Controversy, 443.

words; the worst construction will be put upon their
motives.
“As the Protestant churches reject the clear,
Scriptural arguments in defense of God’s law, they will
long to silence those whose faith they cannot overthrow
by the Bible. Though they blind their own eyes to the
fact, they are now adopting a course which will lead to
the persecution of those who conscientiously refuse to
do what the rest of the Christian world are doing, and
acknowledge the claims of the papal sabbath.
“The dignitaries of church and state will unite to
bribe, persuade, or compel all classes to honor the
Sunday. The lack of divine authority will be supplied
by oppressive enactments. Political corruption is
destroying love of justice and regard for truth; and
even in free America, rulers and legislators, in order
to secure public favor, will yield to the popular
demand for a law enforcing Sunday observance.
Liberty of conscience, which has cost so great a
sacrifice, will no longer be respected. In the sooncoming conflict we shall see exemplified the prophet’s
words: ‘The dragon was wroth with the woman, and
went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which
keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.’ Revelation 12:17.” Great
Controversy, 592.

“When the leading churches of the United States,
uniting upon such points of doctrine as are held by them
in common, shall influence the state to enforce their
decrees and to sustain their institutions, then Protestant
America will have formed an image of the Roman
hierarchy, and the infliction of civil penalties upon
dissenters will inevitably result. ...The ‘image to the
beast’ represents that form of apostate Protestantism
which will be developed when the Protestant
churches shall seek the aid of the civil power for the
enforcement of their dogmas.” Great Controversy, 445.

“There is a tremendous parallel between
Protestantism in its relations with the United States
today, and the Christian church in its relations with
the Roman Empire in the days of Constantine which
resulted in their illicit marriage and the consequent
corruption of both. The ultimate result was the
paganizing of the church, the downfall of the empire,
and the long Dark Ages for the world.” Bunch, TR, 183.

“The enforcement of Sunday-keeping on the part
of Protestant churches is an enforcement of the worship
of the papacy—of the beast. Those who, understanding
the claims of the fourth commandment, choose to
observe the false instead of the true Sabbath are thereby
paying homage to that power by which alone it is
commanded. But in the very act of enforcing a
religious duty by secular power, the churches would
themselves form an image to the beast; hence the
enforcement of Sunday-keeping in the United States
would be an enforcement of the worship of the beast
and his image.” Great Controversy, 448,449.

“This movement to secure the aid of the state is
one of the greatest evidences of the loss of spiritual
power in Protestantism. The demand for the use of
the sword of the state is always proof of the loss of the
sword of the Spirit. Someone has said that ‘Jesus
Christ never spent any time in the lobby of the Caesars.’
He had all the power He needed for His work and this
mighty power of the Spirit He promised to the church as
being all-sufficient for the propagation of their work in
giving the gospel to the world.” Bunch, TR, 184.

“Those who honor the Bible Sabbath will be
denounced as enemies of law and order, as breaking
down the moral restraints of society, causing anarchy
and corruption, and calling down the judgments of
God upon the earth. Their conscientious scruples will
be pronounced obstinacy, stubbornness, and contempt
of authority. They will be accused of disaffection
toward the government. Ministers who deny the
obligation of the divine law will present from the pulpit
the duty of yielding obedience to the civil authorities as
ordained of God. In legislative halls and courts of
justice, commandment keepers will be misrepresented
and condemned. A false coloring will be given to their

“The Lord has shown me clearly that the image of
the beast will be formed before probation closes; for
it is to be the great test for the people of God, by
which their eternal destiny will be decided.” Selected
Messages, Vol. 2, 81.
“[Pat Robertson:] ‘Over the past few decades, the
people of our nation—including Christians—have
pushed aside the Fourth Commandment. We have said,
“We are not under the Law.” And this is true, but no
one has been freed from the moral, physical or
commonsense basis for God’s Ten Commandments.
That is why it is so devastating to see city after city

348

REVELATION 13
opening full blast on Sunday.’ [Church and State,
April, 1990.]
“While Mr. Robertson advocates the keeping of
God’s commandments, in this last statement he
misapplies the ‘seventh day’ to ‘Sunday,’ thus
advocating papal authority. Robertson had enough
support as a Protestant Evangelical in 1988 to make a
bid for the presidency of the United States. Since his
defeat he has headed up the Christian Coalition, an
organization working at the grass-roots level to bring
voting power to his religious views. And what are Mr.
Robertson’s views?
“He is bent upon taking this nation back to what it
was before we had a Constitution that provides religious
freedom for all faiths. He laments that Sunday ‘laws in
America that mandated a day of rest from incessant
commerce have been nullified as a violation of the
separation of church and state.’ [Pat Robertson, The
New World Order, p. 227; Word Publishing, 1991.]
Then he plainly states that America and this world must
be led by ‘godly men and women operating under the
laws of the God of Jacob.’ [Ibid.]
“How does Pat Robertson and the Christian
Coalition view the wall of separation erected by
America’s founding fathers to protect religious
freedom? Keith Fournier, a Catholic lawyer and leading
figure in Robertson’s Christian Coalition, states
emphatically, ‘The wall of separation between church
and state that was erected by secular humanists and
other enemies of religious freedom has to come
down. That wall is more of a threat to society than
the Berlin wall ever was.’ [Keith Fournier, Second
Annual Road to Victory and Strategy Briefing
Conference, Virginia Beach, Virginia, 1992.]” Rafferty,
PI, 86,87.

He Had Power to Give Life to Image of the Beast.—
“The apostle Paul points to a time when men
would have ‘a form of godliness,’ but would deny ‘the
power thereof.’
“We greatly regret to see the Protestant church
active in the fulfillment of this prophetic picture. While
the power of God is lacking, the outward services of
true Christian worship are maintained. With the loss of
the power of God the churches are turning more and
more to the state to supply what they lack. It is the
testimony of all history that just in proportion as any
popular and extensive ecclesiastical organization loses
the spirit and power of God, it clamors for the support
of the civil arm and finally religion becomes a part of
the state. Thus it will be in the formation of the image
of the beast, for the prophecy declares: ‘He had power
to give life unto the image of the beast, that the
image of the beast should both speak, and cause that
as many as would not worship the image of the beast
should be killed.’ Rev. 13:15.
“Let now an ecclesiastical organization be formed,
let the government legalize such an organization and
give it power to enforce upon the people the dogmas
which the different denominations can all adopt as the
basis of union, and what do we have? Exactly what the
prophecy represents—an image to the papal beast
endowed with life by the two-horned beast, to speak
and act with power.” Smith, DR, 601.
“With the 1961 decision of the Supreme Court
of the United States declaring state Sunday-closing laws
to be Constitutional, a long step was taken toward ‘the
sanctifying of Sunday.’” Anderson, UR, 143.
Worship.—
“A remark by Prof. Bliss, bearing on this point, is
worthy of lasting remembrance: ‘Whenever any civil or
ecclesiastical enactment conflicts with the requisitions
of Jehovah, that power is worshiped which is obeyed in
preference to the other. “Know ye not, that to whom
ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye
are to whom ye obey?” Rom. 6:16.’” Andrews, TAM,
112.

Which Had the Wound By Sword and Did Live.—
“The vitality, the power of this beast is such that
people are awed by its resurrection, and this causes
them to say ‘that they should make an image to the
beast, which had the wound by a Sword, and did live’,
or, as in the R.V., ‘and lived’. As the resurrection from
the dead proved Jesus to be of God (Acts 2:24; 3:15;
Rom. 1:4; etc.), so the resurrection of this beast will
lead people to conclude that it is of God. As the
Christian’s hope lies in Christ’s resurrection power, so
the world will be led to conceive that the uprising of
this beast from the state of death will bring the world
into a state of ‘peace and safety’.” Were, WATB, 59.

“Looking back at Revelation 12-14 we realize that
the key verb ‘worship’ occurs no fewer than eight
times, a feature that deserves comment. ...The core of
the end-time issue which involves the mark of the beast
is the question of worship.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 54.
How the Beast is Worshipped.—
“The third angel’s warning is: ‘If any man
worship the beast and his image, and receive his
mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God.’ ...After the
warning against the worship of the beast and his image
the prophecy declares: ‘Here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.’
Since those who keep God’s commandments are thus

REVELATION 13:15
And he had power to give life unto the
image of the beast, that the image of the
beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the
beast should be killed.

349

GEMS FROM REVELATION
placed in contrast with those that worship the beast and
his image and receive his mark, it follows that the
keeping of God’s law, on the one hand, and its
violation, on the other, will make the distinction
between the worshipers of God and the worshipers
of the beast.
“The special characteristic of the beast, and
therefore of his image, is the breaking of God's
commandments. Says Daniel, of the little horn, the
papacy: ‘He shall think to change times and the law.’
Daniel 7:25, R.V. And Paul styled the same power the
‘man of sin,’ who was to exalt himself above God. One
prophecy is a complement of the other. Only by
changing God’s law could the papacy exalt itself
above God; whoever should understandingly keep the
law as thus changed would be giving supreme honor to
that power by which the change was made. Such an act
of obedience to papal laws would be a mark of
allegiance to the pope in the place of God.
“The papacy has attempted to change the law of
God. The second commandment, forbidding image
worship, has been dropped from the law, and the fourth
commandment has been so changed as to authorize the
observance of the first instead of the seventh day as the
Sabbath. But papists urge, as a reason for omitting the
second commandment, that it is unnecessary, being
included in the first, and that they are giving the law
exactly as God designed it to be understood. This
cannot be the change foretold by the prophet. An
intentional, deliberate change is presented: ‘He shall
think to change the times and the law.’ The change in
the fourth commandment exactly fulfills the prophecy.
For this the only authority claimed is that of the church.
Here the papal power openly sets itself above God.
“While the worshipers of God will be
especially distinguished by their regard for the fourth
commandments—since this is the sign of His creative
power and the witness to His claim upon man’s
reverence and homage—the worshipers of the beast
will be distinguished by their efforts to tear down the
Creator’s memorial, to exalt the institution of Rome.
It was in behalf of the Sunday that popery first asserted
its arrogant claims; and its first resort to the power of
the state was to compel the observance of Sunday as
‘the Lord’s day.’ But the Bible points to the seventh
day, and not to the first, as the Lord’s day. Said Christ:
‘The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath.’ The
fourth commandment declares: ‘The seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord.’ And by the prophet Isaiah
the Lord designates it: ‘My holy day.’ Mark 2:28; Is.
58:13.” Great Controversy, 445,446.

refuse to do this, they lose the rights of citizenship, and
become outlaws in the land. They must do that which
constitutes the worship of the image of the beast, or
forfeit their lives. On the other hand, God sends forth a
message a little before this fearful crisis comes upon the
people, as we shall see in remarks on Revelation 14:912, declaring that all who do any of these things ‘shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture into the cup of His
indignation.’ He who refuses to comply with these
demands of earthly powers exposes himself to the
severest penalties which human beings can inflict. He
who does comply, exposes himself to the most terrible
threatenings of divine wrath to be found in the word of
God. The question whether they will obey God or
man is to be decided by the people of the present age
under the heaviest pressure, from both sides, that
has ever been brought to bear upon any generation.”
Smith, DR, 602,603.
“This means that the plan of a politico-religious
power in the image of the Papacy would succeed. It
would begin to promulgate laws, going as far as to
punish with death those who would not submit to its
authority. In short it would behave just as did the little
horn of Daniel 7, ‘that spake very great things’ and
that oppressed ‘the saints of the most High’ (Dan.
7:20,25).” Zurcher, COR, 102.
“While, according to the prophecy, the ‘image’
can be looked for only in the United States, the worship
of the beast will prevail in other countries also: for
all the world is to wonder after the beast. Someone
may now say, As you expect this movement to carry,
you must look for a period of religious persecution in
the United States; nay, more, you must take the position
that all the saints of God are to be put to death; for the
image is to cause that all who will not worship it shall
be killed. ...The prophet elsewhere declares, God does
not abandon his people to defeat in this dire conflict,
but grants them a complete victory over the beast,
his image, his mark, and the number of his name.
Revelation 15:2. We further read respecting this
earthly power, that he causeth all to receive a mark in
their right hand or in their foreheads; yet chapter 20:4
speaks of the people of God as those who do not receive
the mark, nor worship the image. If, then, he could
‘cause’ all to receive the mark, and yet all not actually
receive it, in like manner his causing all to be put to
death who will not worship the image does not
necessarily signify that their lives are actually to be
taken.” Smith, DR (1897), 464-465.

As Many As Would Not Worship the Image of the
Beast Should Be Killed.—
“This, then, is the issue which according to this
prophecy we are soon to be called upon to meet.
Human organizations, controlled and inspired by the
spirit of the dragon, are to command men to do those
acts which are in reality the worshiping of an apostate
religious power and the receiving of his mark. If they

“I saw the saints leaving the cities and villages,
and associating together in companies, and living in the
most solitary places. Angels provided them food and
water, while the wicked were suffering from hunger
and thirst. Then I saw the leading men of the earth
consulting together, and Satan and his angels busy
around them. I saw a writing, copies of which were

350

REVELATION 13
scattered in different parts of the land, giving orders that
unless the saints should yield their peculiar faith, give
up the Sabbath, and observe the first day of the week,
the people were at liberty after a certain time to put
them to death.” Early Writings, 282,283.

Why God’s People Are Marked for Death.—
“Those who honor the law of God have been
accused of bringing judgments upon the world, and
they will be regarded as the cause of the fearful
convulsions of nature and the strife and bloodshed
among men that are filling the earth with woe. The
power attending the last warning has enraged the
wicked; their anger is kindled against all who have
received the message, and Satan will excite to still
greater intensity the spirit of hatred and persecution.
“…As the Sabbath has become the special point of
controversy throughout Christendom, and religious and
secular authorities have combined to enforce the
observance of the Sunday, the persistent refusal of a
small minority to yield to the popular demand will make
them objects of universal execration. It will be urged
that the few who stand in opposition to an institution
of the church and a law of the state ought not to be
tolerated; that it is better for them to suffer than for
whole nations to be thrown into confusion and
lawlessness. The same argument eighteen hundred
years ago was brought against Christ by the ‘rulers of
the people.’ ‘It is expedient for us,’ said the wily
Caiaphas, ‘that one man should die for the people,
and that the whole nation perish not.’ John 11:50.
This argument will appear conclusive; and a decree will
finally be issued against those who hallow the Sabbath
of the fourth commandment, denouncing them as
deserving of the severest punishment and giving the
people liberty, after a certain time, to put them to death.
Romanism in the Old World and apostate Protestantism
in the New will pursue a similar course toward those
who honor all the divine precepts.” Great Controversy,
615,616.

“The persecutions of Protestants by Romanism, by
which the religion of Jesus Christ was almost
annihilated, will be more than rivaled when
Protestantism and popery are combined. The darkest
pages of history will be opened in that great day when it
will be too late for wrongs to be righted. Registered in
the book are crimes that have been committed because
of religious differences. We are not ignorant of the history. Europe was shaken as though with an earth-quake,
when a church, lifted up in pride and vanity, haughty
and tyrannical, devoted to condemnation and death all
who dared to think for themselves, and who ventured to
take the Bible as the foundation of their faith.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 16, 239.
Parallels Between Daniel 3 and Revelation 13.—

DANIEL 3

REVELATION 13

1. Literal Babylon.
2. ‘Great Babylon.’
3. Dominated the world.
4. Connected with the
Number ‘6.’
5. Its Fall Predicted in
Dan. 2:39; 5:25-31.
6. Erected Image
Representing Babylon
Forever.
7. Compels All to
Worship
8. Three Literal Jews
Refuse to Worship Image.

Spiritual Babylon
‘Babylon the Great’
Will dominate the world.
Connected with the
Number ‘6.’
Its Fall Predicted in Rev.
18:7,8.
Is to Erect a Spiritual
Image Representing
Babylon Forever.
Compels All to Worship

Spiritual Jews of 3
Angel’s Messages Refuse
to Worship Image.
9. Hailed Before Ruler.
Hailed Before Rulers.
10. Wrath Against the
Wrath Against the
Three Jews.
Spiritual Jews.
11. Issue Over Worship
Issue Over Worship (7
(10 times in ch. 3).
times in ch. 13-14).
Death Decree. (13:15).
12. Death Decree
13. A Fiery Trial.
A Fiery Trial.
14. Delivered by the Son Delivered by the Son of
of God.
God. (17:14).
Source: Cooke, #20-UR, 24,25.

“1 Kings 18:17,18. The obedient are blamed.
Elijah probably was blamed for the famine, but when
the false prophets of Baal died, the rain came. Elijah
is a type of the Last Day Message. He was accused, but
God fed him by the angels. Later he was translated.
“Why Do the Calamities Come? Is. 24:3-6:
Transgressed God’s laws. Zeph. 3:4: ‘They have
done violence to the law.’ Jer. 9:12-17: ‘They have
forsaken My law.’” Burnside, RWU, 168,169.
“[We are] not to provoke those who have accepted
this spurious sabbath, an institution of the Papacy in the
place of God’s holy Sabbath. Their not having the
Bible arguments in their favor makes them all the
more angry and determined to supply the place of
arguments that are wanting in the Word of God by the
power of their might. The force of persecution
follows the steps of the dragon. Therefore great care
should be exercised to give no provocation.” (Letter 55,
1886). Evangelism, 235.

Death Decree Similar to Esther’s Day.—
“The decree that will finally go forth against the
remnant people of God will be very similar to that
issued by Ahasuerus against the Jews. Today the
enemies of the true church see in the little company
keeping the Sabbath commandment, a Mordecai at the
gate. The reverence of God’s people for His law is a
constant rebuke to those who have cast off the fear of
the Lord and are trampling on His Sabbath.” Prophets
& Kings, 605.

God’s People Flee, Others are Imprisoned.—
“As the decree issued by the various rulers of
Christendom against commandment keepers shall

351

GEMS FROM REVELATION
withdraw the protection of government and abandon
them to those who desire their destruction, the people
of God will flee from the cities and villages and
associate together in companies, dwelling in the most
desolate and solitary places. Many will find refuge in
the strongholds of the mountains. Like the Christians of
the Piedmont valleys, they will make the high places of
the earth their sanctuaries and will thank God for ‘the
munitions of rocks.’ Isaiah 33:16. But many of all
nations and of all classes, high and low, rich and
poor, black and white, will be cast into the most
unjust and cruel bondage. The beloved of God pass
weary days, bound in chains, shut in by prison bars,
sentenced to be slain, some apparently left to die of
starvation in dark and loathsome dungeons. No human
ear is open to hear their moans; no human hand is ready
to lend them help. Will the Lord forget His people in
this trying hour? Great Controversy, 626.

“With shouts of triumph, jeering, and imprecation,
throngs of evil men are about to rush upon their prey,
when, lo, a dense blackness, deeper than the darkness of
the night, falls upon the earth. Then a rainbow,
shining with the glory from the throne of God, spans
the heavens and seems to encircle each praying
company. The angry multitudes are suddenly arrested.
Their mocking cries die away. The objects of their
murderous rage are forgotten. With fearful forebodings
they gaze upon the symbol of God’s covenant and long
to be shielded from its overpowering brightness.
“By the people of God a voice, clear and
melodious, is heard, saying, ‘Look up,’ and lifting their
eyes to the heavens, they behold the bow of promise.
The black, angry clouds that covered the firmament are
parted, and like Stephen they look up steadfastly into
heaven and see the glory of God and the Son of man
seated upon His throne. In His divine form they discern
the marks of His humiliation; and from His lips they
hear the request presented before His Father and the
holy angels: ‘I will that they also, whom Thou hast
given Me, be with Me where I am.’ John 17:24.
Again a voice, musical and triumphant, is heard, saying:
‘They come! they come! holy, harmless, and undefiled.
They have kept the word of My patience; they shall
walk among the angels;’ and the pale, quivering lips of
those who have held fast their faith utter a shout of
victory.
“It is at midnight that God manifests His power
for the deliverance of His people. The sun appears,
shining in its strength. Signs and wonders follow in
quick succession. The wicked look with terror and
amazement upon the scene, while the righteous behold
with solemn joy the tokens of their deliverance.
Everything in nature seems turned out of its course.
The streams cease to flow. Dark, heavy clouds come up
and clash against each other. In the midst of the angry
heavens is one clear space of indescribable glory,
whence comes the voice of God like the sound of many
waters, saying: ‘It is done.’ Rev. 16:17. That voice
shakes the heavens and the earth. There is a mighty
earthquake, ‘such as was not since men were upon the
earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.’
Verses 17, 18.” Great Controversy, 635-637.

Those Who Don’t Worship the Image Get Victory.—
“While John was shown the last great struggles of
the church with earthly powers, he was also permitted to
behold the final victory and deliverance of the
faithful. He saw the church brought into deadly
conflict with the beast and his image, and the worship of
that beast enforced on pain of death. But looking
beyond the smoke and din of the battle, he beheld a
company upon Mount Zion with the Lamb, having,
instead of the mark of the beast, the ‘Father’s name
written in their foreheads.’ And again he saw ‘them
that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over
his image, and over his mark, and over the number
of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the
harps of God’ and singing the song of Moses and the
Lamb. [Rev. 14:1,15:2,3].” 5 Testimonies, 752-753.
“When the protection of human laws shall be
withdrawn from those who honor the law of God, there
will be, in different lands, a simultaneous movement
for their destruction. As the time appointed in the
decree draws near, the people will conspire to root out
the hated sect. It will be determined to strike in one
night a decisive blow, which shall utterly silence the
voice of dissent and reproof.
“The people of God—some in prison cells, some
hidden in solitary retreats in the forests and the
mountains—still plead for divine protection, while in
every quarter companies of armed men, urged on by
hosts of evil angels, are preparing for the work of death.
It is now, in the hour of utmost extremity, that the God
of Israel will interpose for the deliverance of His
chosen. Saith the Lord; ‘Ye shall have a song, as in
the night when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness
of heart, as when one goeth ...to come into the
mountain of the Lord, to the Mighty One of Israel.
And the Lord shall cause His glorious voice to be
heard, and shall show the lighting down of His arm,
with the indignation of His anger, and with the flame
of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and
hailstones.’ Isaiah 30:29, 30.

When the Execution of the Death Decree Occurs.—
“‘And at that time shall Michael stand up, the
great prince which standeth for the children of thy
people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as
never was since there was a nation even to that same
time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered,
everyone that shall be found written in the book.’
When this time of trouble comes, every case is decided;
there is no longer probation, no longer mercy for the
impenitent. The seal of the living God is upon His
people.
This small remnant, unable to defend
themselves in the deadly conflict with the powers of
earth that are marshaled by the dragon host, make God
their defense. The decree has been passed by the
highest earthly authority that they shall worship the

352

REVELATION 13
that beast to whom the image was made—the first beast.
Rev. 19:20; 16:2. But it is enforced by the two-horned
beast; hence we understand it is an institution of the
papacy, enforced by Protestantism. The beast and his
image unite in this thing, in opposition to the saints,
who are engaged in keeping the commandments of
God. Have we an institution of the papal apostasy
which the civil power supports, and to which the
religious world pays homage? We have. It is found in a
weekly Sabbath, which the ‘man of sin’ has placed in
the stead of the Sabbath of the fourth
commandment.” Andrews, TAM, 106,107.

beast and receive his mark under pain of persecution
and death. May God help His people now, for what
can they then do in such a fearful conflict without His
assistance!” 5 Testimonies, 212.

REVELATION 13:16
And he causeth all, both small and
great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in
their foreheads.

“After the warning against the worship of the
beast and his image the prophecy declares: ‘Here are
they that keep the commandments of God, and the
faith of Jesus.’
Since those who keep God’s
commandments are thus placed in contrast with those
that worship the beast and his image and receive his
mark, it follows that the keeping of God’s law, on the
one hand, and its violation, on the other, will make
the distinction between the worshipers of God and
the worshipers of the beast.
“The special characteristic of the beast, and
therefore of his image, is the breaking of God’s
commandments. Says Daniel, of the little horn, the
papacy: ‘He shall think to change times and the law.’
Daniel 7:25, R.V. And Paul styled the same power the
‘man of sin,’ who was to exalt himself above God. One
prophecy is a complement of the other. Only by
changing God’s law could the papacy exalt itself above
God; whoever should understandingly keep the law as
thus changed would be giving supreme honor to that
power by which the change was made. Such an act of
obedience to papal laws would be a mark of
allegiance to the pope in the place of God.
“…An intentional, deliberate change is presented:
‘He shall think to change the times and the law.’
The change in the fourth commandment exactly
fulfills the prophecy. For this the only authority
claimed is that of the church. Here the papal power
openly sets itself above God.” Great Controversy, 446.

He Causeth All.—
“There will be no spot too secluded for that power
to reach. The present perfection of organization, the
census taking, the enrollment for voting, etc., bring
every individual under the eye of the govern-ment as
truly as the enrollment of Augustus Caesar, the taxgatherer of Rome, brought the parents of Jesus to the
attention of the nation.” Haskelll, SSP, 242, 243.
Free and Bond.—
“That there will be slavery at the time of the
Second Advent. This is made clear in Revelation
6:15,16, which declares that ‘every bondman and
every free man’ calls for the mountains and rocks to
fall on them and hide them ‘from the face of Him that
sitteth on the throne.” PJ
(See also comments under Rev. 18:13.)
A Mark.—
“The word used for mark in this prophecy is
charagma, and is defined to mean, ‘a graving, sculpture;
a mark cut in or stamped.’ It occurs nine times in the
New Testament, and with the single exception of Acts
17:29, refers every time to the mark of the beast. Of
course, we are not to understand in this symbolic
prophecy that a literal mark is intended, but the giving
of the literal mark, as practiced in ancient times is used
as a figure to illustrate certain acts that will be
performed in the fulfillment of this prophecy. From the
literal mark as formerly employed, we learn something
of its meaning as used in the prophecy.... The mark as
literally used, signified that the person receiving it was
the servant of the person whose mark he bore,
acknowledged his authority, and professed allegiance to
him. So the mark of the beast, or of the papacy,
must be some act or profession by which the
authority of that power is acknowledged. What is
it?” Smith, DR, 604.

“Respecting this commandment, they do not claim
that their version is like that given by God. They
expressly claim a change here, and also that the change
has been made by the church. A few quotations from
standard Catholic works will make this matter plain.
“...In the Catechism of the Christian Religion,
by Stephen Keenan (Boston, Patrick Donahue, l857), p.
206, on the subject of the third (fourth) commandment,
we find these questions and answers:—
“Ques.—What does God ordain by this
commandment?
“Ans.—He ordains that we sanctify in a special
manner, this say on which he rested from the labor of
creation.
“Q.—What is this day of rest?
“A.—The seventh day of the week, or Saturday;
for he employed six days in creation, and rested on the

“A mark of a religious power is some outstanding
belief or supposed power that other religions do not
claim to have.” Burnside, RWU, 162.
The Mark of the Beast (Papal Power).—
“What is this mark of the beast? It is the mark of

353

GEMS FROM REVELATION
seventh. Genesis 2:2; Hebrews 4:1;etc.
“Q.—Is it, then, Saturday we should sanctify, in
order to obey the ordinance of God?
“A. — During the old law, Saturday was the day
sanctified; but the church, instructed by Jesus Christ,
and directed by the Spirit of God, has substituted
Sunday for Saturday; so now we sanctify the first,
not the seventh day. Sunday means, and now is, the
day of the Lord.’
“In the Catholic Christian Instructed (J. P. Kenedy,
New York, l884), p. 202, we read:—
“Ques.—What warrant have you for keeping the
Sunday preferable to the ancient Sabbath, which was
Saturday?
“Ans.—We have for it the authority of the
Catholic Church, and apostolic tradition.
“Q. — Does the Scripture anywhere command the
Sunday to be kept for the Sabbath?
“A.—The Scripture commands us to hear the
church (Matthew 18:17; Luke 10:16), and to hold fast
the traditions of the apostles. 2 Thessalonians 2:15. But
the Scriptures do not in particular mention this
change of the Sabbath.
“In the Doctrinal Catechism (Kenedy, New York),
p. 174, we find further testimony to the same point:—
“Ques.—Have you any other way of proving that
the church has power to institute festivals of precept?
“Ans.—Had she not such power, she could not
have done that in which all modern religionists agree
with her — she could not have substituted the
observance of Sunday, the first day of the week, for
the observance of Saturday, the seventh day, a
change for which there is no Scriptural authority.”
Smith, DR (1897) 446-449.

Paul—a conclusion sufficiently hideous to drive any
Christian from the view which leads thereto.
“…The nature of the change which the little horn
has attempted to effect in the law of God is worthy of
notice. True to his purpose to exalt himself above God,
he undertakes to change that command-ment which, of
all others, is the fundamental commandment of the law,
the one which makes known who the lawgiver is, and
contains his signature of royalty.
The fourth
commandment does this; no other one does. Four
others, it is true, contain the word God, and three of
them the word Lord, also. But who is this Lord God of
whom they speak? Without the fourth commandment, it
is impossible to tell; for idolaters of every grade apply
these terms to the multitudinous objects of their
adoration. With the fourth commandment to point
out the Author of the Decalogue, the claims of every
false god are annulled at one stroke; for the God who
here demands our worship is not any created being,
but the One who created all things.” Smith, DR
(1897), 483-488.
The Issue is Between Sabbath and Sunday.—

“The Papacy is correct in stating that they changed
the day.
“ ‘In reply to a letter of October 28, 1895, to
Cardinal Gibbons, asking if the church claimed the
change of the Sabbath as her mark, the following was
received: “Of course the Catholic church claims that
the change was her act.... And the act is a mark of her
ecclesiastical power and authority in religious
matters.”—C.F. Thomas, Chancellor.’” Nelson, TA,
71.

God made the Sabbath through Jesus
for all mankind.
Ephesisans 3:9; John 1:1-3; Mark 2:28
“This change of the fourth commandment must
therefore be the change to which the prophecy points,
and the Sunday sabbath must be the mark of the beast!
Some who have long been taught to regard this
institution with reverence will perhaps start back with
little less than feelings of horror at this conclusion. We
have not space, nor is this, perhaps, the place, to enter
the origin and nature of the observance of the first day
of the week. Let us submit this one proposition: If the
seventh day is still the Sabbath enjoined in the
fourth commandment; if the observance of the first
day of the week has no foundation whatever in the
Scriptures; if this observance has been brought in as
a Christian institution, and designedly put in place of
the Sabbath of the Decalogue by that power which is
symbolized by the beast, and placed there as a badge
and token of its power to legislate for the church—is
it not inevitably the mark of the beast? The answer

“ ‘But,’ says one, ‘I supposed that Christ changed
the Sabbath.’ A great many suppose so, and it is natural
that they should; for they have been so taught. And
while we have no words of denunciation to utter against
any such persons for so believing, we would have them
at once understand that it is, in reality, one of the most
enormous of errors. We would therefore remind such
persons that, according to the prophecy, the only change
ever to be made in the law of God, was to be made by
the little horn of Daniel 7, the man of sin of 2
Thessalonians 2; and the only change that has been
made in it, is the change of the Sabbath. Now, if Christ
made this change, he filled the office of the
blasphemous power spoken of by both Daniel and

354

REVELATION 13
must be in the affirmative. But these hypotheses are all
certainties.” Smith, DR (1897), 488,489.

their persecution the religious zealots who are seeking
to enforce them. Give them no occasion to call you
lawbreakers. If they are left to rein up men who fear
neither God nor man, the reining up will soon lose its
novelty for them, and they will see that it is not
consistent nor convenient for them to be strict in regard
to the observance of Sunday. Keep right on with your
missionary work, with your Bibles in your hands,
and the enemy will see that he has worsted his own
cause. One does not receive the mark of the beast
because he shows that he realizes the wisdom of
keeping the peace by refraining from work that gives
offense, doing at the same time a work of the highest
importance.” 9 Testimonies, 232.

“Matt. 15:3. Christ asks you ‘Why do ye also
transgress the commandment of God by your
tradition?’ Sunday is based on tradition only.
“Matt. 15:9: ‘In vain do they worship Me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.’
If you keep the Sabbath, whom do you obey?
God! If you keep Sunday, whom do you obey? You
cannot say you obey God, for God never once asked
you to keep Sunday. The issue is not just a matter of
days. It is a matter of obeying Christ or Rome—
either God or man.” Burnside, RWU, 165.
The Prophecy First Seen By Faith. —
“When the application of Revelation 13:11-17 to
the United States was first made, as early as the year
1850, these positions respecting a union of the churches
and a grand Sunday movement were taken. But at that
time no sign appeared above or beneath, at home or
abroad—no token was seen, no indication existed,
that such an issue would ever be made. But there was
the prophecy, and that must stand. The United States
government had given abundant evidence, by its
location, the time of its rise, the manner of its rise, and
its apparent character, that it was the power symbolized
by the two-horned beast. There could be no mistake in
the conclusion that it was the very nation intended by
that symbol. This being so, it must take the course and
perform the acts foretold. But here were predictions
which could be fulfilled by nothing less than the abovenamed movement respecting church and state, and the
enforcement of the papal Sabbath as a mark of the beast.
“To take the position at that time that this
government was to pursue such a policy and engage in
such a work, without any apparent probability in its
favor, was no small act of faith. On the other hand, to
deny or ignore it, while admitting the application of the
symbol to this government, would not be in accordance
with either Scripture or logic. The only course for the
humble, confiding student of prophecy to pursue in such
cases is to take the light as it is given, and believe the
prophecy in all its parts. So the stand was boldly
taken; and open proclamation has been made from
that day to this, that such a work would be seen in
the United States. With every review of the argument,
new features of strength have been discovered in the
application; and amid a storm of scornful incredulity we
have watched the progress of events, and awaited the
hour of fulfilment.” Smith, DR (1897), 453,454.

The Mark Received When Issue is Plainly Seen.—
“Christians of past generations observed the
Sunday, supposing that in so doing they were keeping
the Bible Sabbath; and there are now true Christians in
every church, not excepting the Roman Catholic
communion, who honestly believe that Sunday is the
Sabbath of divine appointment. God accepts their
sincerity of purpose and their integrity before Him. But
when Sunday observance shall be enforced by law,
and the world shall be enlightened concerning the
obligation of the true Sabbath, then whoever shall
transgress the command of God, to obey a precept
which has no higher authority than that of Rome, will
thereby honor popery above God. He is paying homage
to Rome and to the power which enforces the institution
ordained by Rome. He is worshipping the beast and
his image. As men then reject the institution which
God has declared to be the sign of His authority, and
honor in its stead that which Rome has chosen as the
token of her supremacy, they will thereby accept the
sign of allegiance to Rome—‘the mark of the beast.’
And it is not until the issue is thus plainly set before the
people, and they are brought to choose between the
commandments of God and the commandments of men,
that those who continue in transgression will receive
‘the mark of the beast.’” Great Controversy, 449.
“While the observance of the false sabbath in
compliance with the law of the state, contrary to the
fourth commandment, will be an avowal of allegiance
to a power that is in opposition to God, the keeping of
the true Sabbath, in obedience to God’s law, is an
evidence of loyalty to the Creator. While one class,
by accepting the sign of submission to earthly
powers, receive the mark of the beast, the other
choosing the token of allegiance to divine authority,
receive the seal of God.” Great Controversy, 605.

How God’s People Will Relate to Sunday Laws.—
“The light given me by the Lord at a time when we
were expecting just such a crisis …was that when the
people were moved by a power from beneath to enforce
Sunday observance, Seventh-day Adventists were to
show their wisdom by refraining from their ordinary
work on that day, devoting it to missionary effort.
“To defy the Sunday laws will but strengthen in

In Their Right Hand, or In Their Foreheads.—
“The forehead and hand as the sites for receiving
the mark and the seal are significant. These terms are
first mentioned in the Pentateuch in connection with the
commands of God: ‘You shall bind them as a sign
upon your hand, and they shall be as frontlets
between your eyes’ (Deut. 6:8).

355

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The context indicates that this means the total
response of the mind, emotions, and behavior: ‘You
shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and
with all your soul, and with all your might’ in every
activity of life, whether teaching or talking, sitting or
walking, lying down or rising up (Deut. 6:5-8). The
forehead symbolized the mind, the thought-life; and
the right hand indicates the deed or action. Both
rival powers wish to control the mind and behavior.
The followers of the Lamb all have the name of God
upon their foreheads; whereas the followers of the
beast have the mark on the forehead (indicating
belief, allegiance) or the hand only (indicating forced
obedience without mental assent).
“A study of the mark of the beast (Rev. 13 and 14)
and the seal or name of God (7:2-3; 14:1) reveals that
the commandments of God are a primary issue in the
conflict.
“God’s law substituted by the beast’s. The mark
on the right hand or forehead (13:16) is an allusion to
Deuteronomy 6:6-8, where God commanded Israel to
bind His commandments (especially the Ten
Commandments just reviewed, Deut. 5) ‘as a sign upon
your hand, and ...as frontlets between your eyes.’
...Hence, the mark on the hand or forehead signifies the
writing of God’s laws into the minds and behaviour of
His people. The use of the forehead and hand by the
beast suggests a parody of God’s command: the
substitution of the laws of the beast for the law of
God.
“Issue: obedience/disobedience.
In the
Apocalypse, those who have the mark of the beast are
set in contrast with ‘those who keep the
commandments of God’ (14:9-12). Hence, it appears
that the mark-seal issue has to do with the violation of
the commandments of God on the one hand, and the
keeping of them on the other.” Biblical Research Inst.,
1SOR, 256,257.

were the only people in the world whom the Lord
favored the appearances were awfully against us. They
declared that they had the truth, that miracles were
among them, that angels from heaven talked with them,
and walked with them, that great power, and signs and
wonders were performed among them, and this was the
Temporal Millennium, which they had been
expecting so long. The whole world was converted and
in harmony with the Sunday law, and this little feeble
people stood out in defiance of the laws of the land, and
the laws of God, and claimed to be the only ones right
on the earth.” Maranatha, 209.
“Again and again the Lord has instructed that our
people are to take their families away from the cities,
into the country, where they can raise their own
provisions; for in the future the problem of buying
and selling will be a very serious one. We should now
begin to heed the instruction given us over and over
again: Get out of the cities into rural districts, where
the houses are not crowded closely together, and where
you will be free from the interference of enemies.”
Adventist Home, 141.
“This stern measure will be taken in an effort to
secure compliance with the dictates of the image. But
the measure will be unavailing (see on ch. 14:1, 12).
This measure will doubtless bring on the death
decree.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 822.
“ ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word of God.’ Often the follower of Christ is
brought where he cannot serve God and carry forward
his worldly enterprises. Perhaps it appears that
obedience to some plain requirement of God will cut
off his means of support. Satan would make him
believe that he must sacrifice his conscientious
convictions. But the only thing in our world upon
which we can rely is the word of God. ‘Seek ye first
the kingdom of God, and His righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you.’ Matt. 6:33.
Even in this life it is not for our good to depart from the
will of our Father in heaven. When we learn the power
of His word, we shall not follow the suggestions of
Satan in order to obtain food or to save our lives. Our
only questions will be, What is God’s command? and
what His promise? Knowing these, we shall obey the
one, and trust the other.
“In the last great conflict of the controversy with
Satan those who are loyal to God will see every
earthly support cut off. Because they refuse to break
His law in obedience to earthly powers, they will be
forbidden to buy or sell. It will finally be decreed that
they shall be put to death. See Rev. 13:11-17. But to the
obedient is given the promise, ‘He shall dwell on high:
his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks:
bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure.’
Isa. 33:16. By this promise the children of God will
live. When the earth shall be wasted with famine, they
shall be fed. ‘They shall not be ashamed in the evil

REVELATION 13:17
And that no man might buy or sell, save
he that had the mark, or the name of the
beast, or the number of his name.
No Man Might Buy or Sell.—
“I saw our people in great distress, weeping, and
praying, pleading the sure promises of God, while the
wicked were all around us, mocking us, and threatening
to destroy us. They ridiculed our feebleness, they
mocked at the smallness of our numbers, and taunted us
with words calculated to cut deep. They charged us
with taking an independent position from all the rest of
the world. They had cut off our resources so that we
could not buy nor sell, and referred to our abject
poverty and stricken condition. They could not see how
we could live without the world; we were dependent
upon the world, and we must concede to the customs,
practices, and laws of the world, or go out of it. If we

356

REVELATION 13
sanctuary, where the ark is], but also share in
persecuting God’s true people.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 55,56.

time: and in the days of famine they shall be
satisfied.’ Ps. 37:19. To that time of distress the
prophet Habakkuk looked forward, and his words
express the faith of the church: ‘Although the fig tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines;
the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold,
and there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation.’ Hab. 3:17,18.” Desire of Ages, 121,122.

“This relationship may be compared with the seal
of God placed on the forehead of the saints (ch. 7:2),
concerning whom John later declared that they had ‘his
Father’s name written in their foreheads’ (ch. 14:1).”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 822.
Number of His Name.—
“I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire:
and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and
over his image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his name…” Rev. 15:2.

Why a Sunday Law and Buy-and-Sell Decree.—
“It will be declared that men are offending God by
the violation of the Sunday sabbath; that this sin has
brought calamities which will not cease until Sunday
observance shall be strictly enforced; and that those who
present the claims of the fourth commandment, thus
destroying reverence for Sunday, are troublers of the
people, preventing their restoration to divine favor
and temporal prosperity.” Great Controversy, 590.

(See next verse.)

REVELATION 13:18
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath
understanding count the number of the
beast: for it is the number of a man; and his
number is Six hundred threescore and six.

Mark of the Beast.-“The ‘mark of the beast’ is not a physical mark….
It is a religious mark… In chapter seven we have noted
that the seal of God is the holy Sabbath of the Lord.
The keeping of the seventh-day Sabbath distinguishes
those designated by John as ‘saints.’ The ‘mark of the
beast’ is the counterfeit of God’s true mark, subtly
designed to deceive as many people as possible. Many
millions of people are in grave danger of receiving the
mark of the beast while they presume that they are safe
in following the majority in religious practice.
“Daniel 7:25 reveals how the papacy has
attempted to change God’s law by the substitution of
another day of rest for the day chosen by God.
…Catholic authorities openly admit that they alone are
responsible for the change of God’s holy Sabbath.
“…Says Leo J. Trese, an apologist for the Roman
church in The Faith Explained (Notre Dame: Fides
Publishers, 1971), p. 243: ‘Nothing is said in the Bible
about a change of the Lord’s day from Saturday to
Sunday. We know of the change only from the
tradition of the [Catholic] Church—a fact handed down
to us from earliest times by the living voice of the
[Catholic] Church. That is why we find so illogical the
attitude of many non-Catholics, who say that they will
believe nothing unless they can find it in the Bible and
yet will continue to keep Sunday as the Lord’s day
on the say-so of the Catholic Church.’” Wieland,
GIR, 100, 101.

Here is Wisdom.—
“Compare the phrase, ‘here is the mind which
hath wisdom’ (ch. 17:9). The wisdom here commended is doubtless that to which Paul refers in Eph.
1:17.
Only by divine enlightenment will men
understand the mysteries of the Word of God.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 823.
“But the wisdom that is from above is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy.” James 3:17.
Understanding.—
“The entrance of thy words giveth light: it giveth
understanding unto the simple.” Ps. 199:130.
“The knowledge of the holy is understanding.”
Prov. 9:10.
“I have more understanding than all my teachers:
for thy testimonies are my meditation.” Ps. 119:99.
Number of the Beast: It is the Number of a Man.—
“The beast represents a human organization.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 824.

Name of the Beast.—
“In the Bible, the word ‘name’ is commonly
associated with character. When God proclaimed His
‘name’ in Exodus 34, He proclaimed His character as
compassionate and kind. . . . We conclude, therefore,
that inasmuch as the mark of the beast is the same as the
name of the beast (Rev. 13:17), people who will carry
the mark of the beast will be people who, like the beast,
not only rebel against God and His dwelling [heavenly

“And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with
fire: and them that gotten the victory over the beast,
and over his image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his name [a third group], stand on the sea of
glass, having the harps of God.” Revelation 15:2.
Six Hundred Threescore and Six.—
“And she [Queen of Sheba] gave the king an

357

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Son of God is renewing the Passion of his Master upon
earth, therefore we are scandalized, therefore we turn
our faces from him.’ [Cardinal Manning, The Temporal
Power of the Year of the Vicar of Jesus Christ, pp. 140,
141.] (Italic ours.)
“Several other variations of this title are used
elsewhere in the same book.
“On the importance of the pope’s position as
indicated by the title under consideration, or its
equivalents, we quote from J. A. Wylie, in his comment
on the Apology of Ennodius written in defense of Pope
Symmachus:
“ ‘We find the council [of Rome, AD 502 or 503]
convoked by Theodoric demurring to investigate the
charges alleged against Pope Symmachus, on the
grounds set forth by his apologist Ennodius, which
were, “that the Pope, as God’s Vicar, was the judge of
all, and could himself be judged by no one.'” 'In this
apology,' remarks Mosheim, 'the reader will perceive
that the foundations of that enormous power which the
popes of Rome afterwards acquired were now laid.' " [J.
A. Wylie, The Papacy, pp. 35, 36.]
“In recent years, the validity of this title has been
questioned, but historical evidence remains that this
arrogated title has served to support the authority of the
popes in building up their vast temporal supremacy
during the heyday of Romanism in medieval times, and
in maintaining their spiritual authority to this day.
“The particular title Vicarius Filii Dei appeared as
early as 752-774 in a document historically known as
the ‘Donation of Constantine.’ Though this document
was later proved to have been written by someone else
and signed with the name of Constantine the Great to
give it the weight of his authority—a practice not
uncommon in medieval times—yet this so-called
Donation of Constantine was used as valid by at least
nine of the popes over a period of seven centuries or
more in establishing the spiritual and temporal
supremacy of the bishops of Rome.
“The title itself was obviously an invention to
designate the office of Peter as the first pope in harmony
with the widely known claim of the Roman Catholic
Church that the words of Jesus in Matthew 16: 18, 19,
conferred upon Peter the first bishopric of the church--a
view which Protestants have never allowed—and that
this bishopric descended to his successors in the papal
seat, as stated in the Donation of Constantine and
maintained by the church to this day. [See Christopher
Coleman, Constantine the Great and Christianity,
p.178.]
“The document employing the title was confirmed
by a church council, says Binius, a high Roman
Catholic dignitary of Cologne, quoted by Labbe and
Cossart. [P. Labbe and G. Cossart, Sacrosancta
Concilia, Vol. 1, col. 1539-1541.] It was incorporated in
Roman Catholic canon law by Gratian, and when this
last-named work was revised and published, with
endorsement by Pope Gregory XIII, the title was
retained. [Corpus Juris Canonici, 1622.] When Lucius
Ferraris wrote his elaborate theological work about

hundred twenty talents of gold….
“Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon
in one year was six hundred and threescore and six
talents of gold. Besides that which chapmen and
merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and
governors of the country brought gold and silver to
Solomon.” 2 Chronicles 9:9,13,14.
His Number is Six Hundred Threescore and Six.—
“The number of the beast, says the prophecy, ‘is
the number of a man.’ If it is to be derived from a name
or title, the natural conclusion would be that it must be
the name or title of some particular or representative
man. The most plausible expression we have seen
suggested as containing the number of the beast, is one
of the titles applied to the pope of Rome. That title is
this: Vicarius Filii Dei, ‘Vicegerent of the Son of God.’
It is worthy of note that the Douay Version of the Bible
has the following comment on Revelation 13: 18: ‘The
numeral letters of his name shall make up this number.’
Taking the letters out of this title which are used as
Roman numerals, we have V, 5; I, 1; C, 100; I, 1; U
(formerly the same as V), 5; I, 1; L, 50; I, 1; I, 1; D,
500; I, 1.
“Adding these numbers together we have 666.
“It has been argued that the title of the popes
should be reckoned according to the Greek gematria,
since John wrote in Greek, but since the title appears in
Latin, and Latin is the official language of the Church of
Rome and the language of its adopted Bible, the
Vulgate, such a procedure would destroy the numerical
value of that title in its own language. It would seem
reasonable that a Latin title should exhibit its Latin
numerical values rather than Greek values.
“As to the practice of representing names by
numbers we read: ‘It was a method practiced among the
ancients, to denote names by numbers.’ [Matthew
Henry, Commentary, Vol. III, p. 1065, note on
Revelation 13:18.]
“ ‘Representing numbers by letters of the alphabet
gave rise to a practice among the ancients of
representing names also by numbers. Examples of this
kind abound in the writings of heathens, Jews, and
Christians.’ [Adam Clarke, Commentary on the New
Testament, Vol. II, p. 1025, note on Revelation 13: 18.]
“…This title, Vicarius Filii Dei, or some
equivalent form of it, has appeared so frequently in
Roman Catholic literature and rituals for centuries, that
it scarcely seems necessary to add other proof of its
validity and importance. Some of the variations of the
title are: Vicar of Christ, Vicar of Jesus Christ, Vicar of
God. A quotation from the noted Cardinal Manning
illustrates these various forms of the same title:
“ ‘So in like manner they say now, "See this
Catholic Church, this Church of God, feeble and weak,
rejected even by the very nations called Catholics.
There is Catholic France, and Catholic Germany, and
Catholic Italy, giving up this exploded figment of the
temporal power of the Vicar of Jesus Christ.” And so,
because the Church seems weak, and the Vicar of the

358

REVELATION 13
1755, he gave under the article “‘Papa’ the title Vicarius
Filii Dei, and cited the revised canon law as his
authority. Again when Ferraris’s work was revised and
enlarged, and published in Rome in 1890, the document
and title were still retained. [Lucius Ferraris, Prompta
Bibliotheca (Rome 1890), Vol. VI, p. 43, col.2.]
“Of Ferraris’s theological work just cited, the
Catholic Encylopedia says that it ‘will ever remain a
precious mine of information.’ [Catholic Encyclopedia
(1913), Vol. VI, p. 49, art., ‘Ferraris.’]
“We quote herewith from the Latin of the
Donation of Constantine, confirmed by a church
council, incorporated in Roman Catholic canon law, and
cited by Ferraris:
“‘Ut sicut Beatus Petrus in terris Vicarius Filii Dei
fuit constitutus, ita et Pontifices eius successores in
terris principatus postestatem amplius, quam terrenae
imperialis nostrae serenitatis mansuetudo habere
videtur.’ [Lucius Ferraris, Prompta Bibliotheca (Edition
of 1890), art., ‘Papa,’ II, Vol. VI, p. 43.]
“Christopher Coleman translates this paragraph
from the Canon law of Gratian as follows:
“ ‘As the blessed Peter is seen to have been
constituted Vicar of the Son of God on the earth, so the
pontiffs who are the representatives of that same chief
of the apostles, should obtain from us and our empire
the power of a supremacy greater than the clemency of
our earthly imperial serenity.’ [Christopher B. Coleman,
The Treatise of Lorenzo Valla on the Donation of
Constantine, p. 13.]
“A freer translation by Edwin Lee Johnson,
professor of Latin and Greek, Vanderbilt University,
reads: ‘Just as the Blessed Peter was appointed on earth
vicar of the Son of God, so also it seems that the
Pontiffs, his successors, hold on earth the power of the
chief rule rather than (that) His Excellency, His Imperial
Serene Highness on earth, (should hold it).’” Smith,
DR, 619-623.

Beast, and of his Image, in their foreheads or in their
hands,’ could not buy or sell. [Rev. 13:15-17.] I saw
that the number (666) of the Image Beast was made
up; [Rev. 13:18.] and that it was the Beast that changed
the Sabbath, and the Image Beast had followed on after,
and kept the Pope’s, and not God’s Sabbath. And all we
were required to do, was to give up God’s Sabbath, and
keep the Pope’s, and then we should have the mark of
the Beast, and of his image.” Word to Little Flock, 19.
“IMAGE OF PAPACY: The two lamb-like
horns, (Republicanism & Protestantism,) whose
names number 666, become united in action, speak
like a DRAGON, and control the civil legislature, and
cause it to make the CHURCH the IMAGE of papacy
which received a deadly wound and was healed. Rev.
17:13,14 quoted:” James White, 1851 Chart.
“Little children, it is the last time: and as ye
have heard that anti-christ shall come, even now are
there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the
last time. They went out from us, but they were not of
us.” 1 John 2:18,19.
“As the storm approaches, a large class who have
professed faith in the third angel’s message, but have
not been sanctified through obedience to the truth,
abandon their position and join the ranks of the
opposition. By uniting with the world and par-taking of
its spirit, they have come to view matters in nearly the
same light; and when the test is brought, they are
prepared to choose the easy, popular side. Men of
talent and pleasing address, who once rejoiced in the
truth, employ their powers to deceive and mislead souls.
They become the most bitter enemies of their former
brethren. When Sabbathkeepers are brought before the
courts to answer for their faith, these apostates are the
most efficient agents of Satan to misrepresent and
accuse them, and by false reports and insinuations to
stir up the rulers against them.” Great Controversy,
608

ALTERNATIVE VIEW:
“John saw a sea of glass mingled with fire, and
them that had got the victory over the beast, and over
his image, and over his mark, and over the NUMBER
of his name, standing on that sea of glass, having the
harps of God. The Greek word, ARITHMOS, here
translated ‘number’, is also thus defined: a mob, a
worthless multitude, a herd; and some have suggested
that these sects make up the number of six hundred
threescore and six, which is ascribed to the
Antichrist beast: and I confess that the idea of
getting the victory over the WORTHLESS
MULTITUDE of the beast, looks to me far more
consistent, and far more likely to be ascribed by
inspiration to the mind that hath wisdom and
understanding, than the usual idea of getting the victory
over the Hebrew, Greek, or Roman letters whose
numerical value amounts to 666.” Fitch, Second Advent
of Christ, 7/26/1843.

This Prophecy Continues With Revelation 14:1-5.—
“Thus closes chapter 13, leaving the people of
God with the powers of earth in deadly array against
them, and the decrees of death and banishment from
society upon them for their adherence to the
commandments of God. Spiritism will be, at the time
specified, performing its most imposing wonders,
deceiving all the world except the elect. Matthew
24:24; 2 Thess. 2:8-12. This will be the ‘hour of
temptation,’ or trial, which is to come, as the closing
test, upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the
earth, as mentioned in Revelation 3:10. What is the
issue of this conflict? This important inquiry is not left
unanswered. The first five verses of the following
chapter, complete the chain of this prophecy, and
reveal the glorious triumph of the champions of the
truth.” Smith, DR, 623.

“I saw all that ‘would not receive the mark of the

359

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Chapter 13 closes with the account of those who
worship the beast in forehead or in hand, signifying
either voluntary or involuntary worship of the anti-God
power. The description of this group is followed
immediately by a description of the people loyal to
God—the 144,000 who followed the Lamb wherever
He goes. The contrast is radical and dramatic, the
literary device is powerful.” BRI, 2SOR, 13.

(Rev. 16:13-14)
(Rev. 14:6-12)
The Great City,
The Holy City,
Babylon
New Jerusalem
(Rev. 17:5)
(Rev. 21:10)
The great supper of God
The marriage supper of
(Rev. 19:11-21)
the Lamb (Rev. 19:6-9)
The dragon, beast, and
The Father, Son, and
false prophet (Rev. 16:13)
Holy Spirit (Rev. 1:4-8)
The Mark of the beast
The Seal of God
(Rev. 13:16-18; 14:9)
(Rev. 7:2,3; 14:1)
From: Swearingen, TOOTN, 60,61.

SATAN’S COUNTERFEITS OF TRUTH
TRUTH
COUNTERFEIT
The Harlot (Rev. 17:1)
The pure woman (Rev.
12:1)
The Three Unclean Spirits
The 3 Angels Messages

360

REVELATION 14

REVELATION 14
REVELATION 14:1-20

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 14.—

1 And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and
with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's
name written in their foreheads.
2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters,
and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of
harpers harping with their harps:
3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and
before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn
that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which
were redeemed from the earth.
4 These are they which were not defiled with women; for they
are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the
firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb.
5 And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without
fault before the throne of God.
6 And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth,
and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,
7 Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for
the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made
heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.
8 And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the
wine of the wrath of her fornication.
9 And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice,
If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark
in his forehead, or in his hand,
10 The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which
is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of
the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb:
11 And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and
ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast
and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name.
12 Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
13 And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea,
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their
works do follow them.
14 And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud
one sat like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden
crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
15 And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a
loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and
reap: for the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the
earth is ripe.
16 And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth;
and the earth was reaped.
17 And another angel came out of the temple which is in
heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.
18 And another angel came out from the altar, which had
power over fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the
sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the
clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.
19 And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and
gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress
of the wrath of God.
20 And the winepress was trodden without the city, and blood
came out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the
space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.

“The significance of this chapter will be missed
unless we view it in relation to chapters 12 and 13.
John is watching the preparations for the final battle
between two great opposing powers. The enemy of all
righteousness is marshaling his strength against God’s
loyal remnant. Even America, the champion of
freedom, will forget her history. With such a
combination of evil, and all the world acclaiming the
greatness of the beast and his image, how can true
Christianity possibly survive?” Anderson, UR, 147.

T H E 1 4 4, 0 0 0
REVELATION 14:1
And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on
the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
forty and four thousand, having his
Father’s name written in their foreheads.
And I Looked.—
“Rev. 14:1-5 is closely connected with ch. 13:1118. The 144,000 are here shown with the Lamb on Mt.
Zion to indicate their triumph over the beast and his
image. Earlier John had seen them passing through the
severest trial:
he had seen them boycotted and
condemned as worthy of death. But in their darkest
hour they were delivered and are now with the Lamb,
eternally secure from the conflicts of earth.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 825.
Lo, A Lamb Stood.—
“The One whom Lucifer had held before the eyes
of the world as a cruel despot, stands a Lamb on Mount
Zion. He is no longer the slain Lamb once seen before
the throne, but the King in His beauty, the true
Conqueror, who has triumphed by the power of truth.
He, who might have uttered a single word, and the
enemy of truth would have been blotted out of
existence, chose rather to be exalted through
suffering. Love is the ruler of the universe; ‘love never
faileth,’ and through six thousand years of conflict, it
has come forth victorious with garments unsullied.”
Haskell, SSP, 246.
Stood.—
“And at that time shall Michael stand up, the
great prince which standeth for the children of thy
people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as
never was since there was a nation even to that same
time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered,

361

GEMS FROM REVELATION
every one that shall be found written in the book.”
Daniel 12:1.

“And I heard the number of them which were
sealed: and there were sealed an hundred and forty
and four thousand of all the tribes of the children of
Israel.” Rev. 7:4.

“To ‘stand’ means to reign as a king. See
Daniel 11:3—“And a mighty king shall stand up, that
shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his
will.” PJ

“Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Or
who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean
hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his
soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.” Ps. 24:4,5.

Mount Zion.—
“Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth,
is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the
great King.” Psalm 48:2.
“The LORD also shall roar out of Zion, and utter
his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth
shall shake: but the LORD will be the hope of his
people, and the strength of the children of Israel. So
shall ye know that I am the LORD your God dwelling in
Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy,
and there shall no strangers pass through her any more.”
Joel 3:16,17.
“And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall
call on the name of the LORD shall be delivered: for in
mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as
the LORD hath said, and in the remnant whom the
LORD shall call.” Joel 2:32.

“LORD, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? Who
shall dwell in thy holy hill?
“He that walketh uprightly, and worketh
righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart.
He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil
to his neighbor, nor taketh up a reproach against his
neighbor. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned;
but he honoreth them that fear the LORD. He that
sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not. He that
putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh
reward against the innocent. He that doeth these
things shall never be moved.” Psalm 15
“The 144,000 here seen on Mount Zion are the
saints who were just before brought to view as
objects of the wrath of the beast and his image. They
are identical with those sealed, as described in
Revelation 7, who have already been shown to be the
righteous who are alive at the second coming of Christ.”
Smith, DR, 626.

“On what Mount Zion does John see this company
standing? —The Mount Zion above; for the voice of
harpers, which no doubt is uttered by these very ones, is
heard from heaven; the same Zion from which the Lord
utters his voice when he speaks to his people in close
connection with the coming of the Son of man. Joel
3:16; Hebrews 12:26-28; Revelation 15:17. A just
consideration of the fact that there is a Mount Zion in
heaven, and a Jerusalem above, would be a powerful
antidote for the false doctrine of a second probation
and a millennium of peace on earth.” Smith, DR, 626.

“John saw these surrounding the Saviour on the
Mount of God—‘the mount of the congregation, in
the sides of the North,’ where Satan once stood, and
where he attempted to raise a throne for himself. The
one hundred and forty-four thousand occupy the
place once filled by Lucifer and his angels. Oh what a
commentary to the universe on the glorious triumph of
truth over error! of love over selfishness!” Haskell,
SSP, 248.

“According to Isa. 8:18 ‘the Lord of hosts’
‘dwelleth in Mount Zion.’ It is therefore the
dwelling place of God. It is the place where God
reigns and is therefore associated with the heavenly
Jerusalem. See Isa. 24:23; Heb. 12:22. It is the
headquarters of the government of God which rules the
universe. It has no reference whatever to the earthly
Mount Zion on which the Temple of Solomon was built.
The fact that the 144,000 are with Christ at the very
headquarters of His kingdom of glory indicates that they
occupy high positions. This is also proven by the fact
that they are said to be ‘before the throne of God’
where they ‘stand on the sea of glass.’ See also Rev.
15: 2,3. The sea of glass is the pavement of the throne
room.” Bunch, TR, 191.

“Upon the crystal sea before the throne, that sea of
glass as it were mingled with fire—so resplendent is it
with the glory of God—are gathered the company that
have ‘gotten the victory over the beast, and over his
image, and over his mark, and over the number of
his name.’ With the Lamb upon Mount Zion, ‘having
the harps of God,’ they stand, the hundred and forty
and four thousand that were redeemed from among
men; and there is heard, as the sound of many waters,
and as the sound of a great thunder, ‘the voice of
harpers harping with their harps.’ And they sing ‘a
new song’ before the throne, a song which no man can
learn save the hundred and forty and four thousand. It is
the song of Moses and the Lamb—a song of
deliverance. None but the hundred and forty-four
thousand can learn that song; for it is the song of their
experience—an experience such as no other company
have ever had. ‘These are they which follow the
Lamb whithersoever He goeth.’ These, having been

“This is a picture of the spiritual temple. Jesus
Christ, the Lamb, is the precious Cornerstone, while the
144,000 are the connected living stones—built up a
spiritual house. See 1 Peter 2:4-6, Rev. 3:12..” PJ
An Hundred Forty and Four Thousand.—

362

REVELATION 14
translated from the earth, from among the living, are
counted as ‘the first fruits unto God and to the
Lamb.’ Revelation 15:2, 3; 14:1-5. ‘These are they
which came out of great tribulation;’ they have
passed through the time of trouble such as never was
since there was a nation; they have endured the anguish
of the time of Jacob's trouble; they have stood without
an intercessor through the final outpouring of God's
judgments. But they have been delivered, for they have
‘washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb.’ ‘In their mouth was found no
guile: for they are without fault’ before God.
‘Therefore are they before the throne of God, and
serve Him day and night in His temple: and He that
sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.’ They
have seen the earth wasted with famine and pestilence,
the sun having power to scorch men with great heat, and
they themselves have endured suffering, hunger, and
thirst. But ‘they shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor
any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto
living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.’ Rev. 7:14-17.” Great
Controversy, 648,649.

turned from their loyalty by the dragon's roar. Now
they are eternally secure from the tempter's devices.
Their sins are transferred to the originator of sin. A
‘fair miter’ is set upon their heads.
“While Satan has been urging his accusations, holy
angels, unseen, have been passing to and fro, placing
upon the faithful ones the seal of the living God.
These are they that stand upon Mount Zion with the
Lamb, having the Father’s name written in their
foreheads.” Prophets & Kings, 591.
“Said the true Witness to the Philadelphia church,
‘Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and
I will WRITE UPON HIM THE NAME OF MY
GOD.’ Where? ‘In their FOREHEADS,’ just where
John saw the ‘Father’s name.’ Now just as sure as the
Philadelphia church is the true church of the last days,
just so sure the 144,000 are sealed, just before the
coming of the Lord.” White, James, The 144,000,
Advent Review, 9/1850.
“They have the name of the Lamb’s Father in their
foreheads. In chapter 7, they are said to have the seal of
God in their foreheads. An important key to an
understanding of the seal of God is thus furnished us;
for we at once perceive that the Father regards His
name as his seal. That commandment of the law
which contains God’s name is therefore the seal of
the law. The Sabbath commandment is the only one
which has this; that is, that contains the descriptive title
which distinguishes the true God from all false gods.
Wherever this was placed, there the Father’s name
was said to be. (Deut.12:5,14,18,21; 14:23; 16:2,6;
etc.); and whoever keeps this commandment has,
consequently, the seal of the living God.” Smith, DR
(1897), 509.

Father’s Name Written in Their Foreheads.—
“The only hope of any man lies through Jesus
Christ.... The pure and holy garments are not prepared
to be put on by any one after he has entered the gate of
the city. All who enter will have on the robe of
Christ’s righteousness, and the name of God will be
seen in their foreheads. This name is the symbol
which the apostle saw in vision, and signifies the
yielding of the mind to intelligent and loyal
obedience to all of God’s commandments.” Son &
Daughters, 370.
“In all you do, let your thought be, ‘Is this the way
of the Lord? Will this please my Saviour? He gave His
life for me; what can I give back to God? I can only
say, “Of Thine own, O lord, I freely give Thee.”’
Unless the name of God is written in your
forehead—written there because God is the center of
your thoughts—you will not be meet for the
inheritance in light.” Counsels on Stewardship, 46.

“The 144,000 have reached a stage of spiritual
development in which their characters have become like
Christ’s character. They have reached a stage of
character development where they are ready for
translation. The 144,000, by the grace of God have
reached perfection or maturity of Christian
character. In the last days God sets himself to
produce a group of people that reflect His image and
the outward sign of this will be the true observance of
the seventh-day Sabbath. ‘I gave them my Sabbaths
to be a sign between me and them, that they might
know that I am the Lord that sanctify them.’ Ezek.
20:12.” Cooke, #22-UR, 4.

“As the people of God afflict their souls before
Him, pleading for purity of heart, the command is
given, ‘Take away the filthy garments,’ and the
encouraging words are spoken, ‘Behold, I have caused
thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe
thee with change of raiment.’ Zechariah 3:4. The
spotless robe of Christ’s righteousness is placed upon
the tried, tempted, faithful children of God. The
despised remnant are clothed in glorious apparel,
nevermore to be defiled by the corruptions of the world.
Their names are retained in the Lamb’s book of life,
enrolled among the faithful of all ages. They have
resisted the wiles of the deceiver; they have not been

“John saw a Lamb on Mount Zion, and with Him
144,000 having His Father’s name written in their
foreheads. They bore the signet of heaven. They
reflected the image of God. They were full of the light
and the glory of the Holy One. If we would have the
image and superscription of God upon us, we must
separate ourselves from all iniquity. We must
forsake every evil way, and then we must trust our

363

GEMS FROM REVELATION
cases in the hands of Christ.”
3/19/1889). 7BC, 978.

and four thousand. It is the song of Moses and the
Lamb —a song of deliverance. None but the hundred
and forty-four thousand can learn that song; for it is
the song of their experience—an experience such as
no other company have ever had. ‘These are they
which follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.’
These, having been translated from the earth, from
among the living, are counted as ‘the first fruits unto
God and to the Lamb.’ Revelation 15:2, 3; 14:1-5.”
Great Controversy, 648.

(Review & Herald,

“Thou holdest fast my name, and hast not
denied my faith.” Rev. 2:13.

REVELATION 14:2
And I heard a voice from heaven, as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of a
great thunder: and I heard the voice of
harpers harping with their harps:

“They sing a new song which no other company is
able to learn. In chapter 15:3, it is called the song of
Moses and the song of the Lamb. The song of Moses,
as may be seen by reference to Ex. 15, was the song of
his experience and deliverance. Therefore the song of
the 144,000 is the song of their deliverance. No others
can join in it; for no other company will have had an
experience like theirs.” Smith, DR (1897), 510.

A Voice from Heaven, As the Voice of Many Waters;
the Voice of a Great Thunder; the Voice of Harpers
Harping.—
“It sounds like the voice of Jesus. See Rev. 1:15.
Babylon tries to imitate it. See Jer. 51:55.” PJ.
“With the Lamb upon Mount Zion, ‘having the
harps of God,’ they stand, the hundred and forty and
four thousand that were redeemed from among men;
and there is heard, as the sound of many waters, and as
the sound of a great thunder, ‘the voice of harpers
harping with their harps’ [Rev. 14:1-4; 15:2].” Great
Controversy, 648.

“The reason why none but the 144,000 can learn or
sing this song, will be because the history and
deliverance of no other class will be like those who
pass through the time of trouble, and are changed ‘at
the twinkling of an eye’ at the coming of the Lord.”
White, James, The 144,000, Advent Review, 9/1850.
“The sinner could not be happy in the
companionship of the saints in light, with Jesus, with
the Lord of hosts; for on every side will be heard the
song of praise and thanksgiving; and honor will be
ascribed to the Father and the Son. A song will be
raised that the unsanctified, unholy ones have never
learned, and it will be out of harmony with their
depraved tastes and desires. It will be unbearable to
them.” Review & Herald, 2/17/91.

Harping (View of Angels Harping).—
“I have been shown the order, the perfect order,
of heaven, and have been enraptured as I listened to the
perfect music there. After coming out of vision, the
singing here has sounded very harsh and discordant. I
have seen companies of angels, who stood in a hollow
square, everyone having a harp of gold. At the end of
the harp was an instrument to turn to set the harp or
change the tunes. Their fingers did not sweep over the
strings carelessly, but they touched different strings to
produce different sounds. There is one angel who
always leads, who first touches the harp and strikes
the note, then all join in the rich, perfect music of
heaven. It cannot be described. It is melody, heavenly,
divine, while from every countenance beams the
image of Jesus, shining with glory unspeakable.” 1
Testimonies, 146.

(See also comments under Revelation 15:3.)
Which Were Redeemed From the Earth.—
“By faith Enoch ‘was translated that he should
not see death; ...for before his translation he had this
testimony, that he pleased God.’ Hebrews 11:5. In
the midst of a world by its iniquity doomed to
destruction, Enoch lived a life of such close communion
with God that he was not permitted to fall under the
power of death. The godly character of this prophet
represents the state of holiness which must be
attained by those who shall be ‘redeemed from the
earth’ (Revelation 14:3) at the time of Christ’s second
advent. Then, as in the world before the Flood, iniquity
will prevail. Following the promptings of their corrupt
hearts and the teachings of a deceptive philosophy, men
will rebel against the authority of Heaven. But like
Enoch, God’s people will seek for purity of heart and
conformity to His will, until they shall reflect the
likeness of Christ. Like Enoch, they will warn the
world of the Lord’s second coming and of the
judgments to be visited upon transgression, and by their
holy conversation and example they will condemn the

REVELATION 14:3
And they sung as it were a new song
before the throne, and before the four
beasts, and the elders: and no man could
learn that song but the hundred and forty
and four thousand, which were redeemed
from the earth.
A New Song That No Man Can Learn.—
“And they sing ‘a new song’ before the throne, a
song which no man can learn save the hundred and forty

364

REVELATION 14
sins of the ungodly. As Enoch was translated to
heaven before the destruction of the world by water,
so the living righteous will be translated from the
earth before its destruction by fire. Says the apostle:
‘We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump.’ ‘For the Lord Himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel,
and with the trump of God;’ ‘the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed.’ ‘The dead in Christ shall
rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with
the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these
words.’ 1 Cor. 15:51, 52; 1 Thess. 4:16-18.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 88,89.

Advent Review, 9/1850.
“Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk
in the law of the LORD.” Psalm 119:1.
“A woman is in Scripture the symbol of a church,
a virtuous woman representing a pure church, a corrupt
woman an apostate church. It is, then, a characteristic
of this company that at the time of their deliverance
they are not defiled with, or have no connection with,
the fallen churches of the land. Yet we are not to
understand that they never had any connection with
these churches; for it is only at a certain time that people
become defiled by them. In chapter 18:4, we find a call
issued to the people of God while they are in Babylon,
to come out, lest they become partakers of her sins.
Heeding that call, and leaving her connection, they
escape the defilement of her sins. So of the 144,000;
though some of them may have once had a connection
with corrupt churches, they sever that connection
when it would become sin to retain it longer.” Smith,
DR (1897), 510.

“The statements ‘redeemed from the earth’ and
‘redeemed from among men’ doubtless indicate
translation from the earth without experiencing
death, which of course is another wonderful privilege.
In 1 Thess. 4:15-17, ‘we which are alive and remain
unto the coming of the Lord’ are ‘caught up
together’ with the resurrected saints ‘to meet the Lord
in the air.’ There are only two ways to reach heaven,
by a translation or a resurrection. We are told that ‘by
faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death,’ (Heb. 11:5). This happened because ‘he
pleased God.’ His nobility of character as he ‘walked
with God’ qualified him for translation.
In all
definitions of translation it is made clear that it means to
be removed to heaven ‘without the intervening
experience of death.’ No person who has ever died can
experience translation.” Bunch, TR, 193.

“The glory of God rested upon the patient, waiting
saints, and they fearlessly gave the last solemn warning,
proclaiming the fall of Babylon and calling upon God’s
people to come out of her that they might escape her
fearful doom…. Servants of God, endowed with power
from on high with their faces lighted up, and shining
with holy consecration, went forth to proclaim the
message from heaven. Souls that were scattered all
through the religious bodies answered to the call, and
the precious were hurried out of the doomed
churches, as Lot was hurried out of Sodom before her
destruction.” Early Writings, 278,279.
For They Are Virgins.—
“Paul wrote: ‘I have espoused you to one
Husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin
to Christ.’ (2 Cor. 11:2). Those who ‘have purified
their souls in obeying the truth’ (1 Pet. 1:22) have
fellowship with Jesus, they become eternally united to
Him. It is because the ten virgins in the parable of Matt.
25:1-13 have a pure faith, as they wait for the coming
of Jesus the Bridegroom, that they are said to be
‘virgins.’” Were, 144,000 Sealed!, 86.

REVELATION 14:4
These are they which were not defiled
with women; for they are virgins. These are
they which follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goeth. These were redeemed from among
men, being the firstfruits unto God and to
the Lamb.
Not Defiled With Women.—
“A woman is used as a symbol of the church.
See Rev. 12:1-6; 17:1-6. The woman arrayed in purple
and scarlet-color, on whose ‘forehead was a name
written MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE
MOTHER OF HARLOTS,’ is the Catholic Church.
Her harlot daughters must therefore be the Protestant
sects. They are the women with whom the 144,000 are
‘not defiled.’ Why not defiled with them? Because
they obey the voice from heaven, saying, ‘Come out
of her, my people, that ye be not PARTAKERS OF
HER SINS, [be defiled] and that ye receive not of her
plagues.’ Ch. 18:4.” White, James, The 144,000,

“To be chaste means to keep oneself pure from
apostasy, to refuse to worship the beast or receive its
mark, even under pressure of death.” Biblical Research
Inst., 1SOR, 273.
“‘Virgins’ as used here has reference to spiritual
rather than literal celibacy.
Marriage is never
considered sinful and does not ‘defile.’
“The true church of Christ is represented in
Scripture as a ‘virgin’ and the individual members as
‘virgins.’ See 2 Cor. 11:2; Matt. 25:1. Virginity is the
symbol of both physical and spiritual purity in life and
conduct. The 144,000 have the name of God in their

365

GEMS FROM REVELATION
foreheads indicating godly characters. They ‘keep the
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.’ We
are told that those who ‘walk in the law of the Lord’
are ‘undefiled,’ and that the disobedient defile
themselves and others. See Ps. 119:1; Isa. 24:5; Titus
1:15. All through the Scriptures unfaithfulness to God
is represented as spiritual fornication and adultery. See
2 Chron. 21:11; Jer. 3:8,9; Hosea 1:2; 2:2; Rev. 17:1-5.
Moral uncleanness has always been a part of paganism.
The 144,000 get complete victory over impurity of
mind and body during the most licentious age of all
history, comparable only to the days of Noah and Lot.
They will pass triumphantly through the antitype of
the Baal-Peor experience of ancient Israel just before
they entered the promised land….
“Is it any wonder that those called out of Babylon
are called ‘virgins’? We are told that only ‘the pure in
heart’ will see God and that ‘the seal of God will never
be placed upon the forehead of an impure man or
woman,’ (5 Testimonies, 216.) The 144,000 are
complete victors over both literal and spiritual
harlotry.” Bunch, TR, 192.

at the same time, says, ‘For the Lamb which is in the
midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead
them unto living fountains of waters.’” Smith, DR
(1897), 510.
“This is evidently a privilege not accorded to all
the redeemed.
Christ will doubtless visit the
unnumbered millions of unfallen worlds which He has
created, and will take with Him this special temple choir
and orchestra of harpists, who, because of their
experience in redeeming love can sing the song of
redemption as none others can sing it. This will help
make possible the promise that ‘affliction shall not rise
up the second time.’ In a special sense the 144,000
may represent the bride of Christ, whom He takes with
Him on a wedding tour of the universe, a privilege
granted them because they have gone through
experiences more like that of Christ than any others, so
that they are more like Him in character.” Bunch, TR,
193.
“Upon the north side of the holy place stood the
golden table, bearing its twelve loaves of bread. This
bread was called ‘bread of the presence.’ Ex. 25:30.
(Young’s Trans.) Christ is the ‘living bread,’ who ever
liveth to make intercession for His people. As the bread
was ever before the Lord, so Christ ever liveth in the
presence of the Father, as the representative of fallen
man. The twelve loaves into which the bread was
divided, represented the twelve tribes of ancient Israel,
and also the twelve thousand of each of the twelve
tribes which form the one hundred and forty-four
thousand, who follow the Lamb wheresoever He
goeth.” Haskell, SSP, 366,367.

They Follow the Lamb Whithersoever He Goeth.—
“The lesson is for all time. We are to follow the
Lamb of God whithersoever He goeth. His guidance is
to be chosen, His companionship valued above the
companionship of earthly friends. Christ says, ‘He that
loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy
of Me, and he that loveth son or daughter more than
Me is not worthy of Me.’ Matt. 10:37.” Christ’s
Object Lessons, 223.
“The Lord has a people on the earth, who
follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth. He has
His thousands who have not bowed the knee to Baal.
Such will stand with Him on Mount Zion. But they
must stand on this earth, girded with the whole armor,
ready to engage in the work of saving those who are
ready to perish. Heavenly angels conduct this search,
and spiritual activity is demanded of all who believe
present truth, that they may join the angels in their
work.
“We need not wait till we are translated to
follow Christ. God’s people may do this here below.
We shall follow the Lamb of God in the courts above
only if we follow Him here. Following Him in heaven
depends on our keeping His commandments now. We
are not to follow Christ fitfully or capriciously, only
when it is for our advantage.
“We must choose to follow Him. In daily life we
must follow His example, as a flock trustfully follows
its shepherd. We are to follow Him by suffering for His
sake, saying, at every step, ‘Though he slay me, yet
will I trust in him.’ His life practice must be our life
practice. And as we thus seek to be like Him, and to
bring our wills into conformity to His will, we shall
reveal Him.” (Review & Herald, 4/12/1898). 7BC, 978.

Redeemed From Among Men.—
“Not out of their graves; no, no—“FROM
AMONG MEN.’ They must, therefore, be the living
saints who are changed to immortality at the coming of
the Lord. The sleeping saints are not ‘among men.’
Those who came out of their graves at the time of the
first Advent were not among men. No, they were in the
silent grave. …The 144,000 are on the earth, ‘among
men’ [the wicked], at the coming of Christ, and at the
‘voice of the archangel’ they are changed in a moment,
and are ‘caught up’ FROM AMONG MEN to ‘meet
the Lord.’” White, James, The 144,000, Advent
Review, 9/1850.
“They are ‘redeemed from among men’ (verse
4), an expression which can be applicable only to those
who are translated from among the living. Paul labored,
if by any means he might attain to a resurrection out
from among the dead. Phil.3:11. This is the hope of
those who sleep in Jesus—a resurrection from the dead.
A redemption from among men, from among the living
must mean a different thing, and can mean only one
thing, and that is translation. Hence the 144,000 are
the living saints, who will be translated at the second
coming of Christ. (See on verse 13, note.)” Smith, DR

“Chapter 7:17, speaking of the same company and

366

REVELATION 14
came out of great tribulation;’ they have passed
through the time of trouble such as never was since
there was a nation; they have endured the anguish of the
time of Jacob’s trouble; they have stood without an
intercessor through the final outpouring of God’s
judgments.” Great Controversy, 649.

(1897), 509.
“Elijah, who was translated without seeing
death, represented those who will be changed to
immortality at Christ’s second coming, and will be
translated to heaven without seeing death.” Early
Writings, 164.

“ ‘The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance.’ Gal. 5:22, 23. This fruit can never
perish, but will produce after its kind a harvest unto
eternal life.
“ ‘When the fruit is brought forth, immediately
he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.’
Christ is waiting with longing desire for the
manifestation of Himself in His church. When the
character of Christ shall be perfectly reproduced in
His people, then He will come to claim them as His
own.
“It is the privilege of every Christian not only to
look for but to hasten the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (2 Peter 3:12, margin). Were all who profess
His name bearing fruit to His glory, how quickly the
whole world would be sown with the seed of the gospel.
Quickly the last great harvest would be ripened, and
Christ would come to gather the precious grain.”
Christ’s Object Lessons, 68,69.

Firstfruits Unto God and to the Lamb.—
“The first fruits in this text do not refer to the
type—the ‘sheaf of the first fruits of the harvest,’
which the priest waved before the Lord ‘on the morrow
after the Sabbath.’ Lev. 23:10-12. That was fulfilled
in Christ. ‘Christ the first fruits; afterward they that
are Christ’s at his coming.’ 1 Cor. 15:23. Paul does
not say, Christ and 144,000 the first fruits, no, no; the
144,000 are a part of the great harvest, in the end of
the world of which the risen Saviour was a sample, or
first fruits. If Paul had said, Christ and 144,000 the first
fruits, and there was no other testimony in the way, then
we might with safety believe that they were raised at the
first Advent; but as it reads ‘Christ the first fruits,’ we
think it safest and best to believe it as it reads.
“ ‘Of his own will begat he us with the word of
truth, that we should be a KIND OF FIRST FRUITS
of his creatures. James 1:18. It will yet be more
clearly seen that the living saints will be delivered by
the voice of God, and have power over the nations
before the second Advent. Their captivity will be
turned, and the yoke broken from off their neck, and
‘destroyed BECAUSE OF THE ANOINTING.’ See
Isa. 10:27. The latter rain—the outpouring of the
Spirit—prior to the Advent, will ripen the 144,000
for the harvest, while the other saints will be still
sleeping in the grave. In this sense they will be ‘the
first fruits unto God and to the Lamb.’ Then they
will be ‘without fault before the throne.’ They will
confess all their faults while Jesus is in the Sanctuary
ready to blot them out, and they will be borne away by
the scape-goat just before our High Priest comes out to
bless his waiting people.” White, James, The 144,000,
Advent Review, 9/1850.

“Applied to the 144,000, the term ‘first-fruits’
may be understood …as being the first installment, or
pledge, of the great harvest.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 826.
“In the Bible the term ‘firstfruit’ is employed in
two ways: (1) firstfruits of a harvest, and (2) the
quality of the fruits. The firstfruits were the first in
quality as well as in time. In the margin of Ezekiel
44:30, they are called the ‘chief’ fruits, and in Num.
18:12, the ‘best.’
“...Undoubtedly in Rev. 14:4 the word ‘firstfruits’
is employed to emphasize the quality of the fruit, the
character of the 144,000. In this case (as in every
other instance in the Scripture where there may be a
question as to the manner in which a word is employed)
the context clearly shows. Briefly, the context draws
attention to the purity of these people: They stand
‘with’ Jesus (Rev. 14:1). The same ones are mentioned
in Rev. 17:14: ‘And they that are with Him are
called, and chosen [sealed], and faithful.’ These have
stood the test, and God judges them perfect, fit for
fellowship with Jesus the Sinless One.” Were, 144,000
Sealed!, 85,86.

“They are ‘first-fruits’ unto God and the Lamb.
This term appears to be applied to different ones to
denote especial conditions. Christ is the first-fruits as
the antitype of the wave-sheaf. The first receivers of the
gospel are called by James (chapter 1:18) a kind of firstfruits. So the 144,000, ripening up for the heavenly
garner here on earth during the troublous scenes of
the last days, being translated to heaven without
seeing death, and occupying a preeminent position, are,
in this sense, as would seem very consistent, called
first-fruits unto God and the Lamb.” Smith, DR
(1897), 510.

REVELATION 14:5
And in their mouth was found no guile:
for they are without fault before the throne
of God.

“These [the 144,000], having been translated
from the earth, from among the living, are counted as
‘the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb.’
Revelation 15:2, 3; 14:1-5. ‘These are they which

367

GEMS FROM REVELATION
every wrong word and action.” Early Writings, 71.

Was Found.—
“The form of the Greek verb suggests that a
certain point of time is under consideration. At that
point of time investigation proves the 144,000 to be
faultless. This does not mean that they had never erred,
but that by the grace of God they had overcome all
defects of character.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 827.

“Those who have learned of Christ will ‘have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.’
Ephesians 5:11. In speech, as in life, they will be
simple, straightforward, and true; for they are preparing
for the fellowship of those holy ones in whose mouth
‘was found no guile.’ Revelation 14:5.” Mount of
Blessing, 169.

In Their Mouth Was Found No Guile.—
“If any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.”
James 3:2.

“Guile will not be found in the lips of the true
Christian. Not an impure thought will be indulged in,
not a word spoken that is approaching to sensuality,
not an action that has the least appearance of evil.”
Medical Ministry, 142.

“The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor
speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found
in their mouth.” Zephaniah 3:13.

“My brethren and sisters, how are you
employing the gift of speech? Have you learned so to
control the tongue that it shall ever obey the dictates of
an enlightened conscience and holy affections? Is your
conversation free from levity, pride and malice,
deceit and impurity? Are you without guile before
God?” 5 Testimonies, 175.

“According as he hath chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love.” Eph. 1:4.
“In their mouth was found no guile; for the soul
temple had been so thoroughly cleansed before leaving
earth that the human mouth became a channel for the
words of God. When the mind of Christ takes full
possession of a man, he thinks and speaks and acts as
Christ Himself would act.” Haskell, SSP, 250.

“The Lord is still gracious; the Lord will still
pardon, but your character must be transformed. There
must be no guile found in the mouth of those who
stand on the sea of glass. All this exaggeration, all
misstatements, everything untrue, must be put away
from you….” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 18, 247.

“ ‘Guile’ has the meaning of craft, trickery and
duplicity. The person with guile in his mouth is a liar
and deceiver. …Purity of speech is closely related to
pureness of heart and faith. The 144,000 have a pure
religion, pure hearts, pure lives, and a pure language
free from deceit, malicious gossip, and filthy stories.
They are like Jesus of whom it is said: ‘Neither was
any deceit in His mouth. (Isa. 53:9). Peter was
doubtless quoting this text when he said of Jesus: ‘Who
did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth,’ (1
Pet. 1:22).” Bunch, TR, 193.

Twelve Identification Marks of the 144,000.—
1. A special group that exist in the last days.
2. They are Israelites—of spiritual Israel—true
Christians.
3. They are sealed: which involves the observance
of the true Sabbath and receiving the mark
of protection at the Close of Probation.
4. They are not defiled with the teachings and
practices of Babylon.
5. They attain to perfection of character.
6. They experience the Great Tribulation of the
End Time.
7. They are victorious in the conflict with the Beast
and his Image.
8. They will experience being without a Mediator.
9. They vindicate God by displaying to the universe
that man can keep God’s law.
10. They do not experience death.
11. They represent the living righteous who will be
translated.
12. They receive a special reward in the kingdom.
From: Cooke, #22-UR, 15,16.

“Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who
shall dwell in thy holy hill?
He that walketh
uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the
truth in his heart. He that backbiteth not with his
tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up a
reproach against his neighbour.” Ps. 15:1-3.
“Those who would have that wisdom which is
from God must become fools in the sinful knowledge of
this age, in order to be wise. They should shut their
eyes, that they may see and learn no evil. They should
close their ears, lest they hear that which is evil and
obtain that knowledge which would stain their purity of
thoughts and acts. And they should guard their
tongues, lest they utter corrupt communications and
guile be found in their mouths.” Adventist Home, 404.

They Are Without Fault Before the Throne.—
“In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD,
the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall
not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve.”

“I saw that none could share the ‘refreshing’
unless they obtain the victory over every besetment,
over pride, selfishness, love of the world, and over

368

REVELATION 14
universe that these also can keep the commandments of
God. This demonstration will be made when there is no
mediator between God and men, when the high priestly
intercession of Christ has ceased, when the Holy Spirit
has completed His work on earth.
This final
generation, which has inherited all the weaknesses
and degeneration of the ages, out of it, God will take
a people and make them without fault. ‘There is no
guile in their mouth.’ What a demonstration of the
grace of God this is going to be!
“This could explain why the Dragon is so
enraged against the Remnant and endeavors to blot
them out of existence.
This explains the great
tribulation through which the 144,000 pass. God
permits Satan to try them to the uttermost. Satan
exerts super efforts to cause them to sin, but he fails.
The 144,000 justify God. They prove before the
universe that God’s law can be kept.” Cooke, #22UR, 11,12.

Jeremiah 50:20.
“Those who are living upon the earth when the
intercession of Christ shall cease in the sanctuary above
are to stand in the sight of a holy God without a
mediator.
Their robes must be spotless, their
characters must be purified from sin by the blood of
sprinkling. Through the grace of God and their own
diligent effort they must be conquerors in the battle
with evil. While the investigative judgment is going
forward in heaven, while the sins of penitent believers
are being removed from the sanctuary, there is to be a
special work of purification, of putting away of sin,
among God’s people upon earth. This work is more
clearly presented in the messages of Revelation 14.
“When this work shall have been accomplished,
the followers of Christ will be ready for His appearing.
‘Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in
former years.’ Malachi 3:4. Then the church which our
Lord at His coming is to receive to Himself will be a
‘glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing.’ Ephesians 5:27. Then she will look ‘forth
as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and
terrible as an army with banners.’ Song of Solomon
6:10.” Great Controversy, 425.

The Throne of God.—
“And they sung as it were a new song before the
throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders.”
Rev. 14:3.
INTRODUCTION:
THREE ANGELS’ MESSAGES.—
“Another scene and another chain of prophetic
events is introduced in these verses. We know that this
is so, because the preceding verses of this chapter
describe a company of the redeemed in the immortal
state—a scene which constitutes a part of the
prophetic chain commencing with the first verse of
chapter 12, and with which that chain of events
closes; for no prophecy goes beyond the immortal
state; and whenever we are brought in a line of
prophecy to the end of the world, we know that that line
there ends, and that what is introduced subsequently
belongs to a new series of events.
“The messages described in these verses are
known as ‘the three angels’ messages of Revelation
14.’ We are justified in applying to them the ordinals,
first, second, and third, by the prophecy itself; for the
last one is distinctly called ‘the third angel,’ from which
it follows that the one preceding was the second angel;
and the one before that, the first angel.
“...The importance of the work set forth in [Rev.
14:6-12] will be apparent to anyone who will attentively
study them. Whenever these messages are due, and are
proclaimed, they must, from the very nature of the case,
constitute the great theme of interest for that generation.
…No man, except at the peril of his soul, can treat
these warnings as nonessential, passing them by with
neglect and disregard.” Smith, DR (1897), 511-513.

“I saw that our heavenly Father has bestowed upon
us the great blessing of light upon the health reform that
we may obey the claims which He has upon us and
glorify Him in our bodies and spirits which are His
and finally stand without fault before the throne of
God.” 1 Testimonies, 488.
“When tempted to murmur, censure, and indulge
in fretfulness, wounding those around you, and in so
doing wounding your own soul, oh! let the deep,
earnest, anxious inquiry come from your soul, Shall I
stand without fault before the throne of God? Only
the faultless will be there. None will be translated to
heaven while their hearts are filled with the rubbish
of earth. Every defect in the moral character must first
be remedied, every stain removed by the cleansing
blood of Christ, and all the unlovely, unlovable traits of
character overcome.” 1 Testimonies, 705.
“With the last generation who are awaiting
translation, they will indeed come to the state where
they fully ‘keep the commandments of God.’ This is
very significant. We believe that in a special way the
144,000 will be used by heaven to vindicate the
character of God.
“From the beginning, one of Satan’s leading
accusations has been that it is impossible for God’s
people to keep His law. However God exposed the
falsity of Satan’s accusation by showing that Jesus
while on earth, in the same nature as man, perfectly
kept the commandments of God.
In a final
demonstration, in the last generation of earth, the
weakest generation of all time, God displays to the

“The theme of greatest importance is the third
angel's message, embracing the messages of the first
and second angels. All should understand the truths
contained in these messages and demonstrate them in
daily life, for this is essential to salvation. We shall have

369

GEMS FROM REVELATION
to study earnestly, prayerfully, in order to understand
these grand truths; and our power to learn and
comprehend will be taxed to the utmost.” Letter 97,
1902. Evangelism, 196.

they live and are to exert their power upon our religious
experience while time shall last.” 6 Testimonies, 17,18.
“There follows no world-wide message in the
New Testament after the one announced in
Revelation 14. In chapters 15 and 16 we have a record
of the seven last plagues to be poured out upon those
who reject the message of Revelation 14.
In
Revelation 18 there is a reinforcement of the message
of Revelation 14..” Gilbert, MIHS, 190.
“In the last days Satan will appear as an angel
of light, with great power and heavenly glory, and claim
to be the Lord of the whole earth. He will declare that
the Sabbath has been changed from the seventh to the
first day of the week; and as lord of the first day of the
week he will present this spurious sabbath as a test of
loyalty to him. Then will take place the final fulfillment
of the Revelator’s prophecy. [Rev. 13:4-18, quoted.]
“In connection with this scripture, the entire
fourteenth chapter of Revelation should be studied
much by God’s people. Verses nine to eleven bring to
view the special message of warning against worshiping
the beast and his image, and receiving his mark in the
forehead or in the hand. This warning is to be given to
the world by those who are mentioned in the twelfth
verse as keeping ‘the commandments of God, and
the faith of Jesus.’” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 19,
282.

The Three Angels Represent Movements of People that
Give Three Global Messages
to Every Nation, Kindred, Tongue, and People.

“Satan is constantly seeking to cast a shadow
about these messages, so that the people of God shall
not clearly discern their import, their time and place; but

370

REVELATION 14

THE FIRST ANGEL’S MESSAGE

symbolize it.” Smith, DR (1897), 511-513.

REVELATION 14:6
And I saw another angel fly in the midst
of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the earth,
and to every nation, and kindred, and
tongue, and people,
I Saw Another Angel.—
“ ‘Angel’ in both Hebrew and Greek signifies
‘messenger.’” Bunch, TR, 198.
“This message is declared to be a part of ‘the
everlasting gospel.’ The work of preaching the gospel
has not been committed to angels, but has been
entrusted to men. Holy angels have been employed in
directing this work, they have in charge the great
movements for the salvation of men; but the actual
proclamation of the gospel is performed by the servants
of Christ upon the earth.” Great Controversy, 312.
“The fact that an angel is said to be the herald of
this warning is significant. By the purity, the glory,
and the power of the heavenly messenger, divine
wisdom has been pleased to represent the exalted
character of the work to be accomplished by the
message and the power and glory that were to attend
it.” Great Controversy, 355.
“These angels [of Rev. 14:6-12] are evidently
symbolic; for the work assigned them is that of
preaching the everlasting gospel to the people. But
the preaching of the gospel has not been entrusted to
literal angels; it has been committed unto men, who
are responsible for this sacred trust placed in their hands.
Each of these three angels, therefore, symbolizes a body
of religious teachers, who are commissioned to make
known to their fellow men the special truths which
constitute the burden of these messages respectively.
“But we are to consider further that angels,
literally, are intensely interested in the work of grace
among men, being sent forth to minister to those who
shall be heirs of salvation. And as there is order in all
the movements and appointments of the heavenly world,
it may not be fanciful to suppose that a literal angel
has charge and oversight of the work of each
message. Hebrews 1:14; Revelation 1:1; 22:16.
“In these symbols we see the sharp contrast the
Bible draws between earthly and heavenly things.
Wherever earthly governments are to be represented—
even the best of them—the most appropriate symbol that
can be found is a cruel and ravenous wild beast; but
when the work of God is to be set forth, an angel,
clad in beauty and girt with power, is taken to

“If angels occupied the place of man in the
administration of the gospel, there would not be whole
regions left in darkness and the shadow of death. The
work would have been as is represented by the angel
flying through the midst of heaven proclaiming the
everlasting gospel to them that dwell on the earth. But
the Lord does nothing without the cooperation of man.
Could the intense interest which the angels have for
man be put into voice that would be heard by the
human agent, what appeals would be heard in
burning words to communicate to others that which
heaven had communicated to them.” My Life Today,
304.
“The three angels of Revelation 14 represent the
people who accept the light of God’s messages and go
forth as His agents to sound the warning throughout the
length and breadth of the earth.” 5 Testimonies,
455,456.
Flying in the Midst of Heaven.—
“The angel’s flight ‘in the midst of heaven,’ the
‘loud voice’ with which the warning is uttered, and its
promulgation to all ‘that dwell on the earth’—‘to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people’—give
evidence of the rapidity and world-wide extent of the
movement.” Great Controversy, 355.
“Here is shown the nature of the work of the people
of God. They have a message of so great importance
that they are represented as flying in the presentation
of it to the world. They are holding in their hands the
bread of life for a famishing world. The love of Christ
constraineth them. This is the last message. There are
no more to follow, no more invitations of mercy to be
given after this message shall have done its work. What
a trust!” 5 Testimonies, 207.
“When will the church do her appointed work?
She is represented as an angel of light, flying through
heaven with the everlasting gospel to be proclaimed to
the world. This represents the speed and directness
with which the church is to prosecute her work.”
Medical Ministry, 131.
Having the Everlasting Gospel.—
“For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for
it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith.”
Romans 1:16,17.
“The everlasting gospel means that it is
everlasting—it doesn’t change. The gospel preached

371

GEMS FROM REVELATION
in the Old Testament is the same preached in the New
Testament. “And the scripture, foreseeing that God
would justify the heathen through faith, preached
before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall
all nations be blessed.” Gal. 3:8. “For unto us was
the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the
word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with
faith in them that heard it.” Heb. 4:2.
“The term ‘everlasting gospel’ in the First Angel’s
message means that only those who believe that the
gospel is everlasting can give the everlasting gospel of
the First Angel’s message. Those who believe that the
OT had a different gospel cannot give these last warning
messages to the world. Indeed, they have sipped the
wine of Babylon.” PJ
“The Scriptures elsewhere speak of the ‘glorious’
gospel (2 Cor. 4:4; 1 Tim. 1:11), but only here is the
word ‘everlasting’ used in connection with the
gospel…. There is but one gospel to save men. It will
continue as long as there are men to be saved. There
never will be another gospel.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
827.
“In the prophecy of Jerusalem’s destruction Christ
said, ‘Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many
shall wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the end,
the same shall be saved. And this gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all nations; and then shall the end
come.’ This prophecy will again be fulfilled. The
abounding iniquity of that day finds its counterpart in
this generation. So with the prediction in regard to the
preaching of the gospel. Before the fall of Jerusalem,
Paul, writing by the Holy Spirit, declared that the gospel
was preached to ‘every creature which is under
heaven.’ Col. 1:23. So now, before the coming of the
Son of man, the everlasting gospel is to be preached ‘to
every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.’
Rev. 14:6, 14. God ‘hath appointed a day, in the
which He will judge the world.’ Acts 17:31. Christ
tells us when that day shall be ushered in. He does not
say that all the world will be converted, but that ‘this
gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall
the end come.’ By giving the gospel to the world it is
in our power to hasten our Lord’s return. We are not
only to look for but to hasten the coming of the day of
God. 2 Peter 3:12, margin. Had the church of Christ
done her appointed work as the Lord ordained, the whole
world would before this have been warned, and the Lord
Jesus would have come to our earth in power and great
glory.” Desire of Ages, 633,634.
“John in the Revelation foretells the proclamation
of the gospel message just before Christ’s second
coming…. (Rev. 14:6,7 quoted.)
“In the prophecy this warning of the judgment,
with its connected messages, is followed by the coming
of the Son of man in the clouds of heaven. The

proclamation of the judgment is an announcement of
Christ’s second coming as at hand.
And this
proclamation is called the everlasting gospel. Thus
the preaching of Christ’s second coming, the
announcement of its nearness, is shown to be an
essential part of the gospel message.” Christ’s Object
Lessons, 227,228.
To Preach.—
“How then shall they call on Him in whom they
have not believed? And how shall they believe in Him
of whom they have not heard? And how shall they
hear without a preacher? And how shall they
preach, except they be sent? As it is written, How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!”
Romans 10:14,15.
“‘Without Me,’ says Christ, ‘ye can do nothing.’
Are we who claim to be workers with Christ, united to
Him? Do we abide in Christ? and are we one with Him?
The message that we bear is worldwide. It must come
before all nations, tongues, and peoples. The Lord will
not require any one of us to go forth with this
message without giving us grace and power to
present it to the people in a manner corresponding to
its importance. The great question with us today is: Are
we carrying to the world this solemn message of truth in
a way to show its importance? The Lord will work with
the laborers if they will make Christ their only
dependence. He never designed that His missionaries
should work without His grace, destitute of His power.”
5 Testimonies, 591.
“In order that the gospel may go to all nations,
kindreds, tongues, and peoples, self-sacrifice must be
maintained.” 7 Testimonies, 215.
“Very much more can be accomplished by the
living preacher with the circulation of papers and
tracts than by the preaching of the word alone
without the publications. The press is a powerful
instrumentality which God has ordained to be
combined with the energies of the living preacher to
bring the truth before all nations, kindreds, tongues, and
peoples. Many minds can be reached in no other way.”
Life Sketches, 217.
To Every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People.—
“The time has come, the important time when
through God’s messengers the scroll is being unrolled to
the world. The truth comprised in the first, second, and
third angels’ messages must go to every nation, kindred,
tongue, and people; it must lighten the darkness of
every continent and extend to the islands of the sea.
Nothing of human invention must be allowed to retard
this work.” 6 Testimonies, 133.
“This proclamation is one of pre-eminent
importance. It is not a mere local judgment, but one

372

REVELATION 14
that concerns all the inhabitants of the earth. Hence
it has reference to the final Judgment scene. It is the
same gospel that Paul preached that is here styled the
‘everlasting gospel.’ But the great truth uttered by this
angel would not have been a truth if uttered by Paul; for
he lived at the commencement of the gospel
dispensation, and this proclamation relates to its closing
scenes. It seems to be the same as ‘this gospel of the
kingdom’ that our Lord presents in Matt. 24:14 as the
sign of the end of this dispensation.” Andrews, TAM, 27.
“If you would go forth to do Christ’s work, angels
of God would open the way before you, preparing
hearts to receive the gospel. Were every one of you a
living missionary, the message for this time would
speedily be proclaimed in all countries, to every people
and nation and tongue. This is the work that must be
done before Christ shall come in power and great glory.”
6 Testimonies, 438.
“Not only individuals, but nations will have a
probationary period of opportunity to take heed to
the warning of three angels messages.
The
announcement will be given to state leaders.” PJ

REVELATION 14:7
Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and
give glory to him; for the hour of his
judgment is come: and worship him that
made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and
the fountains of waters.
Saying With a Loud Voice.—
“The message of both the first angel and the third
angel are given with a ‘loud voice’ (vs. 9). The loud
voice indicates that the message will be proclaimed so
that all may hear. It also emphasizes the importance
of the message.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 827.
“It is represented as being given with a loud voice;
that is, with the power of the Holy Spirit.”
(Manuscript 16, 1900). 7BC, 980.
Fear God.—
“And the angel of the LORD called unto him out of
heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here
am I.
“And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad,
neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that
thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son,
thine only son from me.” Genesis 22:11,12.
“Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:
Fear God, and keep His commandments: for this is
the whole duty of man.” Ecc. 12:13.
“It conveys the thought of absolute loyalty to God,

of full surrender to His will.”
Commentary, 827.

7SDA Bible

“The love of God ever tends to the fear of God—
fear to offend Him. Those who are truly converted will
not venture heedlessly upon the borders of any evil, lest
they grieve the Spirit of God and are left to their own
way, to be filled with their own doings.” Upward Look,
371.
“And ye shall know that I have sent this
commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with
Levi, saith the LORD of hosts. My covenant was with
him of life and peace; and I gave them to him for the
fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before
my name. The law of truth was in his mouth, and
iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in
peace and equity, and did turn many away from
iniquity.” Malachi 2:4-6.
“Noah did not indulge them [the wicked] in the
faintest hope that those who neglected the present
opportunity, who rejected the present message, would be
favored with another opportunity of salvation. God
means that men shall not only love him, but that his
fear shall be in their hearts. Noah’s faith was
mingled with fear; for it is written that Noah, being
warned of God, moved with fear, prepared an ark for
the saving of his house. His faith intensified his fear;
for it was no cowardly fear that moved him. He dared
not suppress the words of God for fear of men, or
withhold his message in dread of the consequences that
might result because of the opposition and hate of the
wicked and unbelieving about him. He knew the power
of God, and realized that God would fulfill his word.
His fear of God did not separate him from God, but
served to draw him closer to him, and to lead him to
pour out his soul in earnest supplication. There were
many who at first received Noah’s message, but the
fear of men was greater than the fear of God, and
they turned away from the truth of God to believe a
lie. As time passed on, and reproach and ridicule were
heaped upon them, their hearts failed them, and they did
not bear the test. It is the testing time that will measure
professed faith and assurance in God. Courage and
integrity cannot be estimated rightly by men until the
day of trial puts them to the test.” Signs, 4/18/1895.
“God is no respecter of persons: But in every
nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness [gives glory to Him], is accepted with him.” Acts
10:35.
“With a great show of prudence the rabbis had
warned the people against receiving the new doctrines
taught by this new teacher; for His theories and practices
were contrary to the teachings of the fathers. The
people gave credence to what the priests and
Pharisees taught, in place of seeking to understand
the word of God for themselves. They honored the

373

GEMS FROM REVELATION
priests and rulers instead of honoring God, and
rejected the truth that they might keep their own
traditions. Many had been impressed and almost
persuaded; but they did not act upon their convictions,
and were not reckoned on the side of Christ. Satan
presented his temptations, until the light appeared as
darkness. Thus many rejected the truth that would have
proved the saving of the soul.” Desire of Ages, 489.
“But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious
heart; they are revolted and gone. Neither say they in
their heart, Let us now fear the LORD our God, that
giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his
season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the
harvest.” Jer. 5:23,24.
Glory = Name = God’s Character.-“The word of God reveals His character. He
Himself has declared His infinite love and pity. When
Moses prayed, ‘Show me Thy glory,’ the Lord
answered, ‘I will make all My goodness pass before
thee.’ Exodus 33:18, 19. This is His glory. The Lord
passed before Moses, and proclaimed, ‘The Lord, The
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin.’
Exodus 34:6, 7. He is ‘slow to anger, and of great
kindness,’ ‘because He delighteth in mercy.’ Jonah 4:2;
Micah 7:18.” Steps to Christ, 10.
Give Glory to Him.—
“Give unto the LORD, O ye mighty, give unto the
LORD glory and strength. Give unto the LORD the
glory due unto his name; worship the LORD in the
beauty of holiness.” Psalm 29:1,2.
“Whoso offereth praise glorifieth Me.” Psalm
50:23.
“Let your light (Jesus = Light of the world) so
shine before men, that they may see your good works
(fruits of the Holy Spirit), and glorify your (God the)
Father which is in heaven.” Matthew 5:16.
“To give glory to God is to reveal His character
in our own, and thus make Him known. And in
whatever way we make known the Father or the Son, we
glorify God.” (Manuscript 16, 1890). 7BC, 979.
“Our mission to the world is not to serve or please
ourselves; we are to glorify God by co-operating with
Him to save sinners.”
Christ’s Object Lessons,
142,143.
“Remember that you are trees in the garden of the
Lord, and that the divine protection is round about you;
The more visible the line of demarcation between the
flowers of God and the briar and thorn of Satan’s
planting, the more the Lord is glorified.” Spalding &
Magan, 229.

“For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify
God in your body, and in your spirit, which are
God’s.” 1Corinthians 6:20.
“‘Ye are not your own,’ He says; ‘for ye are bought
with a price;’ therefore glorify God by a life of service
that will win men and women from sin to
righteousness.” 9 Testimonies, 104.
“By exerting every power to glorify God, they will
have increased power with which to glorify him.”
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, & Students, 506.
“Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much
fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.” John 15:8.
“Fathers and mothers who make God first in their
households, who teach their children that the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, glorify God before
angels and before men by presenting to the world a
well-ordered, well-disciplined family—a family that
love and obey God instead of rebelling against Him.”
Adventist Home, 27.
“Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.” 1
Corinthians 10:31.
The Hour of His Judgment Is Come.—
“Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:
Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the
whole duty of man. For God shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil.” Ecc. 12:13,14.
“The idea of a judgment at a specific time
destroys at a stroke the widespread belief of an
individual judgment immediately after death that decides
the eternal reward or punishment.” Zurcher, COR, 74.
“The time of the judgment is a most solemn period,
when the Lord gathers His own from among the
tares. Those who have been members of the same
family are separated. A mark is placed upon the
righteous. ‘They shall be Mine, saith the Lord of
hosts, in that day when I make up My jewels; and I
will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that
serveth him.’” Testimonies to Ministers, 234.
When Does The Hour of God’s Judgment Occur?—
“And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance,
and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered,
Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient
season, I will call for thee.” Acts 24:25. [Note: The
Judgment had not yet come in Paul’s day.]
“The message itself sheds light as to the time when
this movement is to take place. It is declared to be a part
of the ‘everlasting gospel;’ and it announces the

374

REVELATION 14
opening of the judgment. The message of salvation
has been preached in all ages; but this message is a
part of the gospel which could be proclaimed only in
the last days, for only then would it be true that the hour
of judgment had come. The prophecies present a
succession of events leading down to the opening of the
judgment. This is especially true of the book of Daniel.
But that part of his prophecy which related to the last
days, Daniel was bidden to close up and seal ‘to the
time of the end.’ Not till we reach this time could a
message concerning the judgment be proclaimed, based
on the fulfillment of these prophecies. But at the time of
the end, says the prophet, ‘many shall run to and fro,
and knowledge shall be increased.’ Daniel 12:4.
“The apostle Paul warned the church not to look for
the coming of Christ in his day. ‘That day shall not
come,’ he says, ‘except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed.’ 2
Thessalonians 2:3. Not till after the great apostasy, and
the long period of the reign of the ‘man of sin,’ can we
look for the advent of our Lord. The ‘man of sin,’
which is also styled ‘the mystery of iniquity,’ ‘the son
of perdition,’ and ‘that wicked,’ represents the papacy,
which, as foretold in prophecy, was to maintain its
supremacy for 1260 years. This period ended in 1798.
The coming of Christ could not take place before that
time. Paul covers with his caution the whole of the
Christian dispensation down to the year 1798. It is this
side of that time that the message of Christ’s second
coming is to be proclaimed.
“No such message has ever been given in past ages.
Paul, as we have seen, did not preach it; he pointed his
brethren into the then far-distant future for the coming of
the Lord. The Reformers did not proclaim it. Martin
Luther placed the judgment about three hundred
years in the future from his day. But since 1798 the
book of Daniel has been unsealed, knowledge of the
prophecies has increased, and many have proclaimed the
solemn message of the judgment near.” Great
Controversy, 355,356.
“In Daniel 8:13,14,17; 9:24,25, the exact time of
the judgment is located. It was to begin at the close of
the 2300 prophetic days or literal years, or in 1844.
Daniel was shown what would take place in heaven at
the close of the 2300 years, and the Revelator what
would take place on earth at the same time. A
message would be heralded to all the world telling every
judgment-bound creature that the supreme court of the
universe has begun its solemn work in heaven.” Bunch,
TR, 200.
The Beginning of ‘The Hour of God’s Judgment’
Message.—
“But the strongest and most conclusive evidence
that the message belongs to the present time will consist
in finding some movement in this generation through
which its fulfilment has been, or is going forward. On
this point we refer to a movement of which it would now
be hard to find any one who is wholly ignorant. It is the

great Advent movement….
“As early as 1831, William Miller, of Low
Hampton, N.Y., by an earnest and consistent study of the
prophecies, was led to the conclusion that the gospel
dispensation was near its close.
He placed the
termination, which he thought would occur at the end of
the prophetic periods, about the year 1843. This date
was afterward extended to the autumn of 1844. …When
he began to promulgate his views, they met with general
favor, and were followed by great religious awakenings
in different parts of the land. Soon a multitude of
colaborers gathered around his standard, among whom
may be mentioned such men as F.G. Brown, Chas. Fitch,
Josiah Litch, J.V. Himes, and others, who were eminent
for piety, and men of influence in the religious world.
The period marked by the years 1840-1844 was one
of intense activity and great progress in this work. A
message was proclaimed to the world which bore
every characteristic of a fulfillment of the
proclamation of Revelation 14:6,7. ...The persons who
were engaged in this movement supposed it to be a
fulfillment of prophecy, and claimed that they were
giving the message of Revelation 14:6,7.
“With this movement also began the fulfill-ment of
the parable of the ten virgins, recorded in Matthew 25,
which our Lord uttered to illustrate and enforce the
doctrine of his second coming and the end of the world,
which he had just set forth in Matthew 24. Those who
became interested in this movement went forth to meet
the Bridegroom; that is, they were aroused to expect the
coming of Christ, and to look and wait for his return
from heaven. The Bridegroom tarried. The first point of
expectation, the close of the year 1843, which according
to Jewish reckoning ended in the spring of 1844, passed
by, and the Lord did not come. While he tarried, they all
slumbered and slept. Surprised by the unexpected doubt
and uncertainty into which they were thrown, the interest
of the people began to wane, and their efforts to flag. At
midnight there was a cry made, ‘Behold, the
Bridegroom cometh! go ye out to meet him.’ Midway
between the spring of 1844, where it was at first
supposed that the 2300 days would terminate, and that
point in the autumn of 1844 to which it was afterward
ascertained that they really extended, just such a cry as
this was suddenly raised. Involuntarily, this very
phraseology was adopted: ‘Behold, the Bridegroom
cometh.’ The cause of this sudden arousing was the
discovery that the great prophetic period of 2300 days
(years) of Daniel 8:14 did not end in the spring of
1844, but would extend to the autumn of that year,
and consequently that the time at which they supposed
they were warranted to look for the appearing of the
Lord had not passed by, but was indeed at the door. At
the same time, the relation between the type and the
antitype relating to the cleansing of the sanctuary was
partially seen. The prophecy declared that at the end
of the 2300 days the sanctuary should be cleansed;
and as in the type the sanctuary was cleansed on the
tenth day of the seventh month of the Jewish year, that
point in the autumn of 1844 was accordingly fixed upon

375

GEMS FROM REVELATION
for the termination of the 2300 years. It fell on the 22d
of October. Between the mid-summer of 1844, when
the light on these subjects was first seen, and the day and
month above named when the 2300 years terminated,
perhaps no movement ever exhibited greater activity
than this respecting the soon coming of Christ, and in no
cause was ever more accomplished in so short a space of
time. A religious wave swept over this country, and
the nation was stirred as no people have been stirred
since the opening of the great Reformation of the
sixteenth century. This was called the ‘seventh-month
movement,’ and was more particularly confined to the
United States and Canada.” Smith, DR (1897), 516-518.

Every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People Hear the
Message.—
“Like the great Reformation of the sixteenth
century, the advent movement appeared in different
countries of Christendom at the same time. In both
Europe and America men of faith and prayer were led to
the study of the prophecies, and, tracing down the
inspired record, they saw convincing evidence that the
end of all things was at hand. In different lands there
were isolated bodies of Christians who, solely by the
study of the Scriptures, arrived at the belief that the
Saviour’s advent was near.” Great Controversy, 357.
“To William Miller and his co-laborers it was
given to preach the warning in America. This country
became the center of the great advent movement. It was
here that the prophecy of the first angel’s message had
its most direct fulfillment. The writings of Miller and
his associates were carried to distant lands.
Wherever missionaries had penetrated in all the
world, were sent the glad tidings of Christ’s speedy
return. Far and wide spread the message of the
everlasting gospel: ‘Fear God, and give glory to Him;
for the hour of His judgment is come.’” Great
Controversy, 368.

Baptist Preacher, William Miller, 1782-1849.
“The chronology of the events of Revelation 10 is
further ascertained from the fact that this angel appears
to be identical with the first angel of Revelation 14.
The points of identity between them are easily seen:
They both have a special message to proclaim. They
both utter their proclamation with a loud voice.
They both use similar language, referring to the
Creator as the maker of heaven and earth, the sea,
and the things that are therein. And they both
proclaim time, one swearing that time should be no
more, and the other proclaiming that the hour of
God’s judgment has come.
“…In 1798 the time of the end began, and the seal
was taken from the little book. Since that time,
therefore, the angel of Revelation 14 has gone forth
proclaiming that the hour of God’s judgment is come.
It is since that time, too, that the angel of chapter 10
has taken his stand on sea and land, and sworn that
time shall be no more. Of their identity there can now
be no question. All the arguments which go to locate the
one are equally effective in the case of the other.
“…The present generation is witnessing the
fulfillment of these two prophecies. In the preaching
of the second advent, more especially from 1840-1844,
began their full and circumstantial accomplish-ment.”
Smith, DR, 520-522.

Effect of the First Angel’s Message.—
“The testimony of the prophecies which seemed to
point to the coming of Christ in the spring of 1844 took
deep hold of the minds of the people. As the message
went from state to state, there was every-where
awakened widespread interest. Many were convinced
that the arguments from the prophetic periods were
correct, and, sacrificing their pride of opinion, they
joyfully received the truth. Some ministers laid aside
their sectarian views and feelings, left their salaries and
their churches, and united in proclaiming the coming of
Jesus. There were comparatively few ministers,
however, who would accept this message; therefore it
was largely committed to humble laymen. Farmers
left their fields, mechanics their tools, traders their
merchandise, professional men their positions; and yet
the number of workers was small in comparison with the
work to be accomplished. The condition of an ungodly
church and a world lying in wickedness, burdened the
souls of the true watchmen, and they willingly endured
toil, privation, and suffering, that they might call men to
repentance unto salvation. Though opposed by Satan,
the work went steadily forward, and the advent truth was
accepted by many thousands.
“Everywhere the searching testimony was heard,
warning sinners, both worldlings and church members,
to flee from the wrath to come. Like John the Baptist,
the forerunner of Christ, the preachers laid the ax at the
root of the tree and urged all to bring forth fruit meet for
repentance. Their stirring appeals were in marked
contrast to the assurances of peace and safety that
were heard from popular pulpits; and wherever the
message was given, it moved the people. The simple,

376

REVELATION 14
direct testimony of the Scriptures, set home by the power
of the Holy Spirit, brought a weight of conviction which
few were able wholly to resist. Professors of religion
were roused from their false security. They saw their
backslidings, their worldliness and unbelief, their pride
and selfishness. Many sought the Lord with repentance
and humiliation. The affections that had so long clung
to earthly things they now fixed upon heaven. The
Spirit of God rested upon them, and with hearts softened
and subdued they joined to sound the cry: ‘Fear God,
and give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment
is come.’
“Sinners inquired with weeping: ‘What must I do
to be saved?’ Those whose lives had been marked
with dishonesty were anxious to make restitution. All
who found peace in Christ longed to see others share the
blessing. The hearts of parents were turned to their
children, and the hearts of children to their parents. The
barriers of pride and reserve were swept away. Heartfelt
confessions were made, and the members of the
household labored for the salvation of those who were
nearest and dearest. Often was heard the sound of
earnest intercession. Everywhere were souls in deep
anguish pleading with God. Many wrestled all night in
prayer for the assurance that their own sins were
pardoned, or for the conversion of their relatives or
neighbors.
“All classes flocked to the Adventist meetings.
Rich and poor, high and low, were, from various causes,
anxious to hear for themselves the doctrine of the second
advent. The Lord held the spirit of opposition in check
while His servants explained the reasons of their faith.
Sometimes the instrument was feeble; but the Spirit
of God gave power to His truth. The presence of holy
angels was felt in these assemblies, and many were daily
added to the believers. As the evidences of Christ’s soon
coming were repeated, vast crowds listened in breathless
silence to the solemn words. Heaven and earth seemed
to approach each other. The power of God was felt
upon old and young and middle-aged. Men sought their
homes with praises upon their lips, and the glad sound
rang out upon the still night air. None who attended
those meetings can ever forget those scenes of deepest
interest.” Great Controversy, 368-370.
“The first angel’s message of Revelation 14,
announcing the hour of God’s judgment and calling
upon men to fear and worship Him, was designed to
separate the professed people of God from the
corrupting influences of the world and to arouse
them to see their true condition of worldliness and
backsliding. In this message, God has sent to the
church a warning, which, had it been accepted, would
have corrected the evils that were shutting them away
from Him. Had they received the message from heaven,
humbling their hearts before the Lord and seeking in
sincerity a preparation to stand in His presence, the
Spirit and power of God would have been manifested
among them. The church would again have reached that
blessed state of unity, faith, and love which existed in

apostolic days, when the believers ‘were of one heart
and of one soul,’ and ‘spake the word of God with
boldness,’ when ‘the Lord added to the church daily
such as should be saved.’ Acts 4:32, 31; 2:47.” Great
Controversy, 379.

“THE 1843 CHART” helped give the trumpet a
certain sound. The designers, Apollos Hale and
Charles Fitch, were inspired by Hab. 2:2:
“Write the vision and make it plain upon tables,
that he may run that readeth it.”
The
Disappointment:
Right
Time,
Wrong
Expectation.—
“Supposing that the earth was the sanctuary and
that its cleansing was to be accomplished by fire at
the revelation of the Lord from Heaven, they
naturally looked for the appearing of Christ at the
end of the days. And through their misapprehension on
this point, they met with a crushing disappoint-ment,
though everything which the prophecy declared, and
everything which they were warranted to expect, took
place with absolute accuracy at that time.” Smith, DR
(1897), 522.
“Like the first disciples, William Miller and his
associates did not, themselves, fully comprehend the
import of the message which they bore. Errors that
had been long established in the church prevented
them from arriving at a correct interpretation of an
important point in the prophecy. Therefore, though
they proclaimed the message which God had committed
to them to be given to the world, yet through a
misapprehension of its meaning they suffered
disappointment.
“In explaining Daniel 8:14, ‘Unto two thousand

377

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be
cleansed,’ Miller, as has been stated, adopted the
generally received view that the earth is the sanctuary,
and he believed that the cleansing of the sanctuary
represented the purification of the earth by fire at the
coming of the Lord. When, therefore, he found that the
close of the 2300 days was definitely foretold, he
concluded that this revealed the time of the second
advent.
His error resulted from accepting the
popular view as to what constitutes the sanctuary.
“In the typical system, which was a shadow of the
sacrifice and priesthood of Christ, the cleansing of the
sanctuary was the last service performed by the high
priest in the yearly round of ministration. It was the
closing work of the atonement—a removal or putting
away of sin from Israel. It prefigured the closing work
in the ministration of our High Priest in heaven, in
the removal or blotting out of the sins of His people,
which are registered in the heavenly records. This
service involves a work of investigation, a work of
judgment; and it immediately precedes the coming of
Christ in the clouds of heaven with power and great
glory; for when He comes, every case has been decided.
Says Jesus: ‘My reward is with Me, to give every man
according as his work shall be.’ Rev. 22:12. It is this
work of judgment, immediately preceding the second
advent, that is announced in the first angel’s message of
Revelation 14:7: ‘Fear God, and give glory to Him;
for the hour of His judgment is come.’” Great
Controversy, 351,352.
“Five hundred years before, the Lord had declared
by the prophet Zechariah: ‘Rejoice greatly, O daughter
of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy
King cometh unto thee: He is just, and having
salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a
colt the foal of an ass.’ Zechariah 9:9. Had the
disciples realized that Christ was going to judgment and
to death, they could not have fulfilled this prophecy—
[The triumphant entry into Jerusalem.]
“In like manner Miller and his associates fulfilled
prophecy and gave a message which Inspiration had
foretold should be given to the world, but which they
could not have given had they fully understood the
prophecies pointing out their disappointment, and
presenting another message to be preached to all nations
before the Lord should come. The first and second
angel’s messages were given at the right time and
accomplished the work which God designed to
accomplish by them.” Great Controversy, 405.
The Disappointment Explained.—
“The subject of the sanctuary was the key
which unlocked the mystery of the disappointment of
1844. It opened to view a complete system of truth,
connected and harmonious, showing that God’s hand
had directed the great advent movement and revealing
present duty as it brought to light the position and work
of His people. As the disciples of Jesus after the terrible
night of their anguish and disappointment were ‘glad

when they saw the Lord,’ so did those now rejoice who
had looked in faith for His second coming. They had
expected Him to appear in glory to give reward to His
servants. As their hopes were disappointed, they had
lost sight of Jesus, and with Mary at the sepulcher they
cried: ‘They have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where they have laid Him.’ Now in the holy of
holies they again beheld Him, their compassionate High
Priest, soon to appear as their king and deliverer. Light
from the sanctuary illumined the past, the present,
and the future. They knew that God had led them by
His unerring providence. Though, like the first disciples,
they themselves had failed to understand the message
which they bore, yet it had been in every respect correct.
In proclaiming it they had fulfilled the purpose of God,
and their labor had not been in vain in the Lord.
Begotten ‘again unto a lively hope,’ they rejoiced ‘with
joy unspeakable and full of glory.’
“Both the prophecy of Daniel 8:14, ‘Unto two
thousand and three hundred days; then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed,’ and the first angel’s message,
‘Fear God, and give glory to Him; for the hour of His
judgment is come,’ pointed to Christ’s ministration
in the most holy place, to the investigative judgment,
and not to the coming of Christ for the redemption of His
people and the destruction of the wicked. The mistake
had not been in the reckoning of the prophetic periods,
but in the event to take place at the end of the 2300 days.
Through this error the believers had suffered
disappointment, yet all that was foretold by the
prophecy, and all that they had any Scripture warrant to
expect, had been accomplished. At the very time when
they were lamenting the failure of their hopes, the
event had taken place which was foretold by the
message, and which must be fulfilled before the Lord
could appear to give reward to His servants.
“Christ had come, not to the earth, as they
expected, but, as foreshadowed in the type, to the most
holy place of the temple of God in heaven. He is
represented by the prophet Daniel as coming at this time
to the Ancient of Days: ‘I saw in the night visions, and,
behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds
of heaven, and came’—not to the earth, but—‘to the
Ancient of Days, and they brought Him near before
Him.’ Daniel 7:13.
“This coming is foretold also by the prophet
Malachi: ‘The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly
come to His temple, even the Messenger of the
covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, He shall come,
saith the Lord of hosts.’ Malachi 3:1. The coming of
the Lord to His temple was sudden, unexpected, to His
people. They were not looking for Him there. They
expected Him to come to earth, ‘in flaming fire taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the gospel.’ 2 Thess. 1:8.” Great Controversy, 422424.
“[Daniel 7:13, 14 quoted]. The coming of Christ
here described is not His second coming to the earth. He
comes to the Ancient of Days in heaven to receive

378

REVELATION 14
dominion and glory and a kingdom, which will be given
Him at the close of His work as a mediator. It is this
coming, and not His second advent to the earth, that was
foretold in prophecy to take place at the termination of
the 2300 days in 1844. Attended by heavenly angels,
our great High Priest enters the holy of holies and
there appears in the presence of God to engage in the
last acts of His ministration in behalf of man—to
perform the work of investigative judgment and to
make an atonement for all who are shown to be entitled
to its benefits.” Great Controversy, 479,480.
The Hour of God’s Judgment is the Anti-typical Day of
Atonement.—
“The prophecy of the 2300 days of Daniel 8 and 9
pointed unmistakably to this judgment hour. This
longest time prophecy in the Scriptures reaches from 457
BC to AD 1844. Then, as we have seen in the study of
Daniel’s prophecy, the sanctuary was to be cleansed.
This cleansing, according to the type in Leviticus 16,
was the final work of atonement.” Smith, DR, 634.
“For eighteen centuries this work of ministration
continued in the first apartment of the sanctuary. The
blood of Christ, pleaded in behalf of penitent believers,
secured their pardon and acceptance with the Father, yet
their sins still remained upon the books of record. As
in the typical service there was a work of atonement
at the close of the year, so before Christ’s work for the
redemption of men is completed there is a work of
atonement for the removal of sin from the sanctuary.
This is the service which began when the 2300 days
[of Daniel 8:14] ended. At that time, as foretold by
Daniel the prophet, our High Priest entered the most
holy, to perform the last division of His solemn work—
to cleanse the sanctuary.
“As anciently the sins of the people were by faith
placed upon the sin offering and through its blood
transferred, in figure, to the earthly sanctuary, so in the
new covenant the sins of the repentant are by faith
placed upon Christ and transferred, in fact, to the
heavenly sanctuary. And as the typical cleansing of the
earthly was accomplished by the removal of the sins by
which it had been polluted, so the actual cleansing of
the heavenly is to be accomplished by the removal, or
blotting out, of the sins which are there recorded.
But before this can be accomplished, there must be an
examination of the books of record to determine who,
through repentance of sin and faith in Christ, are entitled
to the benefits of His atonement. The cleansing of the
sanctuary
therefore
involves
a
work
of
investigation—a work of judgment. This work must
be performed prior to the coming of Christ to redeem
His people; for when He comes, His reward is with Him
to give to every man according to his works. Revelation
22:12.
“Thus those who followed in the light of the
prophetic word saw that, instead of coming to the earth
at the termination of the 2300 days in 1844, Christ then
entered the most holy place of the heavenly sanctuary

to perform the closing work of atonement preparatory
to His coming.
“It was seen, also, that while the sin offering
pointed to Christ as a sacrifice, and the high priest
represented Christ as a mediator, the scapegoat typified
Satan, the author of sin, upon whom the sins of the
truly penitent will finally be placed. When the high
priest, by virtue of the blood of the sin offering,
removed the sins from the sanctuary, he placed them
upon the scapegoat. When Christ, by virtue of His own
blood, removes the sins of His people from the heavenly
sanctuary at the close of His ministration, He will place
them upon Satan, who, in the execution of the
judgment, must bear the final penalty. The scapegoat
was sent away into a land not inhabited, never to come
again into the congregation of Israel. So will Satan be
forever banished from the presence of God and His
people, and he will be blotted from existence in the final
destruction of sin and sinners.” Great Controversy,
421,422.
The Hour of God Judgment in the Parables.—
“We have spoken of the midnight cry of that
parable in the summer of 1844. The foolish virgins then
said to the wise, ‘Give us of your oil; for our lamps are
gone [margin, going] out.’ The wise answered, ‘Go
and buy for yourselves.’ And while they went to buy,
the Bridegroom came. This is not the coming of Christ
to this earth; for it is a coming which precedes the
marriage; but the marriage, that is, the reception of the
kingdom (see on chapter 21), must precede his coming
to this earth to receive to himself his people, who are to
be the guests at the marriage supper. Luke 19:12; Rev.
19:7-9. This coming, in the parable, must therefore be
the same as the coming to the Ancient of days spoken of
in Daniel 7:13,14.
“‘And they that were ready went in with him to
the marriage, and the door was shut.’ After the
Bridegroom comes to the marriage, there is an
examination of the guests to see who are ready to
participate in the ceremony, according to the parable
of Matthew 22:1-13. As the last thing before the
marriage, the King comes in to see the guests, to
ascertain if all are properly arrayed in the wedding
garment; and whoever, after due examination, is found
with the garment on, and is accepted by the King, never
after loses that garment, but is sure of immortality. But
this question of fitness for the kingdom can be
determined only by the investigative judgment of the
sanctuary. This closing work in the sanctuary,
therefore, which is the cleansing of the sanctuary,
and the atonement, is nothing else than the
examination of the guests to see who have on the
wedding garment; and consequently until this work is
finished, it is not determined who are ‘ready’ to go in to
the marriage. ‘They that were ready went in with him
to the marriage.’ By this short expression we are
carried from the time when the Bridegroom comes to the
marriage, entirely through the period of the cleansing of
the sanctuary, or the examination of the guests; and

379

GEMS FROM REVELATION
when this is concluded, probation will end, and the door
will be shut.
“The connection of the parable with the message
under examination is now apparent. It brings to view a
period of making ready the guests for the marriage of the
Lamb, which is the work of judgment to which the
message brings us when it declares, ‘The hour of his
judgment is come.’ This message was to be proclaimed
with a loud voice. It went forth with the power thus
indicated between the years 1840-44, more especially
in the seventh-month move-ment of the latter year,
bringing us to the end of the 2300 days, when the
work of judgment commenced as Christ began the
work of cleansing the sanctuary.
“But, as has been already shown, this did not bring
the close of probation, but only the period of the
investigative judgment. In this judgment we are now
living; and during this time other messages are
proclaimed, as the prophecy further declares.” Smith,
DR (1897), 522-524.
Hour of God’s Judgment Occurs Before Second
Coming.—
“It must be apparent to every student of the
Scriptures that the angel who proclaims the hour of
God’s judgment does not give the latest message of
mercy. Revelation 14 presents two other and later
proclamations before the close of human probation.
This fact alone is sufficient to prove that the coming of
the Lord does not take place until the second and third
proclamations have been added to the first. The same
thing may also be seen in the fact that after the angel of
chapter 10 has sworn that time shall be no longer,
another work of prophesying before many people and
nations is announced. Hence we understand that the
first angel preaches the hour of God’s judgment come;
that is, he preaches the termination of the prophetic
periods; and that this is the time which he swears shall
be no longer.
“The judgment does of necessity commence
before the advent of Christ; for he comes to execute
the judgment (Jude 14, 15; Revelation 22:12; 2
Timothy 4:1); and at the sound of the last trumpet he
confers immortality upon every one of the righteous, and
passes by all the wicked. The investigative judgment
does therefore precede the execution of the same by the
Saviour. It is the province of the Father to preside in this
investigative work, as set forth in Daniel 7. At this
tribunal, the Son closes up his work as high priest, and is
crowned king. Thence he comes to earth to execute the
decisions of his Father. It is this work of judgment by
the Father which the first angel introduces.”
Andrews, TAM, 33-35.
A Solemn Hour.—
“At the time appointed for the judgment—the close
of the 2300 days, in 1844—began the work of
investigation and blotting out of sins. All who have
ever taken upon themselves the name of Christ must
pass its searching scrutiny. Both the living and the

dead are to be judged ‘out of those things which were
written in the books, according to their works.’
“Sins that have not been repented of and
forsaken will not be pardoned and blotted out of the
books of record, but will stand to witness against the
sinner in the day of God. He may have committed his
evil deeds in the light of day or in the darkness of night;
but they were open and manifest before Him with whom
we have to do. Angels of God witnessed each sin and
registered it in the unerring records. Sin may be
concealed, denied, covered up from father, mother, wife,
children, and associates; no one but the guilty actors may
cherish the least suspicion of the wrong; but it is laid
bare before the intelligences of heaven. The darkness of
the darkest night, the secrecy of all deceptive arts, is not
sufficient to veil one thought from the knowledge of the
Eternal. God has an exact record of every unjust account
and every unfair dealing. He is not deceived by
appearances of piety. He makes no mistakes in His
estimation of character. Men may be deceived by those
who are corrupt in heart, but God pierces all disguises
and reads the inner life.
“How solemn is the thought! Day after day,
passing into eternity, bears its burden of records for the
books of heaven. Words once spoken, deeds once done,
can never be recalled. Angels have registered both the
good and the evil. The mightiest conqueror upon the
earth cannot call back the record of even a single day.
Our acts, our words, even our most secret motives, all
have their weight in deciding our destiny for weal or
woe. Though they may be forgotten by us, they will
bear their testimony to justify or condemn.
“As the features of the countenance are reproduced
with unerring accuracy on the polished plate of the artist,
so the character is faithfully delineated in the books
above. Yet how little solicitude is felt concerning that
record which is to meet the gaze of heavenly beings.
Could the veil which separates the visible from the
invisible world be swept back, and the children of men
behold an angel recording every word and deed, which
they must meet again in the judgment, how many words
that are daily uttered would remain unspoken, how
many deeds would remain undone.”
Great
Controversy, 486,487.
Feast of Trumpets Ten Days Before Day of
Atonement.—
“The rise of this message was described in
connection with the Philadelphia church. That message
began to be preached about ten years before the time
the judgment was to open. [In light of the principle
that a day in prophecy represents a literal year]—This
agrees with the practice of the Jews. Ten days before
the Day of Atonement the trumpets were to be
sounded to announce the approach of that hour. So it
was with the first angel’s message that announced the
judgment.” Straw, SR, 88,89.
Trumpets Blown Worldwide.—
“‘It is both interesting and significant that

380

REVELATION 14
more than sixty men in the early nineteenth century,
scattered over four continents, and located in twelve
different countries—including even a Roman Catholic
supreme court justice, Jose de Rozas of Mexico City—
looked to 1843, ’44, or ’47 as the terminus of this
epochal period. And nearly all of them published their
expectations before William Miller’s first book appeared
in Troy, New York, in 1836.’ (Questions on Doctrine, p.
314).” Zurcher, COR, 76.
Record Books Used in the Judgment.—
(See comments under Revelation 20:12.)
Worship God the Father, The Creator.—
“And to make all men see what is the fellowship of
the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath
been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ.” Ephesians 3:9.
“And when those beasts give glory and honour and
thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for
ever and ever, The four and twenty elders fall down
before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that
liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before
the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.”
Revelation 4:9-11. This is God the Father.
“That the One we are to worship is God the
Father, is proved by Jesus Himself, the mighty Angel,
of Revelation 10, when He lifts up his hand to heaven
and swares by the Father, “the one who liveth for ever
and ever,” who created the heaven and earth and the
sea. Revelation 4:9-11; 10:6.” PJ
“Against the command to worship the Father and
keep the Sabbath holy in the first angel’s message,
Satan flooded the world at the same time with an
anti-creation, anti-Sabbath, and anti-judgment
message through Darwin in 1844-48. The doctrine of
evolutionism teaches that since we all are here by
random chance through eons of time, there is no God,
no sabbath, and (since we are not responsible for our
actions) no judgment.” PJ
When to Worship the Creator.—
“By the first angel, men are called upon to ‘fear
God, and give glory to Him’ and to worship Him as the
Creator of the heavens and the earth. In order to do this,
they must obey His law. Says the wise man: ‘Fear God,
and keep His commandments: for this is the whole
duty of man.’ Ecclesiastes 12:13. Without obedience
to His commandments no worship can be pleasing to
God. ‘This is the love of God, that we keep His
commandments.’ ‘He that turneth away his ear from
hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abomination.’ 1 John 5:3; Proverbs 28:9.
“The duty to worship God is based upon the fact
that He is the Creator and that to Him all other beings
owe their existence. And wherever, in the Bible, His
claim to reverence and worship, above the gods of the

heathen, is presented, there is cited the evidence of His
creative power. ‘All the gods of the nations are idols:
but the Lord made the heavens.’ Psalm 96:5. ‘To
whom then will ye liken Me, or shall I be equal? saith
the Holy One. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold
who hath created these things.’ ‘Thus saith the Lord
that created the heavens; God Himself that formed
the earth and made it: ...I am the Lord; and there is
none else.’ Isaiah 40:25, 26; 45:18. Says the psalmist:
‘Know ye that the Lord He is God: it is He that hath
made us, and not we ourselves.’ ‘O come, let us
worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord
our Maker.’ Psalms 100:3; 95:6. And the holy beings
who worship God in heaven state, as the reason why
their homage is due to Him: ‘Thou art worthy, O Lord,
to receive glory and honor and power: for Thou hast
created all things.’ Rev. 4:11.
“In Revelation 14, men are called upon to worship
the Creator; and the prophecy brings to view a class that,
as the result of the threefold message, are keeping the
commandments of God. One of these commandments
points directly to God as the Creator. The fourth precept
declares: ‘The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: ...for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it.’ Exodus 20:10, 11. Concerning
the Sabbath, the Lord says, further, that it is ‘a sign,
...that ye may know that I am the Lord your God.’
Ezekiel 20:20. And the reason given is: ‘For in six
days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the
seventh day He rested, and was refreshed.’ Exodus
31:17.
“ ‘The importance of the Sabbath as the
memorial of creation is that it keeps ever present the
true reason why worship is due to God’—because He
is the Creator, and we are His creatures. ‘The Sabbath
therefore lies at the very foundation of divine worship,
for it teaches this great truth in the most impressive
manner, and no other institution does this. The true
ground of divine worship, not of that on the seventh day
merely, but of all worship, is found in the distinction
between the Creator and His creatures. This great fact
can never become obsolete, and must never be
forgotten.’—J. N. Andrews, History of the Sabbath,
chapter 27. It was to keep this truth ever before the
minds of men, that God instituted the Sabbath in
Eden; and so long as the fact that He is our Creator
continues to be a reason why we should worship Him, so
long the Sabbath will continue as its sign and memorial.
Had the Sabbath been universally kept, man’s thoughts
and affections would have been led to the Creator as the
object of reverence and worship, and there would never
have been an idolater, an atheist, or an infidel. The
keeping of the Sabbath is a sign of loyalty to the true
God, ‘Him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea,
and the fountains of waters.’ It follows that the
message which commands men to worship God and
keep His commandments will especially call upon them
to keep the fourth commandment. Great Controversy,

381

GEMS FROM REVELATION
436-438.
“The worship of the Creator must include the
observance of the Sabbath which is the memorial of
creation. This is indicated by the fact that a part of
the fourth commandment is quoted in the first
angel’s message. God’s power to create is an evidence
of His power to redeem, and for this reason reference to
His creative power has been an important part of all
heaven-sent messages.” Bunch, TR, 199.
“The Sabbath governs worship and will do so
eternally when ‘from one Sabbath to another shall all
flesh come to worship before Me, saith the Lord.’
Isaiah 66: 22,23. The Sabbath can never be separated
from worship.” Burnside, RWU, 175.
True Call to Worship Amidst 7 False Calls.—
“Another reason buttresses the call to worship God
as Creator—the worship given to the beast and his
image, which is dealt with in Rev. 13 and in the third
angel’s message. Scripture says that ‘all that dwell
upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain’
(13:8). …In the face of this coming religious crisis, the
first angel’s appeal calls the inhabitants of the earth
to choose between the worship of the true God and
the false gods of this century, just as the Israelites had
to do in the time of the prophet Elijah on Mount
Carmel.” Zurcher, COR, 88,89.
“Worship is the key issue in this central portion of
the book of Revelation, the climax of the controversy
between Christ and Satan. In Revelation 13 and 14,
there are seven times that the word ‘worship’ is used
in context with false worship (See Rev. 13: 4 twice, 8,
12, 15; 14:9, 11). Here in Rev. 14:7 the first angel gives
one great call to worship the true Creator—God the
Father.” PJ.
True Call to Worship God Proclaimed in Second
Advent Movement.
“There is one God, a personal, spiritual being, the
creator of all things, omnipotent, omniscient, and
eternal, infinite in wisdom, holiness, justice, goodness,
truth, and mercy; unchangeable, and everywhere present
by his representative, the Holy Spirit. Ps. 139:7.” 1872
SDA Statement of Beliefs.
{Note: This position of the SDA church was later
changed in 1980 to a belief in the god that we are
warned not to worship in the 3rd Angels message—the
god of the beast and the image to the beast—the
Trinity—the three-in-one god.]
The Message of the Angel of Rev. 10 and the Angel of
Rev. 14:6,7 Are The Same.—
“And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and
upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven, And sware
by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created
heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth,

and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the
things which are therein, that there should be time no
longer.” Rev. 10:5, 6.

THE SECOND ANGEL’S
MESSAGE
REVELATION 14:8
And there followed another angel,
saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great
city, because she made all nations drink of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
And There Followed.—
“Gr. akoloutheo, ‘to accompany,’ ‘to follow’ (see
Matt. 19:27,28; Mark 1:18, where the word has the idea
of accompanying Jesus personally). It seems to have
both meanings in this text. In point of time the second
angel follows the first, but it is also true that the first
angel continues his ministry when the second angel
joins him. In this sense the second angel’s message
accompanies that of the first.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
828.
And There Followed Another Angel. —
“The chronology of this message is deter-mined, to
a great extent, by that of the first message. This cannot
precede that; but that, as has been shown, is confined
to the last days; yet this must be given before the end,
for no move of this kind is possible after that event. It
is therefore a part of that religious movement which
takes place in the last days with especial reference to the
coming of Christ.” Smith, DR (1897), 485.
Angel.—
“ ‘Angel’ in both Hebrew and Greek signifies
‘messenger.’” Bunch, TR, 198.
“The three angels of Revelation 14 represent the
people who accept the light of God’s messages and go
forth as His agents to sound the warning throughout the
length and breadth of the earth.” 5 Testimonies,
455,456.
Saying.—
“The first and third angels’ messages are
proclaimed with a ‘loud voice’ (vs.7,9). The message
concerning the fall of Babylon is later proclaimed with
a loud voice (see on ch. 18:1,2).” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 828.
“In the messages of the first and second angels, the
work was done in this manner. Men and women were
moved to search the Scriptures, and they called the
attention of others to the truths revealed. It was
personal labor for individuals and families that gave

382

REVELATION 14
these messages their wonderful success.” (Review and
Herald, 1/27/1885). Evangelism, 435.
What is Meant by the Term Babylon?—
“At the present time the word Babel signifies
‘confusion,’ because of what occurred at that place.
Originally it meant the ‘Gate of God.’ The same root
word is rendered ‘Babylon.’ That name to the ancient
Babylonians
never
signified
‘confusion.’
Nebuchadnezzar never went up and down the world
proclaiming that he was king of ‘confusion.’
“It was the devil’s counterfeit of the gate and
road to heaven. It was his endeavor to accomplish on
earth what he had failed to accomplish in heaven. But
God foresaw that it could only result in the very opposite
of all this. He knew that instead of peace and liberty, it
meant bloodshed and despotism. Satan originated the
vast scheme so that whenever and wherever some
soul should arise to teach the true religion of God he
could be crushed at a blow.” Magan, Vatican & the
War, 26,27.
Babylon Is Not the Whole Wicked World.—
“Rev. 17 represents Babylon by the symbol of a
woman seated on a scarlet-colored beast. If, therefore,
the woman Babylon represents the whole of this fallen
world, the entire empire of the Devil, what does the
beast represent upon which the woman is seated? Is it
not a fact that the beast represents the fourth empire of
our earth in its papal form? And that being the case, is
it not a certainty that Babylon does not include the
whole wicked world? That the beast and the woman
are two distinct symbols, is evident from verse 7. The
same chapter represents the unlawful connection of
Babylon with the kings of the earth, and that she has
made the inhabitants of the earth drunken. She is also
represented as that great city that reigneth over the kings
of the earth. Babylon is therefore distinct from the
kings of the earth, and does not include all the wicked
of the earth. It is also stated that this great harlot sat
upon many waters. In the explanation it is stated that
these waters are peoples, and multitudes, and nations,
and tongues. Rev. 17:1, 15. Certainly we should not
confound the harlot with the waters or nations upon
which she is said to sit. When Babylon is destroyed,
being thrown down as a millstone is cast into the mighty
deep, and utterly burned with fire, the kings of the earth,
the merchants, the sailors, etc., are still spared, and
mourn, and lament over her. It is plain, therefore, that
the utter destruction of Babylon is not the destruction
of those wicked men who lived in iniquity with her.
Hence it follows that Babylon does not comprise the
whole wicked world.” Andrews, TAM, 37,38.
Babylon Is Not Confined to the Roman Catholic
Church.—
“That this [Roman Catholic] church is a very
prominent component part of great Babylon, is not
denied. The descriptions of chapter 17 seem to apply
very particularly to that church. But the name which she

bears on her forehead, ‘Mystery, Babylon the Great,
the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the
Earth,’ reveals other family connections. If this
church is the mother, who are the daughters? The
fact that these daughters are spoken of, shows that there
are other religious bodies besides the Romish Church
which come under this designation. Again, there is to be
a call made in connection with this message, ‘Come out
of her, my people’ (Revelation 18:1-4); and as this
message is located in the present generation, it follows,
if no other church but the Romish is included in
Babylon, that the people of God, as a body, are now
found in the communion of that church, and are to be
called out. But this conclusion, no Protestant at least
will be willing to adopt.” Smith, DR (1897), 485,486.
“The message of Revelation 14, announcing the
fall of Babylon must apply to religious bodies that were
once pure and have become corrupt. Since this
message follows the warning of the judgment, it must be
given in the last days; therefore it cannot refer to the
Roman Church alone, for that church has been in a
fallen condition for many centuries.”
Great
Controversy, 383.
Babylon Is Not the City of Rome.—
“The argument relied upon to show that the city of
Rome is the Babylon of the Apocalypse runs thus: ‘The
angel told John that the woman which he had seen
was the great city which reigned over the kings of the
earth, and that the seven heads of the beast are seven
mountains upon which the woman sitteth.’ And then,
taking the city and the mountains to be literal, and
finding Rome built upon just seven hills, the application
is made at once to literal Rome.
“The principle upon which this interpretation rests
is the assumption that the explanation of a symbol must
always be literal. It falls to the ground the moment it can
be shown that symbols are sometimes explained by
substituting for them other symbols, and then explaining
the latter. This can easily be done. In Revelation 11:3,
the symbol of the two witnesses is introduced. The next
verse reads: ‘These are the two olive trees and the two
candlesticks standing before the God of the earth.’ In
this case the first symbol is said to be the same as
another symbol which is elsewhere clearly explained.
So in the case before us. ‘The seven heads are seven
mountains,’ and ‘The woman is that great city;’ and
it will not be difficult to show that the mountains and
the city are both used symbolically. The reader’s
attention is asked to the following points:
“(1) We are informed in chapter 13 that one of the
seven heads was wounded to death. This head therefore
cannot be a literal mountain; for it would be folly to
speak of wounding a mountain to death.
“(2) Each of the seven heads has a crown upon it.
But who ever saw a literal mountain with a crown
upon it?
“(3) The seven heads are evidently successive in
order of time; for we read, ‘Five are fallen, and one is,

383

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and the other is not yet come.’ Revelation 17. But the
seven hills on which Rome is built are not successive,
and it would be absurd to apply such language to them.”
Smith, DR (1897), 486-487.
Babylon Signifies the Universal Worldly Church
Systems.—
“How unlike what God designed that his
people should be, has this great city become! The
church of Christ was to be the light of the world, a city
set upon a hill, which could not be hid. Matt. 5:14-17.
But instead of this, his professed people have united
with the world, and joined in affinity with it. This
unlawful union of the church and the world (James
4:4) has resulted in her rejection by God; for how can
the God of truth and holiness recognize as his people
those who, in addition to their departure from their Lord,
have rejected with scorn the tidings of his speedy
coming?” Andrews, TAM, 61.
“Babylon is called a woman. A woman, used as a
symbol, signifies a church. The woman of chapter 12
was interpreted to mean a church. The woman of
chapter 17 should undoubtedly be interpreted as
signifying also a church. The character of the woman
determines the character of the church represented, a
chaste woman standing for a pure church, a vile woman
for an impure or apostate church. The woman Babylon
is herself a harlot, and the mother of daughters like
herself. This circumstance, as well as the name itself,
shows that Babylon is not limited to any single
ecclesiastical body, but must be composed of many.
It must take in all of a like nature, and represent the
entire corrupt or apostate church of the earth. This
will perhaps explain the language of Revelation 18:24,
which represents that when God makes requisition upon
great Babylon for the blood of his martyrs, in her will be
found ‘the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all’
that have been slain upon the earth. …Countries have
their established religions, and zealously oppose
dissenters. Babylon has made all nations drunken with
the wine of her fornication, that is, her false doctrines; it
can therefore symbolize nothing less than the
universal worldly church.
“…The true church is a chaste virgin. 2 Cor. 11:2.
The church that is joined with the world in
friendship, is a harlot. It is this unlawful connection
with the kings of the earth that constitutes her the
great harlot of the Apocalypse. Rev. 17. Thus the
Jewish Church, at first espoused to the Lord (Jeremiah,
chs. 2, 3, and 31:32), became a harlot. Eze. 16. This
church, when thus apostatized from God, was called
Sodom (Isaiah 1), just as ‘the great city’ (Babylon) is so
called in Revelation 11. The unlawful union with the
world of which Babylon is guilty, is positive proof that it
is not the civil power. That the people of God are in her
midst just before her over-throw is proof that she is
professedly a religious body. For these reasons, is it not
very evident that the Babylon of the Apocalypse is the
professed church united with the world?” Smith,

DR(1897), 487,490.
“In the professedly Christian world many turn
away from the plain teachings of the Bible and build
up a creed from human speculations and pleasing
fables, and they point to their tower as a way to climb
up to heaven. Men hang with admiration upon the lips
of eloquence while it teaches that the transgressor
shall not die, that salvation may be secured without
obedience to the law of God. If the professed followers
of Christ would accept God’s standard, it would bring
them into unity; but so long as human wisdom is exalted
above His Holy Word, there will be divisions and
dissension. The existing confusion of conflicting creeds
and sects is fitly represented by the term ‘Babylon,’
which prophecy (Rev. 14:8; 18:2) applies to the worldloving churches of the last days.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 124.
“The churches, represented by Babylon, are
represented as having fallen from their spiritual state to
become a persecuting power against those who keep the
commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ.” Testimonies to Ministers, 117.
“No church has a right to consider itself
apostolic while it violates the commandments of God.
So long as a church does this, the stain of apostasy is
upon her, and in this respect she is Babylonian rather
than apostolic.” Testimonies to Ministers, 71.
Roman Catholic Church is the Mother.-“And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet
color, and decked with gold and precious stones and
pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication:
“And upon her forehead was a name written,
MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER
OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE
EARTH.” Revelation 17:4,5.
“One of Pope John Paul II's closest aides has
written to bishops worldwide declaring that
the Catholic church is the ‘mother’ of other Christian
churches, a move which could hurt Vatican efforts
toward unity with other believers. …In the document,
Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger told the bishops that it
was incorrect to refer to Christian churches, ranging
from Orthodox to Protestant, as ‘sister’ churches of the
Catholic church..” VATICAN CITY (Associated Press),
Sept. 3, 2000.
Fallen Protestantism Is Part of Babylon, The
Daughters of Mother Rome—
“Rome, having the power, destroyed vast
multitudes of those whom she adjudged heretics. The
Protestant church has shown the same spirit. Witness
the burning of Michael Servetus by the Protestants of
Geneva with John Calvin at their head. Witness the
long-continued oppression of dissenters by the Church of

384

REVELATION 14
England. Witness the hanging of Quakers and whipping
of Baptists even by the Puritan fathers of New England,
themselves fugitives from like oppression by the Church
of England. But these, some may say, are things of the
past. Very true; yet they show that when persons
governed by strong religious prejudice have the
power to coerce dissenters, they cannot forbear to use
it—a state of things which we look for in this country
under a further fulfilment of the closing prophecy of
chapter 13.
“Mark also how far they have departed from the
teachings of Christ in other respects. Christ forbade his
people to seek after the treasures of this world. But the
popular church, as a body, exhibits greater eagerness
for wealth than do worldlings themselves. In how
many churches does mammon bear rule!
“Christ says, ‘Be not ye called Rabbi,’ that is,
master, or doctor; ‘for one is your Master, even
Christ.’ To do this is to partake of the same spirit which
has lead aspiring men to assume to be the head of the
church, the successor of St. Peter, the vicegerent of
Christ, and a god upon earth. Yet how many in the
Protestant church, in imitation of the Romish, adopt the
title of ‘Reverend,’ which in our version of the
Scriptures is applied to God alone: ‘Holy and reverend
is his name.’ But not content with this, some become
‘Very Reverend,’ and ‘Right Reverend,’ and ‘Doctors of
Divinity.’
“The New Testament speaks in the most decided
terms against adornments and extravagance in dress; yet
where shall we look for a display of the latest
fashions, the most costly attire, the most gaudy
adornments, the richest diamonds, and the most
dazzling jewelry, except in a fashionable assembly in
a Protestant church on a pleasant Sunday? Such is
now the state of the religious world, that many, in
pursuit of their vocation as lawyers, doctors, politicians,
merchant kings, etc., seek through the avenue of church
connection success in business, honor in society, high
offices in the nation, and lucrative positions everywhere.
And much more of this will be seen, when, as already
explained, church and state shall be united in America,
and a religious profession shall become a qualification
for political office. To adopt the form of godliness from
such motives must be most abominable in the sight of
God; yet these very classes are welcomed by the
churches, because it will make them still more popular.
“Babylon is represented as trafficking in the souls
of men. …Look at all the arts and devices resorted to
draw the multitude, not to convert and save them, but to
gain their patronage and influence.
The most
disastrous result of all this is that the minister must
preach smooth things, and tickle fashionable ears
with pleasing fables.
“It was the will of Christ that his church should be
one. He prayed that his disciples might be one, as he
and the Father were one; for this would give power to his
gospel, and cause the world to believe in him. Instead
of this, look at the confusion that exists in the
Protestant world, the many sectional walls that divide

it up into a network of societies, and the many creeds,
discordant as the languages of those who were
dispersed at the tower of Babel. God is not the author
of all these. It is just this state of things which the word
Babylon, as a descriptive term, appropriately designates.
It is evidently used for this very purpose, and not at all as
a term of reproach. Instead of being stirred with feelings
of resentment when this term is mentioned, people
should rather examine their position, to see if in faith or
practice they are guilty of any connection with this great
city of confusion, and if so, separate at once
therefrom.” Smith, DR (1897), 488-490.
The Fall of Babylon is Not Her Destruction.—
“As Babylon is not a literal city, the fall cannot be
a literal overthrow. We have already seen what an
absurdity this would involve. And besides, between the
fall and the destruction of Babylon, the clearest
distinction is maintained by the prophecy itself.
Babylon ‘falls’ before it is with violence ‘thrown
down,’ as a millstone cast into the sea, and ‘utterly
burned with fire.’ The fall is therefore a moral fall;
for after the fall, the voice is addressed to the people of
God who are still in her connection, ‘Come out of her,
my people;’ and the reason is immediately given—‘that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues.’ Babylon therefore still exists to
sin, and her plagues are still future, after the fall.” Smith,
DR (1897), 490.
“[Babylon’s] fall was her rejection by God, her
destruction being deferred for a considerable period, the
following facts prove:
1. The nature of the reasons assigned for the fall of
Babylon proves that it is a moral fall; for it is because
she has made the nations drunk with her wine. In
other words, it is her wickedness that has caused God to
reject her.
2. The consequences of her fall testify that that
fall is her rejection by God, and not her destruction;
for her fall causes her to become the hold of foul spirits,
and the cage of unclean and hateful birds. This shows
that God has given her up to strong delusions. It is for
this reason that the voice from heaven cries, ‘Come out
of her, my people.’” Andrews, TAM, 51.
The Fall of Babylon is Not the Loss of Papal Rome’s
Civil Power.—
“Those who make Babylon apply exclusively to the
papacy, claim that the fall of Babylon is the loss of civil
power by the papal church. But such a view would be
inconsistent with the prophecy in several particulars:—
“Babylon falls because she makes all nations
drink of her wine, or instills among them her false
doctrines. But this by no means caused the loss of the
pope’s temporal power; on the contrary, it was the very
means by which he so long maintained his supremacy.
“Because of the fall of Babylon, she becomes the
hold of foul spirits and hateful birds; but such is not at
the result to Rome of the loss of civil power.

385

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The people of God are called out of Babylon on
account of her increasing sinfulness resulting from the
fall; but the loss of the temporal power of the papacy
constitutes no additional reason why the people of
God should leave that church. The reasons given why
Babylon meets with this moral fall is ‘because she made
all nations drink of the wine of the wrath [not anger,
but intense passion] of her fornication.’ There is but
one thing to which this can refer, and that is false
doctrines.” Smith, DR (1897), 490-491.
The Cause of the Fall of Babylon.—
“The cause of the fall of Babylon is thus stated:
‘She made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath
of her fornication.’ Her fornication was her unlawful
union with the kings of the earth; and the wine is that
with which the church has intoxicated the nations of the
earth. There is but one thing that this can refer to; viz.,
false doctrine. This harlot, in consequence of her
unlawful union with the powers of the earth, has
corrupted the pure truths of the Bible, and with the wine
of her false doctrine has intoxicated the nations.”
Andrews, TAM, 51.
“Babylon is Fallen!” This Message Given When
Protestantism Fell.—
“To come now more particularly to the application
of the prophecy concerning the fall of Babylon, let us see
how the religious world stood with reference to the
possibility of such a change, when the time came for the
proclamation of this message, in connection with the
first message, about the year 1844. Paganism was only
apostasy and corruption in the beginning, and is so
still; and no moral fall is possible there. Catholicism
has been for centuries about as low in the scale as it is
possible for a church to sink. No room for a moral
fall in that church. Two great branches of Babylon
were, therefore, when the second message became due,
in so low a condition morally that a further declension
with them was scarcely possible. Not so, however, with
the Protestant branch of this great city. These churches,
which commenced the great work of reformation
from papal corruption, had done some noble work.
They had run well for a season. They reached a moral
plane vastly higher than that of the other divisions
named. They were, in a word, in such a position that
with them a moral fall was possible. The conclusion is
therefore inevitable that the message announcing the
fall had reference almost wholly to the Protestant
churches.
“The question may then be asked why this
announcement was not made sooner, if so large a portion
of Babylon, the pagan and papal divisions, had been so
long fallen. And the answer is at hand: Babylon, as a
whole, could not be said to be fallen so long as one
division of it remained unfallen. It could not be
announced, therefore, till a change for the worse came
over the Protestant world, and the truth, through which
alone the path of progress lay, had been deliberately
discarded. But when this took place, and a moral fall

was experienced in this last division, then the
announcement concerning Babylon as a whole could be
made, as it could not have been made before—‘Babylon
is fallen.’ Smith, DR (1897), 492,493.
“The separation of the Protestants from Rome was
characterized by the renunciation of several great errors.
It is therefore worthy of our attention to determine
carefully whether the Protestants made such a reform as
would cause them to cease to be a part of Babylon. They
rejected the authority of the pope and of the church of
Rome; they appealed to the Bible as the supreme rule of
faith; they exposed many errors and sins of the church of
Rome; and they taught justification by faith.
“But to leave Babylon it is not enough to separate
from the communion of those who sustain her errors.
It is necessary to renounce these errors by receiving
the truth of God, and it is necessary, also, to renounce
the sins of Babylon by true repentance. If the
Protestants returned to the purity and simplicity of the
New Testament, then they ceased to be a part of
Babylon; but if they retained a considerable number
of the essential errors and sins of Babylon, and
contented themselves to preserve their part of the old
city, after a partial purification, instead of building
anew after the divine model, then they have never
ceased to be a part of Babylon. The churches of the
New Testament were composed of those only who
repented of their sins, believed on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and were buried with him in baptism. But the churches
which compose the Romish apostasy are organized on a
plan essentially different from that of the apostles. By
means of infant baptism, the entire population is
brought into the church; the church and the world
are no longer distinct, and the church becomes an
assembly of unconverted men. This confusion of the
world and the church is one of the essential errors which
made a Babylon of the Catholic church. Now it is a
painful fact that the reformers did not see it necessary to
commence at the foundation, and form churches of
converted persons only; on the contrary, they positively
refused to do this, but their first churches were simply
Romish churches which had accepted the doctrines of
the Reformation, but which were composed of
persons admitted by infant baptism, the larger part
of whom were unacquainted with Christian
experience; and the churches afterward raised up by
them were of a similar character, because formed on
the same model.
“Now we offer a second decisive proof that the
Reformation was not sufficiently complete to deliver the
Protestants from Babylon. The unlawful union of
Church and State is the natural consequence of the
prevalence of infant baptism; for that human ordinance
made the terms church and world two names for one
thing. This shows how appropriate is the term Babylon
as the name for this city of confusion. But Babylon is
called a prostitute because of her unlawful union with
the kings of the earth. This criminal union is seen when
by their royal authority they exercise their influence

386

REVELATION 14
informing the doctrines of the church, in giving form to
the service and worship of God, and in creating offices
in the church, and filling them with their favorites; and
when the church not only accepts all this, but even
sanctions the criminal practices of kings, so that she may
profit by their revenues, and that she may use this power
to persecute those who do not accept her dogmas. Was
it true that the reformers separated Church and State in
Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
Scotland and England? Did they imitate the apostles in
organizing churches without the participation of the civil
power? By no means. In all these countries the civil
power has exercised a strong influence in the formation
of the confessions of faith, and in deciding what should
be the character and manner of the worship, in creating
church offices and in selecting the persons to fill those
offices, and even in determining who should be the
ministers of the word of God. These things are carried
so far in England that the king or queen is recognized
as the head of the church. This unlawful union of
Church and State made Babylon a prostitute, and the
reformers did not dissolve this union, but
perpetuated it.
“The ordinances of the church have been corrupted
in Babylon. To leave Babylon it is necessary to turn
from these corruptions, and to receive the pure
ordinances of the New Testament church. Did the
reformers see the necessity of doing this? They did not.
They were satisfied with the baptism they had
received in their infancy from the Catholic priests,
and they perpetuated this corruption of the ordinance of
baptism in the Protestant churches. They served in the
work of the Christian ministry by virtue of their
ordination as Catholic priests, and they never
considered it important to be set apart to the holy
ministry by converted men. They were satisfied with
that which they had received from Rome. Even the
bishops and archbishops of the ancient Catholic Church
of England have been perpetuated in the Church of
England and in the Episcopal Church of America, and
these churches pretend to be the Catholic Church, or
rather, grand divisions of that church, because they can
trace their bishops back to the apostles through the long
line of popes.
“These things show that the Reformation formed
the third grand division of Babylon, instead of
establishing a church upon the model of the ancient
apostolic church. This third division is much less
soiled with error than are the other two divisions, but
it is not clean in the sight of God. Since the
Reformation, other Protestant churches have arisen,
having less of papal errors than the first reformed
churches. But a serious error which is at the foundation
of the great Babylonian apostasy is found in nearly all
the Protestant churches.
That great apostasy has
virtually annulled the commandment which forbids
graven images, and the commandment which
commands men to sanctify the seventh day in
memory of the Creator’s rest. The action of the
church of Rome with respect to the first of these

commandments was considered by the reformers a just
ground for separation from that church, and yet nearly
all the Protestant churches have perpetuated the action of
that great apostasy with respect to the fourth
commandment. They violate the fourth commandment, and teach men so; or rather, they make void
the commandment of God to keep the tradition of the
elders. They set aside the Sabbath of the Lord that they
may keep the festival day of the sun; and in thus
violating the fourth commandment, they actually violate
the entire law of God. No church has a right to
consider itself apostolic while it violates the
commandments of God. So long as a church does
this, the stain of apostasy is upon her, and in this
respect she is Babylonian rather than apostolic.
“...The fall of this great city is announced after the
third and last section has fallen. It is only then we are
able to say in truth that Babylon is fallen. The place
assigned to this proclamation in prophecy is the only
place suitable for it. For us to be able to leave Babylon,
it is necessary that the angel of God should illuminate
the earth with his glory (Rev. 18:1, 2), and thus dissipate
the darkness which its errors have caused. This angel
accomplishes his work in intimate connection with
the angel who announces that the hour of God’s
Judgment is come, and with that other angel who
preaches the commandments of God and the faith of
Jesus. It is at the time of these messages that the people
of God are called out of Babylon—a proof conclusive
that the greater part are in Babylon when this
proclamation is made. The coming of Christ must be
preceded by a work which shall establish the
primitive purity, and this work must be accomplished
by the three angels. Consequently, the proclamation
concerning Babylon pertains to the end of this
dispensation.” Andrews, TAM, 66-72.
(See Rev. 18:2-4 for more comments.)
The Second Angel’s Message in History.—
“It is well known that in immediate connection
with the proclamation of the hour of God’s Judgment,
the announcement of the fall of Babylon was everywhere made throughout our land. Its connection with
the advent message is well expressed by the following
from Elder Himes, dated McConnellsville, O. , Aug. 29,
1844:
“‘When we commenced the work of giving the
‘midnight cry’ with Bro. Miller, in 1840, he had been
lecturing nine years. During that time he stood almost
alone. But his labors had been incessant and effectual in
awakening professors of religion to the true hope of
God’s people, and the necessary preparation for the
advent of the Lord, as also the awakening of all
classes of the unconverted to a sense of their lost
condition, and the duty of immediate repentance and
conversion to God as a preparation to meet the
Bridegroom in peace at his coming. These were the
great objects of his labor. He made no attempt to
convert men to a sect or party, in religion. Hence he

387

GEMS FROM REVELATION
labored among all parties and sects without interfering
with their organization or discipline, believing that the
members of the different communions could retain their
standing, and at the same time prepare for the advent of
their King and labor for the salvation of men in these
relations until the consummation of their hope. …We
told the ministers and churches that it was no part of our
business to break them up, or to divide and distract them.
We had one distinct object, and that was to give the
‘cry,’ the warning of the ‘Judgment at the door,’ and
to persuade our fellowmen to get ready for the event.
“Most of the ministers and churches that opened
their doors to us and our brethren who were proclaiming
the advent doctrine, cooperated with us till the last year.
The ministry and membership who availed themselves of
our labors, but had not sincerely embraced the doctrine,
saw that they must either go with the doctrine, and
preach and maintain it, or in the crisis which was right
upon them, they would have difficulty with the decided
and determined believers. They therefore decided
against the doctrine, and determined, some by one
policy and some by another, to suppress the subject.
“This placed our brethren and sisters among them
in a most trying position. Most of them loved their
churches, and could not think of leaving. But when
they were ridiculed, oppressed, and in various ways
cut off from their former privileges and enjoyment,
and when the ‘meat in due season’ was withheld from
them, and the siren song of ‘peace and safety' was
resounded in their ears from Sabbath to Sabbath,
they were soon weaned from their party
predilections, and arose in the majesty of their
strength, shook off the yoke, and raised the cry,
‘Come out of her, my people!’” Andrews, TAM, 55-57.
“As the churches refused to receive the first angel’s
message, they rejected the light from heaven and fell
from the favor of God. They trusted to their own
strength, and by opposing the first message placed
themselves where they could not see the light of the
second angel’s message. But the beloved of God, who
were oppressed, accepted the message, ‘Babylon is
fallen,’ and left the churches.” Early Writings, 237.
The Second Angel Includes An Additional Message:
‘Come Out of Her, My People’.—
“The [First Angel’s] message was rejected; and
what was the result? …Everywhere throughout the
land the cry was raised, ‘Babylon is fallen,’ and, in
anticipation of the movement brought to view in Rev.
18:1-4, they added, ‘Come out of her, my people;’
and about fifty thousand severed their connection
with the denominations where they were not allowed to
hold and proclaim their views in peace.” Smith, DR
(1897), 494.
“At the time of the First Angel’s Message, the
people of God were in Babylon; for the announcement of
the fall of Babylon, and the cry, ‘Come out of her, my
people,’ is made after the first proclamation has been

heard. Here also we have a most decisive testimony that
Babylon includes Protestant as well as Catholic
churches. It is certain that the people of God, at the time
of the preaching of the hour of his Judgment, were in all
the popular churches; and this fact is a most striking
testimony as to what constitutes the great city of
confusion. In a word, Paul has well described the
Babylon of the Apocalypse, and the duty of the people of
God with reference to it, in 2 Tim. 3:1-5: ‘This know
also, that in the last days perilous times shall come;
for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers
of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded,
lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof;
from such turn away.’ Who would dare to limit this
description to the Catholic Church?” Andrews, TAM, 54.
“The duty of the people of God is plainly
expressed, ‘Come out of her, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.’ Her sins have reached unto heaven, and God
has remembered her iniquities; she has united herself to
the kings of earth, and confided in the arm of flesh,
and not in Jehovah. For the sake of this protection, she
has smoothed down the terrible threatenings of God’s
word against sin, and has thrown the mantle of religion
over some of the basest of human crimes. As an
instance, we will cite the Fugitive Slave Law, which
during its existence had the sanction of many of the
leading doctors of divinity. Pride, love of the world,
and departure from God too plainly identify the Babylon
of the Apocalypse with St. Paul's description of the
popular church of the last days. 2 Tim. 3:1-5. ‘From
such,’ says the apostle, ‘turn away.’ If we would not
partake of her sins, and thus share in the plagues that
are about to be poured out upon her, we must heed
the voice from heaven, ‘Come out of her, my
people.’” Andrews, TAM, 63,64.
All Israel Comes Out of Babylon to Participate in the
Anti-typical Day of Atonement.-“The church systems were given a call to repent
through the first angel’s message. Spiritual Israel did
not wait for their churches to repent, before they would
repent. Their churches never did repent. Thus, God’s
people felt it their duty to repent themselves, and 50,000
came out of the fallen church systems. Jesus says, ‘If any
man hears my voice…’ True Israel will respond to His
voice.” PJ.
Experiences of Those Who Came Out of Babylon in
1844 Second Advent Movement.—
“There is one thing, in reference to these (200)
converts, that should be noticed. The great mass of
them have not joined any of the existing sects: they
stand by themselves. Nearly all such are living,
thriving Christians, and strong in the belief of the

388

REVELATION 14
speedy advent. But most of those who have connected
themselves with any of the sects, are dying in religion,
and are giving up the doctrine of the speedy appearing.
They have the spiritual asthma; it is hard for them to
breathe.” Midnight Cry, Letter from Silas Hawley,
August 24, 1843.
“One thing which tends to increase the interest and
union, is, the bands which have so long held us to
sectarian churches, are now fast breaking away, and
God seems to be signally blessing those individuals
who have become free, by pouring His spirit upon
them in such a fullness, as they never before
experienced. Many of us have remained in our
churches as long as union could be preserved, especially
in the Methodist Episcopal Church. But the time has
now arrived, in which they prophesied we should burn
our Bibles, or be asking pardon of the church for our
errors. But they, seeing us still firm in the faith, and as
devoted as ever, have become discouraged, and are now
bitter against us. Their Scripture arguments have long
since been silenced, and they meet us only with censure
and reproach, yet the Lord is with us, while His spirit
appears to be fast withdrawing from the churches
and the ungodly.” Midnight Cry, Letter from Richard
Walker, February 8, 1844.
“The Adventists in this neighborhood are few, but
in the main firm in the belief that this is the last year of
time. We are doing what we can to convince the people
of the truth of the doctrine; but this whole community
are embraced in the walls of Babylon; and as we have
obeyed the command of God to ‘Come out of her,’ we
find that our feeble voices are scarcely audible over,
or through, the high and thick walls of that great city,
and especially as the watchmen upon her towers are
unanimous in either sleeping at their post with dead
indifference, or crying, ‘Peace and safety.’ May the
Lord help us to watch and be ready.” Midnight Cry,
Letter from W.D. Cook, March 7, 1844.

man-made churches. Our meetings are but thinly
attended. Many who profess to love the Lord, are
determined to hear nothing of His coming, and think by
staying away, our meetings will go down. But blessed
be God, there are some 20 brethren and sisters,
scattered through these towns, who get together as
often as possible, and God blesses us.” Midnight Cry,
Letter from Brother Hassler, July 4, 1844.
Falling Religious Condition of Protestant Churches
Since 1844.—
“I saw that in ’44 God had opened a door and no
man could shut it, and shut a door and no man could
open it. Those who rejected the light which was
brought to the world by the message of the second
angel went into darkness, and how great was that
darkness.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 74.
“A marked change then came over the churches in
respect to their spiritual condition. …When a person
refuses the light, he necessarily puts himself in
darkness; when he rejects truth, he inevitably forges
the shackles of error about his own limbs. Loss of
spirituality—a moral fall—must follow.
This the
churches experienced. They chose to adhere to old
errors, and still promulgate their false doctrines among
the people. The light of truth must therefore leave them.
Some of them felt and deplored the change.” Smith, DR
(1897), 494.

“Our dear brother Storrs says that the Great Head
of the Church designed that we should come out of
Babylon, and not wait for Babylon to thrust us out. I
believe he is right, and I am therefore determined to
come out. …I now wish to say through your paper to
the world, that I do from this time regard myself, and
hereby proclaim myself to all men, as free and
independent of all ecclesiastical domination, as a
member of no sect, and a subscriber to no creed. At
the same time, I receive the Bible as the word of the
living and true God, and am looking for the immediate
coming to the Lord Jesus Christ to whom I must give
account.”
Fitch, Charles, Midnight Cry, Letter,
3/14/1844.

“I saw that since the second angel proclaimed the
fall of the churches, they have been growing more and
more corrupt. They bear the name of being Christ’s
followers; yet it is impossible to distinguish them from
the world. Ministers take their texts from the Word
of God, but preach smooth things. To this the natural
heart feels no objection. It is only the spirit and power
of the truth and the salvation of Christ that are hateful to
the carnal heart. There is nothing in the popular ministry
that stirs the wrath of Satan, makes the sinner tremble, or
applies to the heart and conscience the fearful realities of
a judgment soon to come. Wicked men are generally
pleased with a form of piety without true godliness,
and they will aid and support such a religion.
“Said the angel, ‘Nothing less than the whole armor
of righteousness can enable man to overcome the powers
of darkness and retain the victory over them. Satan has
taken full possession of the churches as a body. The
sayings and doings of men are dwelt upon instead of
the plain, cutting truths of the Word of God. The
spirit and friendship of the world are at enmity with God.
When the truth in its simplicity and strength, as it is in
Jesus, is brought to bear against the spirit of the world, it
at once awakens the spirit of persecution….’” Early
Writings, 273,274.

“The few brethren and sisters in this section (of
Oakland County, Mich.) who have fully believed in the
time, continue steadfast and firm in the faith. We hold
our meetings by ourselves, having withdrawn from

“The fall is understood to be progressive; it is
not yet complete, but it will be so when the major
Protestant churches collaborate with the Church of Rome
in an attempt to coerce the conscience (Revelation 13).”

389

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Zurcher, COR, 95.

state.” PJ.

Fall of Protestant Babylon is Not Yet Complete.—
“The second angel’s message of Revelation 14 was
first preached in the summer of 1844, and it then had a
more direct application to the churches of the United
States, where the warning of the judgment had been
most widely proclaimed and most generally rejected,
and where the declension in the churches had been most
rapid. But the message of the second angel did not
reach its complete fulfillment in 1844. The churches
then experienced a moral fall, in consequence of their
refusal of the light of the advent message; but that
fall was not complete. As they have continued to reject
the special truths for this time they have fallen lower
and lower. Not yet, however, can it be said that
‘Babylon is fallen,... because she made all nations
drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.’
She has not yet made all nations do this. The spirit of
world conforming and indifference to the testing truths
for our time exists and has been gaining ground in
churches of the Protestant faith in all the countries of
Christendom; and these churches are included in the
solemn and terrible denunciation of the second angel.
But the work of apostasy has not yet reached its
culmination.
“The Bible declares that before the coming of the
Lord, Satan will work ‘with all power and signs and
lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness;’ and they that ‘received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved,’ will be left to
receive ‘strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie.’ 2 Thess. 2:9-11. Not until this condition shall be
reached, and the union of the church with the world
shall be fully accomplished throughout Christendom,
will the fall of Babylon be complete. The change is a
progressive one, and the perfect fulfillment of
Revelation 14:8 is yet future.” Great Controversy, 389.

“Babylon hath been a golden cup in the LORD'S
hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations
have drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are
mad.” Jeremiah 51:7.

A Fallen Church Can Corporately Repent.—
“This testimony [Babylon is fallen] comes from
God, and is not dependent upon the will of man, and
therefore no person should be offended when it is
presented. If that which is said of Babylon is true of
a particular denomination, then that people should
receive the light with gratitude, and bring forth the
fruits of repentance.” Andrews, TAM, 65.
Made All Nations.—
“Coercion is suggested in the phrase ‘made all
nations drink.’ Religious elements will bring pressure
to bear upon the state to enforce their decrees.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 831.
“All nations will drink.
This is a global
experience. No nation will be left out. China, Viet
Nam, North Korea, Cuba—all the atheist nations
remaining—with all the rest of the world, will drink the
false doctrines of the fallen Christian churches—
especially the doctrine of union of church with the

Drink.—
“A figure describing the acceptance of the false
teaching and policies of Babylon.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 831.
“We are accountable for that which shines in our
day. If we turn from the testimony of God’s word,
and accept false doctrines because our fathers taught
them, we fall under the condemnation pronounced upon
Babylon; we are drinking of the wine of her
abomination.” Great Controversy, 536.
Wine.—
“The pure ‘water of life’ (Rev. 22:17) represents
the pure ‘words’ of truth (Rev. 22:18), so the
intoxicating ‘wine’ of Babylon’s fornication
represents false, impure doctrine. Spiritual fornication
is the union of the church with the state, her new
husband. Such a union (fornication) always lowers the
standards and produces error and false doctrines. ‘But
they also have erred through wine, and through
strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the
prophet have erred through strong drink, they are
swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through
strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in
judgment.’ Isaiah 28:7.” PJ
The Wine of Babylon.—
“The great sin charged against Babylon is that she
‘made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication.’ This cup of intoxication which she presents
to the world represents the false doctrines that she has
accepted as the result of her unlawful connection
with the great ones of the earth. Friendship with the
world corrupts her faith, and in her turn she exerts a
corrupting influence upon the world by teaching
doctrines which are opposed to the plainest statements of
Holy Writ.” Great Controverys, 388.
“The fallen denominational churches are Babylon.
Babylon has been fostering poisonous doctrines, the
wine of error. This wine of error is made up of false
doctrines, such as the natural immortality of the soul,
the eternal torment of the wicked, the denial of the
pre-existence of Christ prior to His birth in
Bethlehem, and advocating and exalting the first day
of the week above God’s holy, sanctified day. These
and kindred errors are presented to the world by the
various churches....” Evangelism, 365.
“She has corrupted the pure truths of God’s word,
and made the nations drunken with pleasing fables.
Among the doctrines she teaches contrary to the word

390

REVELATION 14
of God, may be mentioned the following:—
“1. The doctrine of a temporal millennium, or a
thousand years of peace and prosperity and
righteousness all over the earth before the second
coming of Christ. This doctrine is especially calculated
to shut the ears of the people against the evidences of the
second advent near, and will probably lull as many souls
into a state of carnal security which will lead to their
final ruin as any heresy which has ever been devised by
the great enemy of truth.
“2. Sprinkling instead of immersion, which is the
only Scriptural mode of baptism, and a fitting memorial
of the burial and resurrection of our Lord, for which
purpose it was designed.
Having corrupted this
ordinance, and destroyed it as a memorial of the
resurrection of Christ, the way was prepared for the
substitution of something else for this purpose, which
she attempted in—
“3. The change of the Sabbath of the fourth
commandment, the seventh day, into the festival of
Sunday as the rest day of the Lord and a memorial of his
resurrection, a memorial which has never been
commanded, and can by no possible means appropriately
commemorate that event. Fathered by heathenism as
‘the wild solar holiday of all pagan times,’ Sunday was
led to the font by the pope, and christened as in
institution of the gospel church. Thus an attempt was
made to destroy a memorial which the great God had set
up to commemorate his own magnificent creative work,
and erect another in its stead to commemorate the
resurrection of Christ, for which there was no occasion,
as the Lord himself had already provided a memorial for
that purpose.
“4. The doctrine of the natural immortality of
the soul. This also was derived from the pagan world.
As distinguished converts from heathenism entered the
ranks of Christians, they soon became ‘Fathers of the
church,’ and foster-fathers of this pernicious doctrine as
a part of divine truth. This error nullifies the two great
Scripture doctrines of the resurrection and the general
judgment, and furnishes a well-laid track for the car of
modern Spiritualism with its load of pollution. From it
have sprung such other evil doctrines as the conscious
state of the dead, saint-worship, Mariolatry,
purgatory, reward at death, prayers and baptisms for
the dead, eternal torment, and Universalism.
“5. The doctrine that the saints, as un-clothed,
immaterialized spirits, find their eternal inheritance
in far-away, indefinable regions, ‘beyond the bounds
of time and space.’ Thus multitudes have been turned
away from the Scriptural view that this present earth is
to be destroyed by fire at the day of judgment and
perdition of ungodly men, and that from its ashes the
voice of Omnipotence will evoke a new earth, which
will be the future everlasting kingdom of glory, and
which the saints will possess as their eternal inheritance.
“…If it were not for the false doctrines which she
has instilled into the minds of all men, how the plain
truths of the Bible would move the world! But people
are held by these, as under the stupefying influence of

the most powerful intoxicant.“
491,492.

Smith, DR (1897),

“The theory of eternal torment is one of the false
doctrines that constitute the wine of the abomination of
Babylon, of which she makes all nations drink.
Revelation 14:8; 17:2. That ministers of Christ should
have accepted this heresy and proclaimed it from the
sacred desk is indeed a mystery. They received it from
Rome, as they received the false sabbath.” Great
Controversy, 536.
“As fundamental errors, we might class with this
counterfeit Sabbath other errors which Protestants have
brought away from the Catholic church, such as
sprinkling for baptism, the trinity, the consciousness of
the dead and eternal life in misery. The mass who have
held these fundamental errors, have doubtless done it
ignorantly, but can it be supposed that the church of
Christ will carry along with her these errors till the
judgment scenes burst upon the world? We think
not.” James White, Review & Herald, September 12,
1854.
“Just as sweet and unfermented wine is the symbol
of truth and spiritual blessings (Isa. 25:6; 55:1; 1 Cor.
11:25-29), so fermented and intoxicating wine is the
symbol of error and false teachings. The poisonous
wine of Babylon is maddening and intoxicating. It
unbalances the mind and brings confusion in thought
and conduct. The false doctrines of Babylon lead to
fornication both literal and spiritual.” Bunch, TR, 202.
(See Revelation 17:2 for more comments.)
All Nations Drink Wine of Her Fornication.—
“The great sin charged against Babylon is that she
‘made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of
her fornication.’ This cup of intoxication which she
presents to the world represents the false doctrines that
she has accepted as the result of her unlawful connection
with the great ones of the earth. Friendship with the
world corrupts her faith, and in her turn she exerts a
corrupting influence upon the world by teaching
doctrines which are opposed to the plainest
statements of Holy Writ.
“Rome withheld the Bible from the people and
required all men to accept her teachings in its place. It
was the work of the Reformation to restore to men the
word of God; but is it not too true that in the churches of
our time men are taught to rest their faith upon their
creed and the teachings of their church rather than
on the Scriptures? Said Charles Beecher, speaking of
the Protestant churches: ‘They shrink from any rude
word against creeds with the same sensitiveness with
which those holy fathers would have shrunk from a rude
word against the rising veneration of saints and martyrs
which they were fostering.... The Protestant evangelical
denominations have so tied up one another’s hands, and
their own, that, between them all, a man cannot become

391

GEMS FROM REVELATION
a preacher at all, anywhere, without accepting some
book besides the Bible.... There is nothing imaginary in
the statement that the creed power is now beginning to
prohibit the Bible as really as Rome did, though in a
subtler way.’ –Sermon on "The Bible a Sufficient
Creed," delivered at Fort Wayne, Indiana, Feb. 22, 1846.
“When faithful teachers expound the word of God,
there arise men of learning, ministers professing to
understand the Scriptures, who denounce sound doctrine
as heresy, and thus turn away inquirers after truth. Were
it not that the world is hopelessly intoxicated with the
wine of Babylon, multitudes would be convicted and
converted by the plain, cutting truths of the word of
God. But religious faith appears so confused and
discordant that the people know not what to believe as
truth. The sin of the world’s impenitence lies at the door
of the church.” Great Controversy, 388,389.
“God appointed the church to be the light of the
world, and at the same time ordained that his word
should be the light of the church. But when the church
becomes unfaithful to her trust, and corrupts the pure
doctrines of the gospel, as a natural consequence the
world becomes intoxicated with her false doctrine. That
the nations of the earth are in such a condition at the
present time, is too obvious to be denied. The world is
intoxicated in the pursuit of riches and honor, but the
sin lies at the door of the church; for the church
sanctions what the Lord strictly forbade, and she sets
the example to the world. If the church had not
intoxicated the world with the wine of her false
doctrines, the plain truths of the Bible would powerfully
move the public mind. But the world seems hopelessly
drunken with the wine of Babylon.” Andrews, TAM, 53.
Wrath.—
“It is a wrath which is created by false doctrines,
and when kings and presidents drink this wine of the
wrath of her fornication, they are stirred with anger
against those who will not come into harmony with
the false and satanic heresies which exalt the false
sabbath, and lead men to trample underfoot God’s
memorial.” Testimonies to Ministers, 61.
“The figure is probably borrowed from Jer. 25:15,
where Jeremiah is bidden to ‘take the wine cup of this
fury…, and cause all the nations …to drink it.’ But
wrath is not Babylon’s object in offering the wine to the
various nations. She contends that drinking of her wine
will bring peace to nations. However, the drinking of it
brings down on men the wrath of God.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 831.
Fornication.—
“A figure of the illicit connection between the
church and the world or between the church and the
state. The church should be married to her Lord, but
when she seeks the support of the state, she leaves here
lawful spouse. By her new connection she commits
spiritual fornication. [See] Eze. 16:15; James 4:4.”

7SDA Bible Commentary, 831.
“The unfaithfulness of the church to Christ in
permitting her confidence and affection to be turned
from Him, and allowing the love of worldly things to
occupy the soul, is likened to the violation of the
marriage vow. The sin of Israel in departing from the
Lord is presented under this figure; and the wonderful
love of God which they thus despised is touchingly
portrayed: ‘I sware unto thee, and entered into a
covenant with thee, saith the Lord God, and thou
becamest Mine.’ ‘And thou wast exceeding beautiful
and thou didst prosper into a kingdom. And thy renown
went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was
perfect through My comeliness, which I had put upon
thee.... But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and
playedst the harlot because of thy renown.’ ‘As a wife
treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye
dealt treacherously with Me, O house of Israel, saith the
Lord;’ ‘as a wife that committeth adultery, which
taketh strangers instead of her husband!’ Ezekiel
16:8, 13-15, 32; Jeremiah 3:20.” Great Controversy,
381,382.
Second Angel’s Message To Be Repeated.—
“Revelation 18 points to the time when, as the
result of rejecting the threefold warning of
Revelation 14:6-12, the church will have fully
reached the condition foretold by the second angel,
and the people of God still in Babylon will be called
upon to separate from her communion. This message
is the last that will ever be given to the world; and it will
accomplish its work. When those that ‘believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness’ (2
Thessalonians 2:12), shall be left to receive strong
delusion and to believe a lie, then the light of truth will
shine upon all whose hearts are open to receive it, and
all the children of the Lord that remain in Babylon
will heed the call: ‘Come out of her, My people’
(Revelation 18:4).” Great Controversy, 390.
(See Rev. 18:1-4 for more on this subject.)

THE THIRD ANGEL’S
MESSAGE
REVELATION 14:9
And the third angel followed them,
saying with a loud voice, If any man worship
the beast and his image, and receive his
mark in his forehead, or in his hand.
The Third Angel Followed Them.—
“It will be noticed that these messages are
cumulative; that is, one does not cease when another is
introduced. Thus, for a time the first message was the
only one going forth. The second message was

392

REVELATION 14
introduced, but that did not put an end to the first. From
that time there were two messages. The third followed
them, not to supersede them, but only to join with
them, so that we now have three messages going forth
simultaneously, or, rather, a threefold message,
embracing the truths of all three, the last one, of
course, being the leading proclamation. Till the work
is done, it will never cease to be true that the hour of
God’s judgment has come, nor that Babylon has fallen;
and these facts still continue to be proclaimed in
connection with the truths introduced by the third
message.” Smith, DR (1897), 538.

that will be.” 2 Selected Messages, 104

Third Angel Must Go With Previous Two.—
“Those who rejected the first message could not be
benefited by the second; neither were they benefited by
the midnight cry, which was to prepare them to enter
with Jesus by faith into the most holy place of the
heavenly sanctuary. And by rejecting the two former
messages, they have so darkened their understanding
that they can see no light in the third angel’s message,
which shows the way into the most holy place. I saw
that as the Jews crucified Jesus, so the nominal churches
had crucified these messages, and therefore they have
no knowledge of the way into the most holy, and they
cannot be benefited by the intercession of Jesus there.
Like the Jews, who offered their useless sacrifices, they
offer up their useless prayers to the apartment which
Jesus has left; and Satan, pleased with the deception,
assumes a religious character, and leads the minds of
these professed Christians to himself, working with his
power, his signs and lying wonders, to fasten them in his
snare.” Early Writings, 260,261.

The Importance of the Third Angel’s Message.—
“No other message ever threatened such terrible
judgments upon the rejectors. The sin of rejecting the
third angel’s message is unpardonable. It is the sin
against the Holy Spirit because the message finishes its
mission under the latter rain of spiritual power during
which time it swells into the loud cry. The whole earth
is illuminated with the glory of God, and with
compelling force the final plea is given for God’ people
to come out of spiritual Babylon with its prevailing
iniquity and idolatry. To reject this heaven-sent message
under the convicting power of the Holy Spirit is a sin
that is unforgivable. Is it any wonder that it is
followed by the unmingled wrath of an insulted and
offended God?” Bunch, TR, 205.

“I saw that those who had no experience in the
first and second angels’ messages must receive them
from those who had an experience, and followed down
through the messages. As Jesus was crucified, so I saw
that these messages have been crucified. And as the
disciples declared that there was salvation in no other
name under heaven, given among men; so, also, should
the servants of God faithfully and fearlessly declare that
those who embrace but a part of the truths connected
with the third message must gladly embrace the first,
second and third messages as God has given them, or
have no part nor lot in the matter.” Spiritual Gifts,
Vol. 1, 75.
“The first and second messages were given in 1843
and 1844, and we are now under the proclamation of the
third; but all three of the messages are still to be
proclaimed. It is just as essential now as ever before that
they shall be repeated to those who are seeking for the
truth.
By pen and voice we are to sound the
proclamation, showing their order, and the application
of the prophecies that bring us to the third angel's
message. There cannot be a third without the first
and second. These messages we are to give to the world
in publications, in discourses, showing in the line of
prophetic history the things that have been and the things

Third Angel is Global Like the Others.—
“Prophecy declares that the first angel would make
his announcement to ‘every nation, and kindred, and
tongue, and people.’ The warning of the third angel,
which forms a part of the same threefold message, is
to be no less widespread. It is represented in the
prophecy as being proclaimed with a loud voice, by an
angel flying in the midst of heaven; and it will
command the attention of the world.”
Great
Controversy, 449.

“When God sends to men warnings so important
that they are represented as proclaimed by holy angels
flying in the midst of heaven, He requires every person
endowed with reasoning powers to heed the message.
The fearful judgments denounced against the worship of
the beast and his image (Revelation 14:9-11), should
lead all to a diligent study of the prophecies to learn
what the mark of the beast is, and how they are to
avoid receiving it.” Great Controversy, 594.
“The third angel of Revelation 14 is represented as
flying swiftly through the midst of heaven crying: ‘Here
are they that keep the commandments of God, and
the faith of Jesus.’ Here is shown the nature of the
work of the people of God. They have a message of so
great importance that they are represented as flying
in the presentation of it to the world. They are
holding in their hands the bread of life for a
famishing world. The love of Christ constraineth them.
This is the last message. There are no more to follow,
no more invitations of mercy to be given after this
message shall have done its work. What a trust!”
Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 132.
Third Angel is the Sealing Angel.—
“I saw a little company traveling a narrow pathway.
All seemed to be firmly united, bound together by the
truth, in bundles, or companies. Said the angel, ‘The
third angel is binding, or sealing, them in bundles for
the heavenly garner.’” Early Writings, 88,89.

393

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“I then saw the third angel. Said my accompanying
angel, ‘Fearful is his work. Awful is his mission. He is
the angel that is to select the wheat from the tares,
and seal, or bind, the wheat for the heavenly garner.
These things should engross the whole mind, the whole
attention.’” Early Writings, 118.
The Time of the Third Angel.—
“The chronology of this message seems to be
distinctly marked by the fact that it is given in the period
of the ‘patience of the saints,’ which follows the
proclamation of the two former messages. ‘Here is the
patience of the saints; here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.’ Verse
12. And this period of the saints’ patience is marked by
a most important fact, viz. , the keeping of the
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus. We wish
to call attention to several points:
“1. We have shown that the First Angel’s Message
refers to the solemn proclamation of the immediate
second advent; consequently the period of patience
here brought to view must be the same as that which in
many scriptures is located immediately preceding the
second advent. A few texts must suffice as examples:
(Hebrews 10:35-39; James 5:7-10; Rev. 3:10,11; Is.
25:9 quoted.)
“2. The period of the saints’ patience, here brought
to view, is distinguished by the fact that they are keeping
the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. It
should be distinctly noticed that the commandments here
brought to view are not the commandments of Christ.
There may be a certain sense in which all the precepts of
the Saviour may be called the commandments of God;
that is, if viewed as proceeding from the sovereign
authority of the Father; but when the commandments of
God are spoken of in distinction from the testimony of
faith of Jesus, there is but one thing to which
reference can be made; viz., the commandments
which God gave in person, the ten commandments.
“...It is a fact beyond dispute that the fourth
commandment, some ages since, was changed from the
rest-day of the Lord to the pagan festival of Sun-day.
…And it is a fact of deep interest that this
commandment, which has been so long trodden down, is
now being vindicated, and the people of God are striving
to keep it with the other nine. Thanks be to God that he
is preparing the remnant for their final conflict with the
dragon, and for admittance through the gates into the
holy city. Rev. 12:17; 22:14. The vindication of the
fourth commandment in opposition to the Sabbath of
the apostasy, and the preaching of all the
commandments of God, is a striking testimony that
the present is the period of the saints’ patience, and
of the warning of the third angel.
“3. The opening of the holiest of all in the Temple
in heaven, by which the ark is seen, is an event that takes
place under the sounding of the seventh angel. And as
the ministration of our great High Priest is changed to
that apartment at the termination of the 2300 days, we
understand that the opening of the Temple is marked

by the termination of that period, as presented by the
proclamation of the first angel. The entrance of our
high Priest into the most holy place to minister before
the ark of God, calls the attention of the church to the
commandments of God contained within that ark.
The commandments of God have been shining out from
the heavenly Sanctuary since that time.
“The period between our Lord’s entrance into
the holiest of all to cleanse the Sanctuary (Heb. 9:23)
and complete his great work of ministration, and the
close of that period as marked by the seven angels’
coming out of the Temple to pour out the vials of the
wrath of God upon the earth. (Rev. 15:5,6), we
understand to be the period of the saints’ patience. It
is the days of the voice of the seventh angel in which the
mystery of God is being finished; that is, the period
when human probation is brought to a close. Besides the
fact of the termination of the 2300 days, which marks the
opening of the Temple in heaven, the anger of the
nations is an important testimony that we are now in the
days of the voice of the seventh angel. Rev. 11:18. The
present time is, therefore, the proper period for the last
message of mercy to perishing men; and it is marked by
the actual presentation of that voice of warning, and of
the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
“4. Another important fact that determines the
chronology of the third angel is that the seven last
plagues are poured out upon those who reject his
warning, the first plague being inflicted upon the
very class which the third angel threatens. The seven
last plagues are the wine of the wrath of God, poured out
without mixture into the cup of his indignation. We
have already seen that they are not inflicted until the
work of mercy for man is accomplished. The third angel
warns us respecting this outpouring of the exterminating
wrath of God, and consequently gives the latest message
of mercy. The mystery of God, or work of salvation for
sinful men, (Eph. 3) is finished in the days of the voice
of the seventh angel, when he begins to sound (Rev. 10);
and as the third angel has the last warning of mercy
before the vials of God’s wrath are poured out, it
follows that it must be given in the days when the
seventh angel begins to sound. It is likewise evident
that the conclusion of the work of our great High Priest
in the heavenly Sanctuary must also take place in the
days when the seventh angel begins to sound; for it is
then that the mystery of God is finished.
“The reason why the third woe, or seven last
plagues, does not commence at once when the seventh
angel begins to sound, is the fact that a period of days is
occupied in finishing the mystery of God. In this period
the warning of the third angel is given, that every one
who has an ear to hear may escape the vials of the wrath
of God; and in this period, also, the Saviour completes
his work in the Sanctuary in heaven. This being
accomplished, the vials of the wrath of God are poured
out upon the defenseless heads of the wicked. We
think, therefore, that the evidence is conclusive that
the present is the time for the warning of the third
angel.” Andrews, TAM, 127-134.

394

REVELATION 14
“The proclamation of the third message is the last
special religious movement to be made before the Lord
appears; for immediately following this, John beholds
one like the Son of man coming upon a great white
cloud to reap the harvest of the earth. [vs. 14.] This
can represent nothing else than the second coming of
Christ. If, therefore, the coming of Christ is at the door,
the time has come for the proclamation of this message.”
Smith, DR (1897), 539.
How The Meaning of the Third Angel’s Message Was
Unfolded.—
“Having identified the first message as a leading
proclamation with the great Advent movement of 184044, and having seen the fulfillment of the second
message in connection with that movement in the latter
year, let us look at what has transpired since that time.
“When the time passed in 1844, the whole
Adventist body was thrown into more or less confusion.
… A few, searching closely and candidly for the cause
of the mistake, were confirmed in their views of the
providential character of the Advent movement, and the
correctness of the argument on the time, but saw that a
mistake had been made on the subject of the sanctuary,
by which the disappointment could be explained. They
learned that the sanctuary was not this earth, as had been
supposed; that the cleansing was not to be by fire; and
that the prophecy on this point did not involve the
coming of the Lord at all. They found in the Scriptures
very clear evidence that the sanctuary referred to was the
temple in heaven, which Paul calls ‘the sanctuary,’ the
‘true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched and not
man;’ and that its cleansing, according to the type,
would consist of the final ministration of the priest in the
second apartment, or most holy place. They then saw
that the time had come for the fulfillment of Revelation
11:19: ‘And the temple of God was opened in heaven,
and there was seen in his temple the ark of his
testament.’
“Having their attention thus called to the ark, they
were naturally led to an examination of the law
contained in the ark. That the ark contained the law was
evident from the very name applied to it. It was called
‘the ark of his testament;’ but it would not have been
the ark of his ‘testament,’ and it could not have been
so called, had it not contained the law. Here, then,
was the ark in heaven, the great antitype of the ark,
which, during the typical dispensation, existed here on
earth; and the law which this heavenly ark contained
must consequently be the great original of which the law
on the tables in the earthly ark was but a transcript, or
copy; and both must read precisely alike, word for word,
jot for jot, tittle for tittle. To suppose otherwise would
involve not only falsehood, but the greatest absurdity.
“That law, then, is still the law of God’s
government, and its fourth precept, now as in the
beginning, demands the observance of the seventh day of
the week as the Sabbath. No one who admits the
argument on the sanctuary pretends to dispute this point.

Thus the Sabbath reform was brought to view; and it
was seen that whatever had been done in opposition to
this law, especially in the introduction of a day of rest
and worship which destroyed the Sabbath of Jehovah,
must be the work of the papal beast, that power which
was to oppose God, and try to exalt himself above him.
But this is the very work in reference to which the third
angel utters his warning; hence it began to be seen that
the period of the third message synchronizes with the
period of the cleansing of the sanctuary, which began
with the ending of the 2300 days in 1844, and that the
proclamation is based on the great truths developed by
this subject.” Smith, DR (1897), 540,541.
“When we began to present the light on the
Sabbath question, we had no clearly defined idea of the
third angel’s message of Revelation 14:9-12. The
burden of our testimony as we came before the people
was that the great second advent movement was of God,
that the first and second messages had gone forth, and
that the third was to be given. We saw that the third
message closed with the words: ‘Here is the patience of
the saints: here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.’ And
we as clearly saw as we now see that these prophetic
words suggested a Sabbath reform; but as to what the
worship of the beast mentioned in the message was, or
what the image and the mark of the beast were, we had
no defined position.
“God by His Holy Spirit let light shine forth upon
His servants, and the subject gradually opened to their
minds. It required much study and anxious care to
search it out, link after link. By care, anxiety, and
incessant labor has the work moved on until the great
truths of our message, a clear, connected, perfect whole,
have been given to the world.” 1 Testimonies, 78,79.
“Thus the dawning light of the third message rose
upon the church. But they say at once that the world
would have a right to demand of those who professed to
be giving that message, an explanation of all the symbols
which it contains—the beast, the image, the worship,
and the mark; hence these points were made subjects
of special study. The testimony of the Scriptures was
found to be clear and abundant; and it did not take a
great while to formulate from the truths revealed,
definite statements and propositions in explanation of all
these points.
“The argument showing what constitutes the beast,
the image, and the mark, has already been given in
chapter 13; and it has been shown that the two-horned
beast, which erects the image and enforces the mark, is
our own country, now in mid-career, and hastening
forward to perform the very work assigned it in the
prophecy. It is this work, and these agents, against
which the third message utters its warning, which is still
further proof that this message is now in order, and
shows the most conclusive harmony in all these
prophecies. The arguments we need not here repeat; it
will be sufficient to recapitulate the points established.

395

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“1. The ‘beast’ is the Roman Catholic power.
“2. The ‘mark of the beast’ is that institution
which this power has set up as proof of its authority
to legislate for the church, and command the consciences
of men under sin. It consists in a change of the law of
God, by which the signature of royalty is taken from the
law—the seventh-day Sabbath, the great memorial of
Jehovah’s creative work, is torn from its place in the
Decalogue, and a false and counterfeit Sabbath, the
first day of the week, is set up in its stead.
“3. The ‘image of the beast’ is some ecclesiastical
combination, which will resemble the beast in being
clothed with power to enforce its decrees with the pains
and penalties of the civil law.
“4. The two-horned beast, by which the image,
after being made by the people, is given power to speak
and act, is the United States; and all but the final steps
toward the formation of the image are already seen.
“5. The two-horned beast enforces the mark of the
beast; that is, he establishes by law the observance of
the first day of the week, or Sunday-sabbath.
“...But the people are not to be left in the dark in
this matter. The third message utters a solemn protest
against all this evil. It exposes the work of the beast,
shows the nature of its opposition to the law of God,
warns the people against compliance with its demands,
and points out to all the way of truth. This naturally
excites opposition; and the church is led so much the
more to seek the aid of human authority in behalf of its
dogmas as they are shown to lack the divine.” Smith,
DR (1897), 541-542.
View of Third Angel’s Message From Heaven’s
Perspective.—
“As the ministration of Jesus closed in the holy
place, and He passed into the holiest, and stood before
the ark containing the law of God, He sent another
mighty angel with a third message to the world. A
parchment was placed in the angel’s hand, and as he
descended to the earth in power and majesty, he
proclaimed a fearful warning, with the most terrible
threatening ever borne to man. This message was
designed to put the children of God upon their guard, by
showing them the hour of temptation and anguish that
was before them. Said the angel, ‘They will be brought
into close combat with the beast and his image. Their
only hope of eternal life is to remain steadfast.
Although their lives are at stake, they must hold fast
the truth.’ The third angel closes his message thus:
‘Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that
keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus.’ As he repeated these words, he pointed to the
heavenly sanctuary. The minds of all who embrace
this message are directed to the most holy place,
where Jesus stands before the ark, making His final
intercession for all those for whom mercy still lingers
and for those who have ignorantly broken the law of
God. This atonement is made for the righteous dead as
well as for the righteous living. It includes all who died
trusting in Christ, but who, not having received the light

upon God’s commandments, had sinned ignorantly in
transgressing its precepts.
“After Jesus opened the door of the most holy, the
light of the Sabbath was seen, and the people of God
were tested, as the children of Israel were tested
anciently, to see if they would keep God’s law. I saw
the third angel pointing upward, showing the
disappointed ones the way to the holiest of the
heavenly sanctuary. As they by faith enter the most
holy, they find Jesus, and hope and joy spring up
anew. I saw them looking back, reviewing the past,
from the proclamation of the second advent of Jesus,
down through their experience to the passing of the time
in 1844. They see their disappointment explained, and
joy and certainty again animate them. The third angel
has lighted up the past, the present, and the future,
and they know that God has indeed led them by His
mysterious providence.” Early Writings, 254,255.
Only One Reason For the Existence of the SeventhDay Adventist Church.—
“In a special sense Seventh-day Adventists have
been set in the world as watchmen and light bearers.
To them has been entrusted the last warning for a
perishing world. On them is shining wonderful light
from the word of God. They have been given a work of
the most solemn import—the proclamation of the
first, second, and third angels' messages. There is no
other work of so great importance. They are to allow
nothing else to absorb their attention.
“The most solemn truths ever entrusted to mortals
have been given us to proclaim to the world. The
proclamation of these truths is to be our work. The
world is to be warned, and God's people are to be true to
the trust committed to them. They are not to engage in
speculation, neither are they to enter into business
enterprises with unbelievers; for this would hinder them
in their God-given work.” 9 Testimonies, 19.
Characteristics of the Movement of People Giving the
Third Angel’s Message.—
“1. ‘The third angel followed them.’ So this
movement follows the two previously mentioned. It
takes up and continues the promulgation of the truths
they uttered, and adds to them what the third message
involves besides.
“2. The third message is characterized as a
warning against the beast. So this movement holds
prominent among its themes an explanation of this
symbol, telling the people what it is, and exposing its
blasphemous claims and works.
“3.
The third message warns all against
worshiping the beast. So this movement explains how
this beast-power has brought into Christendom certain
institutions which antagonize the requirements of the
Most High, and shows that if we yield to these, we
worship this power. ‘Know ye not,’ says Paul, ‘that to
whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey?’ Romans 6:16.
“4.
The third message warns all against

396

REVELATION 14
receiving the mark of the beast. So this movement
makes it the burden of its work to show what the mark of
the beast is, and to warn against its reception. It is the
more solicitous to do this, because this antichristian
power has worked so cunningly that the majority are
deceived into making unconscious concessions to its
authority.
“It is shown that the mark of the beast is an
institution which has been arrayed in Christian garb, and
insidiously introduced into the Christian church in such a
way as to nullify the authority of Jehovah and enthrone
that of the beast. Stripped of all disguises, it is simply
setting up a counterfeit sabbath of its own on the first
day of the week, in place of the Sabbath of the Lord on
the seventh day—a usurpation which the great God
cannot tolerate, and from which the remnant church must
fully clear itself before it will be prepared for the coming
of Christ. Hence the urgent warning, Let no man
worship the beast or receive his mark.
“5. The third message has something to say
against the worship of the image of the beast. So this
movement speaks of this subject also, telling what the
image will be, or at least explaining the prophecy of the
two-horned beast, which makes the image, showing that
it is our own government; that here the image is to be
formed; that the prophecy concerns this generation; and
that it is evidently on the very verge of fulfillment.”
Smith, DR (1897), 542-544.

mightily with a strong voice.’ Revelation 18:1, 2. We
are in danger of giving the third angel’s message in so
indefinite a manner that it does not impress the people.
So many other interests are brought in that the very
message which should be proclaimed with power
becomes tame and voiceless. At our camp meetings a
mistake has been made. The Sabbath question has been
touched upon, but has not been presented as the great
test for this time. While the churches profess to believe
in Christ, they are violating the law which Christ
Himself proclaimed from Sinai. The Lord bids us:
‘Show My people their transgression, and the house
of Jacob their sins.'’ Isaiah 58:1. The trumpet is to
give a certain sound.” 6 Testimonies, 60,61.
“The third angel’s message is truth, and light,
and power, and to present it so that right impressions
will be made upon hearts should be the work of our
schools as well as of our churches, of the teacher as
well as of the minister. Those who accept positions as
educators should prize more and more the revealed will
of God so plainly and strikingly presented in Daniel and
the Revelation.” 6 Testimonies, 131.

The Third Angel’s Message is Righteousness of Christ
by Faith.—
“Several have written to me, inquiring if the
message of justification by faith is the third angel’s
message, and I have answered, ‘It is the third angel’s
message, in verity.’ Review and Herald, 4/1/1890.

“Combine the medical missionary work with the
proclamation of the third angel’s message. Make
regular, organized effort to lift the churches out of the
dead level into which they have fallen and have
remained for years. Send into the churches workers
who will set the principles of health reform in their
connection with the third angel’s message before
every family and individual. Encourage all to take a
part in work for their fellowmen, and see if the breath of
life will not quickly return to these churches.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 415,416.

“The message of Christ’s righteousness is to
sound from one end of the earth to the other to
prepare the way of the Lord. This is the glory of
God, which closes the work of the third angel.” 6
Testimonies, 19.

“When the third angel’s message is preached as it
should be, power attends its proclamation, and it
becomes an abiding influence. It must be attended
with divine power, or it will accomplish nothing....”
Evangelism, 191,192.

Saying With a Loud Voice.—
“This message embraces the two preceding
messages. It is represented as being given with a loud
voice; that is, with the power of the Holy Spirit.
Everything is now at stake. The third angel’s message is
to be regarded as of the highest importance. It is a life
and death question. The impression made by this
message will be proportionate to the earnestness and
solemnity with which it is proclaimed. (Manuscript 16,
1900). 7BC, 980.

“The third angel’s message must be presented as
the only hope for the salvation of a perishing world.”
(Letter 87, 1896). Evangelism, 195.

“The third angel’s message is to be given with
power. The power of the proclamation of the first
and second messages is to be intensified in the third.
In the Revelation John says of the heavenly messenger
who unites with the third angel: ‘I saw another angel
come down from heaven, having great power; and
the earth was lightened with his glory. And he cried

“The solemn, sacred message of warning must be
proclaimed in the most difficult fields and in the most
sinful cities, in every place where the light of the great
threefold gospel message has not yet dawned. Everyone
is to hear the last call to the marriage supper of the
Lamb. From town to town, from city to city, from
country to country, the message of present truth is to

“The question then arises, How can these people be
reached? How can the great work of the third angel’s
message be accomplished?
It must be largely
accomplished by persevering, individual effort; by
visiting the people at their homes.”
Historical
Sketches, 149,150. Evangelism, 410.

397

GEMS FROM REVELATION
be proclaimed, not with outward display, but in the
power of the Spirit. As the divine principles that our
Saviour came to this world to set forth in word and life,
are presented in the simplicity of the gospel, the power
of the message will make itself felt. In this age, a new
life, coming from the Source of all life, is to take
possession of every laborer. O, how little do we
comprehend the breadth of our mission! We need a faith
that is earnest and determined, and a courage that is
unshaken. Our time for work is short, and we are to
labor with unflagging zeal.” Gospel Workers, 27.
If Any Man Worship.—
“ ‘Whenever any civil or ecclesiastical enactment
conflicts with the requisitions of Jehovah, that power is
worshiped which is obeyed in preference to the other.
“Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye
obey?” Rom. 6:16.’ (Bliss on the ‘Apocalypse,’ p.
233.)”
“We have already seen that the conflict is between
the commandments of God and the requirements of the
beast; and that a papal institution, which has usurped the
place of one of the commandments of God, is yet to be
made a test by the two-horned beast. It is not difficult,
therefore, to see how men will be made to worship the
beast; for whenever they obey the requirements of the
beast, in the place of the commandments of God, they
worship the beast; for they acknowledge him as above
the Most High. It is a remarkable fact that the pagan
festival of Sunday, which the great apostasy has
substituted for the Sabbath of the Bible, is now enforced
by law in most of the States of the union. A papal
institution which directly contradicts the fourth
commandment is thus enforced by a Protestant
government!” Andrews, TAM, 112,113.

“If any man worship the beast and his image…”
If Any Man Worship the Beast and His Image.—
“‘The beast’ mentioned in this message, whose
worship is enforced by the two-horned beast, is the first,
or leopardlike beast of Revelation 13—the papacy. The

‘image to the beast’ represents that form of apostate
Protestantism which will be developed when the
Protestant churches shall seek the aid of the civil power
for the enforcement of their dogmas. The ‘mark of the
beast’ still remains to be defined.
“After the warning against the worship of the beast
and his image the prophecy declares: ‘Here are they
that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus.’ Since those who keep God’s commandments are
thus placed in contrast with those that worship the beast
and his image and receive his mark, it follows that the
keeping of God’s law, on the one hand, and its violation,
on the other, will make the distinction between the
worshipers of God and the worshipers of the beast.”
Great Controversy, 445,446.
“Romanists declare that ‘the observance of Sunday
by the Protestants is an homage they pay, in spite of
themselves, to the authority of the [Catholic] Church.’—
Mgr. Segur, Plain Talk About the Protestantism of
Today, p. 213. The enforcement of Sunday-keeping
on the part of Protestant churches is an enforcement
of the worship of the papacy—of the beast. Those
who, understanding the claims of the fourth
commandment, choose to observe the false instead of the
true Sabbath are thereby paying homage to that power by
which alone it is commanded. But in the very act of
enforcing a religious duty by secular power, the churches
would themselves form an image to the beast; hence the
enforcement of Sunday-keeping in the United States
would be an enforcement of the worship of the beast
and his image.” Great Controversy, 448,449.
What is the Beast?
(See description of beast and comments in Rev.
13:1-10.)
What Is the Image of the Beast?—
“What is the ‘image to the beast’? and how is it to
be formed? The image is made by the two-horned beast,
and is an image to the beast. It is also called an image of
the beast. Then to learn what the image is like and
how it is to be formed we must study the
characteristics of the beast itself—the papacy.
“When the early church became corrupted by
departing from the simplicity of the gospel and accepting
heathen rites and customs, she lost the Spirit and power
of God; and in order to control the consciences of the
people, she sought the support of the secular power.
The result was the papacy, a church that controlled
the power of the state and employed it to further her
own ends, especially for the punishment of ‘heresy.’ In
order for the United States to form an image of the beast,
the religious power must so control the civil
government that the authority of the state will also be
employed by the church to accomplish her own ends.
“Whenever the church has obtained secular power,
she has employed it to punish dissent from her
doctrines. Protestant churches that have followed in the
steps of Rome by forming alliance with worldly powers

398

REVELATION 14
have manifested a similar desire to restrict liberty of
conscience. An example of this is given in the longcontinued persecution of dissenters by the Church of
England. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
thousands of nonconformist ministers were forced to flee
from their churches, and many, both of pastors and
people, were subjected to fine, imprisonment, torture,
and martyrdom.
“It was apostasy that led the early church to
seek the aid of the civil government, and this prepared
the way for the development of the papacy—the beast.
Said Paul: ‘There’ shall come a falling away,... and that
man of sin be revealed.’ 2 Thessalonians 2:3. So
apostasy in the church will prepare the way for the
image to the beast.
“The Bible declares that before the coming of the
Lord there will exist a state of religious declension
similar to that in the first centuries. ‘In the last days
perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without
natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof.’ 2 Timothy 3:1-5. ‘Now the
Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of devils.’ 1 Timothy 4:1. Satan
will work ‘with all power and signs and lying wonders,
and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness.’ And all
that ‘received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved,’ will be left to accept ‘strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie.’ 2 Thessalonians 2:9-11. When this
state of ungodliness shall be reached, the same results
will follow as in the first centuries.”
Great
Controversy, 443,444.

Pagan Rome gave the Beast (Papal Rome) his power,
seat, and great authority.
“When the Protestant churches shall unite with
the secular power to sustain a false religion, for
opposing which their ancestors endured the fiercest
persecution; when the state shall use its power to enforce
the decrees and sustain the institutions of the church—

then will Protestant America have formed an image
to the papacy, and there will be a national apostasy
which will end only in national ruin.”
(Signs,
3/22/1910). 7BC, 976.
The Mark of the Beast.—
“As the sign of the authority of the Catholic
Church, papist writers cite ‘the very act of changing the
Sabbath into Sunday, which Protestants allow of;
...because by keeping Sunday, they acknowledge the
church’s power to ordain feasts, and to command them
under sin.’—Henry Tuberville, An Abridgment of the
Christian Doctrine, page 58. What then is the change
of the Sabbath, but the sign, or mark, of the authority
of the Roman Church—‘the mark of the beast’?”
Great Controversy, 448.
Pope Calls For Sunday Rest.—
“John Paul II is quoted as saying [in Encyclical
Centesimus Annus], ‘Capitalism could only be
acceptable if it had an ethical and religious core.’ San
Francisco Chronicle, May 3, 1991.
“Affirming the need for ‘Sunday rest’ and the
‘worship’ of God, John Paul II states, ‘No one can take
away this human right, which is based on a
commandment.’
‘And consequently,’ the Pope
continued, ‘the state must guarantee to the worker the
exercise of this freedom.’
“Going one step further in his encyclical, the pope
called for laws to ensure Sunday rest. ‘In this regard,’
he states, ‘one may ask whether existing laws and the
practice of industrialized societies effectively ensure
in our own day the exercise of this basic right to
Sunday rest.’ [Centesimus Annus, Social Encyclical,
pp. 5,6.]” Rafferty, PI, 72.
Receiving the Mark of the Beast.—
“When Sunday observance shall be enforced by
law, and the world shall be enlightened concerning the
obligation of the true Sabbath, then whoever shall
transgress the command of God, to obey a precept which
has no higher authority than that of Rome, will thereby
honor popery above God. He is paying homage to Rome
and to the power which enforces the institution ordained
by Rome. He is worshipping the beast and his image. As
men then reject the institution which God has
declared to be the sign of His authority, and honor in
its stead that which Rome has chosen as the token of
her supremacy, they will thereby accept the sign of
allegiance to Rome—‘the mark of the beast.’ And it
is not until the issue is thus plainly set before the people,
and they are brought to choose between the
commandments of God and the commandments of men,
that those who continue in transgression will receive
‘the mark of the beast.’” Great Controversy, 449.
“With the issue thus clearly brought before him,
whoever shall trample upon God’s law to obey a
human enactment receives the mark of the beast; he
accepts the sign of allegiance to the power which he

399

GEMS FROM REVELATION
chooses to obey instead of God. The warning from
heaven is: (Rev. 14:9,10 quoted.)
“But not one is made to suffer the wrath of God
until the truth has been brought home to his mind and
conscience, and has been rejected. There are many who
have never had an opportunity to hear the special truths
for this time.
The obligation of the fourth
commandment has never been set before them in its
true light. He who reads every heart and tries every
motive will leave none who desire a knowledge of the
truth, to be deceived as to the issues of the controversy.
The decree is not to be urged upon the people blindly.
Everyone is to have sufficient light to make his decision
intelligently.
“The Sabbath will be the great test of loyalty, for it
is the point of truth especially controverted. When the
final test shall be brought to bear upon men, then the line
of distinction will be drawn between those who serve
God and those who serve Him not.
While the
observance of the false sabbath in compliance with the
law of the state, contrary to the fourth commandment,
will be an avowal of allegiance to a power that is in
opposition to God, the keeping of the true Sabbath, in
obedience to God’s law, is an evidence of loyalty to the
Creator. While one class, by accepting the sign of
submission to earthly powers, receive the mark of the
beast, the other choosing the token of allegiance to
divine authority, receive the seal of God.” Great
Controversy, 605.

“Those who are uniting with the world are
receiving the worldly mold and preparing for the
mark of the beast.… Now is the time to prepare. The
seal of God will never be placed upon the forehead of an
impure man or woman. It will never be placed upon the
forehead of the ambitious, world-loving man or woman.
It will never be placed upon the forehead of men or
women of false tongues or deceitful hearts.”
5
Testimonies, 216.

REVELATION 14:10
The same shall drink of the wine of the

wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture into the cup of his indignation; and
he shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the presence of the holy angels,
and in the presence of the Lamb:
The Same Shall Drink of the Wine.—
“For thus saith the LORD God of Israel unto me;
Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause
all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it. And
they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of
the sword that I will send among them. Then took I the
cup at the LORD’s hand, and made all the nations to
drink, unto whom the LORD had sent me.” Jeremiah
25:15-17.
The Wine of the Wrath of God.—
“What is the wine of the wrath of God? The next
chapter clearly explains this point: ‘And I saw another
sign in heaven, great and marvelous, seven angels
having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up
the wrath of God.’ ‘And one of the four beasts gave
unto the seven angels seven golden vials, full of the
wrath of God, who liveth forever and ever.’ Rev. 15:1,
7. It follows, therefore, that the wine of the wrath of
God is the seven last plagues.” Andrews, TAM, 115.
“Then I saw that the seven last plagues were soon
to be poured out upon those who have no shelter; yet the
world regarded them no more than they would so many
drops of water that were about to fall. I was then made
capable of enduring the awful sight of the seven last
plagues, the wrath of God. I saw that His anger was
dreadful and terrible, and if He should stretch forth His
hand, or lift it in anger, the inhabitants of the world
would be as though they had never been, or would suffer
from incurable sores and withering plagues that would
come upon them, and they would find no deliverance,
but be destroyed by them. Terror seized me, and I fell
upon my face before the angel and begged of him to
cause the sight to be removed, to hide it from me, for
it was too dreadful. Then I realized, as never before,
the importance of searching the Word of God carefully,
to know how to escape the plagues which that Word
declares shall come on all the ungodly who shall worship
the beast and his image and receive his mark in their
foreheads or in their hands. It was a great wonder for me
that any could transgress the law of God and tread down
His holy Sabbath, when such awful threatenings and
denunciations were against them.” Early Writings, 64.
“God’s judgments will be visited upon those who
are seeking to oppress and destroy His people. His long
forbearance with the wicked emboldens men in
transgression, but their punishment is nonetheless certain
and terrible because it is long delayed. ‘The Lord shall
rise up as in Mount Perazim, He shall be wroth as in
the valley of Gibeon, that He may do His work, His

400

REVELATION 14
strange work; and bring to pass His act, His strange
act.’ Isaiah 28:21. To our merciful God the act of
punishment is a strange act. ‘As I live, saith the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked.’
Ezekiel 33:11. The Lord is ‘merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth,... forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin.’
Yet He will ‘by no means clear the guilty.’ ‘The Lord
is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at
all acquit the wicked.’ Ex. 34:6, 7; Nahum 1:3. By
terrible things in righteousness He will vindicate the
authority of His downtrodden law. The severity of the
retribution awaiting the transgressor may be judged
by the Lord’s reluctance to execute justice. The
nation with which He bears long, and which He will not
smite until it has filled up the measure of its iniquity in
God’s account, will finally drink the cup of wrath
unmixed with mercy.
“When Christ ceases His intercession in the
sanctuary, the unmingled wrath threatened against
those who worship the beast and his image and receive
his mark (Revelation 14:9, 10), will be poured out. The
plagues upon Egypt when God was about to deliver
Israel were similar in character to those more terrible
and extensive judgments which are to fall upon the
world just before the final deliverance of God’s people.”
Great Controversy, 627,628.
Without Mixture.—
“God keeps a reckoning with the nations. Through
every century of this world’s history evil workers have
been treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath; and
when the time fully comes that iniquity shall have
reached the stated boundary of God’s mercy, His
forbearance will cease. When the accumulated figures in
heaven’s record books shall mark the sum of
transgression complete, wrath will come, unmixed with
mercy, and then it will be seen what a tremendous thing
it is to have worn out the divine patience. This crisis
will be reached when the nations shall unite in making
void God's law.” 5 Testimonies, 524.
“ ‘The wine of the wrath of God’ has often been
poured out in judgments upon men and nations
throughout the history of the reign of sin, but in most
cases it has been mingled with mercy in order that ‘the
inhabitants of the world’ might ‘learn righteousness’
(Isa. 26:9,10).
“Wine is usually diluted with water, but this is
unmixed and of full strength. It is the undiluted and
concentrated wrath of an insulted God whose love and
grace have been spurned and outraged. Jesus drank to its
bitter dregs the cup of woe and sufferings in the Garden
of Gethsemane and on the cross of Calvary in order that
guilty man could escape the cup of His wrath against sin
in which there will be no element of mercy. Undiluted
wrath in the Greek indicates ‘boiling indignation’ with
no drop of water to cool its heat.” Bunch, TR, 207,208.
The Wrath of God Comes After the Warning of the

Third Angel.—
“1. The wrath of God, as threatened by the third
angel, is poured out in the seven last plagues; for the
first plague is inflicted on the very class that the third
angel threatens. Compare Rev. 14:9, 10; 16:1, 2. The
fact proves that the plagues must be future when the
Third Angel's Message is given; and it also proves the
identity of the wrath of God without mixture with the
seven last plagues.
“2. We have shown that the plagues and the
wrath of God without mixture are the same. And
wrath without mixture must be wrath with nothing
else; that is, wrath without mercy. God has not yet
visited the earth with unmixed wrath; nor can he while
our great High Priest ministers in the heavenly
Sanctuary, and stays the wrath of God by his
intercession for sinful men. When the plagues are
poured out, mercy has given place to vengeance.
“3. Hence it is that the seven angels are represented
as receiving the vials of the wrath of God—the seven
last plagues—after the opening of the Temple of God in
heaven. If we turn to Rev. 11:15-19, we shall find that
the opening of the Temple in heaven is an event that
transpires under the sounding of the seventh angel. And
that account concludes with a brief statement of the
events of the seventh vial, or last plague. Now if we turn
to chap. 11:5-8, and 16:1-21, we shall read an expanded
view of the facts stated in chap. 11:15-19, and we shall
find that the two accounts conclude in the same manner,
viz., with the events of the last plague. These scriptures
show that the seven angels do not receive the vials of the
wrath of God to pour out upon the earth until the Temple
in heaven is opened. That Temple is opened under the
voice of the seventh angel. The third woe is by reason of
the voice of the seventh angel. Rev. 8:13; 9:12; 11:14.
The seven plagues are poured out under the sounding of
that angel; hence the plagues are future, and constitute
the third woe.
“The foregoing reasons establish the fact that the
plagues are future. We see no reason why they will not
be similar in character to those poured out on Egypt,
while their consequence will be far more terrific and
dreadful.” Andrews, TAM, 115,116.
“The closing work of Christ’s priesthood is in the
second apartment of the heavenly sanctuary. This is
opened under the sounding of the seventh trumpet.
Rev.11:19. It is after the temple is thus opened in
heaven that the seven angels pour out the seven last
plagues. Rev.15:5-8. But these plagues fill up the wrath
of God which is threatened by the third angel. Rev.15:1
compared with 14:10. And the third angel gives the final
message of mercy and warning to mankind before the
Son of man sits upon the white cloud. Rev.14:6-14. So
it is apparent that while Christ is finishing his work
in the sanctuary, and while the third angel is giving
the last message of mercy to man, the seven last
plagues are withheld, though pending ready to be
poured out. But when the work of probation is closed,
and the intercession of Christ in heaven, and the voice of

401

GEMS FROM REVELATION
warning upon earth, are ended, then men drink from the
cup of his indignation the wine of God’s wrath without
any mixture.” Andrews, JEO, 89.
Wrath of God Poured Out After Sunday Law.—
“The substitution of the laws of men for the law of
God, the exaltation, by merely human authority, of
Sunday in place of the Bible Sabbath, is the last act in
the drama. When this substitution becomes universal,
God will reveal Himself. He will arise in His majesty to
shake terribly the earth. He will come out of His place
to punish the inhabitants of the world for their
iniquity, and the earth shall disclose her blood and shall
no more cover her slain.” 7 Testimonies, 141.
“When He [Jesus] leaves the sanctuary,
darkness covers the inhabitants of the earth. In that
fearful time the righteous must live in the sight of a holy
God without an intercessor. The restraint which has
been upon the wicked is removed, and Satan has entire
control of the finally impenitent. God’s long-suffering
has ended. The world has rejected His mercy, despised
His love, and trampled upon His law. The wicked have
passed the boundary of their probation; the Spirit of
God, persistently resisted, has been at last withdrawn.
Unsheltered by divine grace, they have no protection
from the wicked one. Satan will then plunge the
inhabitants of the earth into one great, final trouble. As
the angels of God cease to hold in check the fierce
winds of human passion, all the elements of strife will
be let loose. The whole world will be involved in ruin
more terrible than that which came upon Jerusalem
of old.” Great Controversy, 614.
“To the wicked it will be the time of trouble such
as never was; to the righteous it will be the time of
Jacob’s trouble, at which, in answer to their cry day and
night, like the importunate widow, they will be
delivered. Jer.30:5-7; Gen.32; Luke 18:7,8.
“In view of this awful scene which must be
witnessed by the people of God, Zephaniah calls upon
all the meek of the earth to seek righteousness and
meekness. And he adds, ‘It may be ye shall be hid in the
day of the Lord's anger.’ Zeph.2:1-3. If they do their
best in seeking God it is but barely possible that they
will escape. And our Lord beseeches his people to
watch and pray always, that they may be accounted
worthy to escape the things coming on the earth, and to
stand before the Son of man. Luke 21:36. If, therefore,
this great time of trouble is to come upon our world
after the close of Christ's intercession and before the
deliverance of the saints, of what vast consequence is
that final message of warning which reveals these
great facts!” Andrews, JEO, 94
Torment.—
“ ‘Torment.’ This word perhaps could be better
translated ‘the smoke of the trial’ or testing. The Greek
word ‘basanismos.’ Dr. Young states the word means
‘to try, test, or torment.’ The idea of torment is

altogether a secondary meaning, primarily it signifies ‘a
trial or testing.’ (See also Liddell and Scott’s Lexicon.)
“‘Every man’s work shall be made manifest:
for the day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man’s
work of what sort it is.’ 1 Corinthians 3:13.
“The word translated ‘try’ is the Greek work
‘dokimozo,’ which again from Dr. Young, means ‘to try,
assay, prove.’ This fire is to test every man’s work. The
righteous are on ‘the sea of glass mingled with fire.’
The redeemed, have nothing of sin about them and like
the three Hebrews of Daniel 3, the fire cannot touch
them.
“This fire shall try (prove) every man’s work of
what sort it is. Both the righteous and the wicked will go
through the same test, and before the whole universe will
be revealed those who are God’s saints, through union
with Him and those who are not. ‘Who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings?’ Isaiah 33:14,15.”
Burnside, RWU, 174,175.
“Greek basanizo, ‘to torture,’ ‘to torment,’ ‘to
distress.’ Compare the use of basanizo in Matt. 8:6, 29;
14:24 (translated ‘tossed’); 2 Peter 2:8. The seven last
plagues fall upon the worshipers of the beast and his
image (Rev. 16:2). In addition, these devotees of the
beast rise in the second resurrection and receive their
punishment (20:5, 11-15). It is not clear to which phase
of punishment the revelator here refers. Perhaps it is to
both. In both there will be torment. The first will end
in death when Jesus appears from heaven (ch. 19:1921), the second in eternal death (ch. 20:14).” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 831.
He Shall Be Tormented With Fire and Brimstone.—
“Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the
portion of their cup.” Psalm 11:6.
Fire & Brimstone At the Second Coming.—
“Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did
eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted,
they builded; But the same day that Lot went out of
Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and
destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day
when the Son of man is revealed.” Luke 17:28.
“The Lord calls for His people to locate away
from the cities, for in such an hour as ye think not,
fire and brimstone will be rained from heaven upon
these cities. Proportionate to their sins will be their
visitation. When one city is destroyed, let not our people
regard this matter as a light affair, and think that they
may, if favorable opportunity offers, build themselves
homes in that same destroyed city....
“Let all who would understand the meaning of
these things read the eleventh chapter of Revelation.
Read every verse, and learn the things that are yet to take
place in the cities. Read also the scenes portrayed in the

402

REVELATION 14
eighteenth chapter of the same book.” (Manuscript
Release, Vol. 21, 91,92. May 10, 1906). Last Day
Events, 95.
“These shall be tormented with fire and brimstone
in the presence of the holy angels and of the Lamb.
When is this torment inflicted? Chapter 19:20 shows
that at the second coming of Christ there is a
manifestation of fiery judgments which may be called
a lake of fire and brimstone, into which the beast and
false prophet are cast alive. This can refer only to the
destruction visited upon them at the commencement,
not at the end, of the thousand years.
“Again, there is a remarkable passage in Isaiah to
which we are obliged to refer in explanation of the
phraseology of the threatening of the third angel, and
which unquestionably describes scenes to take place here
at the second advent, and in the desolate state of the
earth during the thousand years following. That the
language in the Revelation was borrowed from this
prophecy can hardly fail to be seen. After describing the
Lord’s anger upon the nations, the great slaughter of
their armies, the departing of the heavens as a scroll,
etc., the prophet says: ‘For it is the day of the Lord’s
vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Zion. And the streams thereof shall
be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into
brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning
pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day; the
smoke thereof shall go up forever; from generation to
generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through
it forever and ever.’ Isaiah 34:8-10. And since it is
expressly revealed that there is to be a lake of fire in
which all sinners perish at the end of the thousand years,
we can only conclude that the destruction of the living
wicked at the commence-ment of this period, and the
final doom of all the ungodly at its close, are very
similar.” Smith, DR (1897), 547,548.
Fire & Brimstone at the End of the Millennium.—
“The seven last plagues are poured out on the
living wicked; but the second part of the penalty affixed
to the warning of the third angel, is not inflicted until the
end of the thousand years, when all the wicked are raised
and suffer together. This part of the penalty we will now
consider.
“‘He shall be tormented with fire and brimstone
in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence
of the Lamb; and the smoke of their torment
ascendeth up forever and ever,’ etc. The final
perdition of ungodly men in the lake of fire is without
doubt the subject of these awful words. That we may
rightly understand this text, we call attention to several
important facts:
“1. The punishment of the wicked will be inflicted
upon them on this earth; for the final conflagration of
our globe is to constitute the lake of fire in which they
are to be rewarded, each according to his works.
‘Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the
earth; much more the wicked and the sinner.’ Prov.

11:31. ‘But the heavens and the earth, which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved
unto fire against the day of Judgment and perdition
of ungodly men.’ 2 Peter 3:7. ‘But the fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake which burneth with
fire and brimstone; which is the second death.’ Rev.
21:8. ‘For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as
an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do
wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh
shall burn them up, said the Lord of hosts, that it
shall leave them neither root nor branch.’ Mal. 4:1.
‘And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall
be loosed out of his prison, and shall go out to deceive
the nations which are in the four quarters of the earthy,
Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle; the
number of who is as the sand of the sea. And they went
up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp
of the saints about, and the beloved city; and fire came
down from God out of heaven and devoured them.’
Rev. 20:7-9.
“2. The prophet Isaiah (chap. 34) describes the
final conflagration of our globe in language which is a
complete parallel to that of the third angel in describing
the punishment of the wicked. Those who contend that
Isaiah refers only to ancient Idumea, must admit that the
period of time described in this strong language must
finally come to an end. And those who admit that Isaiah,
in the language we are about to quote, refers to the
conflagration of our earth, will find in what follows,
ample proof that that scene will finally close. ‘For it is
the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of
recompenses for the controversy of Zion. And the
streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the
dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof
shall become burning pitch. It shall not be quenched
night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up forever;
from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none
shall pass through it forever and ever.’ Isa. 34:8-10.
“3. But this terrific scene of final conflagration is
not to last throughout unlimited duration. For the earth
having been burned, and all its elements melted, new
heavens and a new earth are to follow, as the present
earth succeeded to that which was destroyed by water.
And in the earth thus made new the righteous are to be
recompensed. ‘But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also; and the works that
are therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that all
these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness; looking for and hasting unto the coming of
the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat? Nevertheless, we, according to his
promise, look for new heavens and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness.’ 2 Pet. 3:10-13.
‘And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the

403

GEMS FROM REVELATION
first heaven and the first earth were passed away;
and there was no more sea.’ Rev. 21:1.
“4. Thus, however dreadful and long-continued the
punishment of the wicked will be (for each is to be
punished according to his deserts), that punishment will
finally result in the utter destruction of all transgressors.
All the wicked will God destroy. Ps. 145:20. They shall
die the second death. Rev. 21:8; Rom. 6:23; Eze. 18:4,
20. They shall perish, being consumed into smoke. Ps.
37:10, 20, 38. They shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, being burned up in unquenchable fire. 2
Thess. 1:9; Matt. 3:12. And thus, having been
consumed, root and branch, they shall be as though
they had not been. Mal. 4:1. Obadiah 16.” Andrews,
TAM, 124-127.
“…After the wicked drink to the dregs the cup of
God’s wrath ‘they shall be as though they had not
been.’ …The wicked will literally be brought to ‘ashes’
and will become a part of the earth which the saints
inherit and on which their feet shall tread throughout the
unending ages of eternity. This will be the fate even of
Satan ‘the root’ of all evil. The divine decree is: ‘I will
bring thee to ashes upon the earth… and never shalt
thou be any more.’ See Eze. 26:18, 19. The strongest
statements possible are used to make plain the complete
annihilation of the wicked. God’s original plan will be
carried out, and eventually every creature in the universe
will join in praising God without a discordant note.”
Bunch, TR, 208.
“What do ye imagine against the LORD? He will
make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the
second time. For while they be folden together as
thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they
shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.” Nahum
1:9,10.
“For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an
oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly,
shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn
them up, saith the LORD of hosts, that it shall leave
them neither root nor branch.
“…And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they
shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day
that I shall do this, saith the LORD of hosts.” Malachi
4:1,3.
“Fire comes down from God out of heaven. The
earth is broken up. The weapons concealed in its depths
are drawn forth. Devouring flames burst from every
yawning chasm. The very rocks are on fire. The day
has come that shall burn as an oven. The elements melt
with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are
therein are burned up. Malachi 4:1; 2 Peter 3:10. The
earth’s surface seems one molten mass—a vast,
seething lake of fire. It is the time of the judgment and
perdition of ungodly men—‘the day of the Lord’s
vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Zion.’ Isaiah 34:8.

“The wicked receive their recompense in the earth.
Proverbs 11:31. They ‘shall be stubble: and the day
that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of
hosts.’ Malachi 4:1. Some are destroyed as in a
moment, while others suffer many days. All are
punished ‘according to their deeds.’ The sins of the
righteous having been transferred to Satan, he is made to
suffer not only for his own rebellion, but for all the sins
which he has caused God’s people to commit. His
punishment is to be far greater than that of those whom
he has deceived. After all have perished who fell by his
deceptions, he is still to live and suffer on. In the
cleansing flames the wicked are at last destroyed,
root and branch—Satan the root, his followers the
branches. The full penalty of the law has been visited;
the demands of justice have been met; and heaven and
earth, beholding, declare the righteousness of Jehovah.
“…While the earth was wrapped in the fire of
destruction, the righteous abode safely in the Holy City.
Upon those that had part in the first resurrection, the
second death has no power. While God is to the
wicked a consuming fire, He is to His people both a
sun and a shield. Revelation 20:6; Psalm 84:11. …The
fire that consumes the wicked purifies the earth. Every
trace of the curse is swept away. No eternally burning
hell will keep before the ransomed the fearful
consequences of sin.” Great Controversy, 673,674.
In the Presence of the Angels and the Lamb.—
“It is in the heavenly temple that the judgments of
God are determined. The plagues are not the result of
natural forces. They are dictated by God. They are
superintended by Christ and the angels. ‘The same
shall drink of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture… and he shall be tormented… in the
presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the
Lamb.’ Rev. 14:10.” Cooke, #25-UR, 3.

REVELATION 14:11
And the smoke of their torment
ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they
have no rest day nor night, who worship the
beast and his image, and whosoever
receiveth the mark of his name.
Smoke of Their Torment Ascendeth Up.—
“For evildoers shall be cut off…. For yet a little
while, and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. …But
the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the LORD
shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume; into
smoke shall they consume away.” Psalm 37:9,10,20.
“For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall
devour the briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the
thickets of the forest, and they shall mount up like the
lifting up of smoke.
Through the wrath of the

404

REVELATION 14
LORD of hosts is the land darkened, and the people
shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his
brother.” Isa 9:18, 19.
Forever and Ever.—
“The meaning of ‘forever’ and kindred terms as
used in the Scriptures shows clearly that their meaning
must be determined by the duration of life. When
applied to God and the future life of the redeemed,
‘forever’ means eternity because with them life will
never end. But with the wicked forever can only mean
as long as they live, or until their lives are extinct in
the lake of fire after they have received the punishment
due them ‘according to their works.’
“In Exodus 21:6 a servant is said to serve his
master ‘for ever’ which can only mean as long as he
lives.
“Hannah declared that when the boy Samuel was
weaned she would ‘bring him, that he may appear
before the Lord, and there abide for ever.’ After she
had fulfilled this vow which she had made because
Samuel had been given in answer to pray, she said:
‘Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord; as long
as he liveth he shall be lent to the Lord.” See 1
Samuel 1:22,28.
“Jonah declared that he was in the belly of the fish
‘for ever’ and yet the period of his submarine journey
was only three days. See Jonah 2:6.
“In Jude 7 we are told that Sodom and Gomorrah
suffered ‘the vengeance of eternal fire’ and ‘are set
forth for an example’ of the final destruction of the
wicked. We are told that the fire that destroyed these
two wicked cities turned them ‘in ashes …making them
an example unto those that after should live ungodly’
(2 Peter 2:6).
“Thus the Bible interprets the meaning of its own
language. How beautifully harmonious are its teachings
when Scripture is compared with Scripture.” Bunch, TR,
209.
They Have No Rest Day Nor Night.—
“The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There
is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.” Isaiah
57:20,21.
“The sinner’s own thoughts are his accusers; and
there can be no torture keener than the stings of a
guilty conscience, which give him no rest day nor
night.” Desire of Ages, 223.
Mark of His Name.—
(See comments on Rev. 13:16.)

REVELATION 14:12
Here is the patience of the saints: here
are they that keep the commandments of
God, and the faith of Jesus.

Here—On a Firm Platform.—
“I saw a company who stood well-guarded and
firm, giving no countenance to those who would unsettle
the established faith of the body. God looked upon them
with approbation. I was shown three steps—the first,
second, and third angels’ messages. Said my
accompanying angel, ‘Woe to him who shall move a
block or stir a pin of these messages. The true
understanding of these messages is of vital importance.
The destiny of souls hangs upon the manner in which
they are received.’ I was again brought down through
these messages, and saw how dearly the people of God
had purchased their experience. It had been obtained
through much suffering and severe conflict. God had
led them along step by step, until He had placed them
upon a solid, immovable platform.” Early Writings,
258.
Here is the Patience of the Saints.—
“We have shown that the First Angel’s Message
refers to the solemn proclamation of the immediate
second advent; consequently the period of patience
here brought to view must be the same as that which in
many scriptures is located immediately preceding the
second advent. A few texts must suffice as examples:
‘Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath
great recompense of reward. For ye have need of
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise. For yet a little while, and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Now the
just shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of
them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that
believe to the saving of the soul.’ Heb. 10:35-39.
“‘Be patient, therefore, brethren, unto the coming
of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the
precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it,
until he receive the early and later rain. Be ye also
patient; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the
Lord draweth nigh. Grudge not one against another,
brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold, the Judge
standeth before the door. Take, my brethren, the
prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for
an example of suffering affliction and of patience.’
James 5:7-10.
“‘Because thou hast kept the word of my patience,
I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which
shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell
upon the earth. Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast
which thou hast, that no man take thy crown.’ Rev. 3:10,
11.
“‘And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our
God; we have waited for him, and he will save us; this
is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation.’ Isa. 25:9.” Andrews, TAM,
128,129.
“This word ‘patience’ is also translated
‘steadfastness.’ It will be a patient and steadfast people

405

GEMS FROM REVELATION
that will be waiting for the coming of the Lord.”
Anderson, UR, 157
“And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's
sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.”
Matthew 10:22.
Here are They That Keep Commandments of God.—
“After the warning against the worship of the beast
and his image the prophecy declares: ‘Here are they
that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus.’ Since those who keep God’s commandments are
thus placed in contrast with those that worship the beast
and his image and receive his mark, it follows that the
keeping of God’s law, on the one hand, and its
violation, on the other, will make the distinction
between the worshipers of God and the worshipers of
the beast.” Great Controversy, 445.
“The period of the saints’ patience, here brought to
view, is distinguished by the fact that they are keeping
the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. It
should be distinctly noticed that the commandments here
brought to view are not the commandments of Christ.
There may be a certain sense in which all the precepts of
the Saviour may be called the commandments of God;
that is, if viewed as proceeding from the sovereign
authority of the Father; but when the commandments
of God are spoken of in distinction from the
testimony of faith of Jesus, there is but one thing to
which reference can be made; viz., the
commandments which God gave in person, the ten
commandments.
“...It is a fact beyond dispute that the fourth
commandment, some ages since, was changed from the
rest-day of the Lord to the pagan festival of Sunday.
This change was made in express contradiction of the
Holy Scriptures, which everywhere recognize the
seventh day as the only weekly Sabbath of the Lord. It
was accomplished by the great apostasy, which
Daniel predicted should ‘think to change times and
laws.’ This power is essentially the same as the beast
which was to be worshiped by all the world. And it is a
fact of deep interest that this commandment, which has
been so long trodden down, is now being vindicated, and
the people of God are striving to keep it with the other
nine. Thanks be to God that he is preparing the remnant
for their final conflict with the dragon, and for
admittance through the gates into the holy city. Rev.
12:17; 22:14. The vindication of the fourth
commandment in opposition to the Sabbath of the
apostasy, and the preaching of all the commandments of
God, is a striking testimony that the present is the
period of the saints’ patience, and of the warning of
the third angel.” Andrews, TAM, 129-132.
“Those who receive the message are rendered
peculiar by their practice in reference to the
commandments of God. What difference is there in
practice, and what only difference, among Christians, in

this respect?—Just this; some think that the fourth
commandment is kept by devoting the first day of the
week to rest and worship; others claim that the seventh
day is the one set apart to such duties, and accordingly
spend its hours in this manner, resuming on the first day
their ordinary labor. No plainer line of demarcation
could be drawn between two classes. The time which
one class regard as sacred, and devote to religious uses,
the other look upon as only secular, and devote to
ordinary labor. One class are devoutly resting, the
other zealously laboring. One class, pursuing their
worldly vocations, find the other class withdrawn from
all such pursuits, and the avenue of commercial
intercourse abruptly closed. Thus for two days in the
week these two classes are kept apart by difference of
theory and practice in regard to the fourth
commandment. On no other commandment could there
be so marked a difference.
“The message brings its adherents to the seventh
day; for in this way only are they made peculiar,
inasmuch as an observance of the first day would not
distinguish a person from the masses who were already
observing that day when the message was introduced.
And in this we find still further evidence that Sundaykeeping is the mark of the beast; for the message,
presenting as its chief burden a warning against
receiving the mark of the beast, will of course bring
its adherents to discard that practice which
constitutes the mark, and to adopt the opposite.
“It does lead them to discard the observance of the
first day of the week, and adopt that of the seventh day.
In view of this, it is at once seen that there is here more
than an inference that Sunday-keeping is the mark of the
beast against which it warns us, and the observance of
the seventh day, to which it leads us, is its opposite.
“This is in harmony with the argument on the seal
of God, as given in chapter 7. It was there shown that
sign, seal, mark, and token are synonymous terms, and
that God takes his Sabbath to be his sign, mark, or seal,
in reference to his people. Thus God has a seal, or
mark, which is his Sabbath. The beast also has a
seal, or mark, which is his Sabbath. One is the
seventh day; the other is just as far removed from it as
possible, even to the other extremity of the week,
namely, the first day. Christendom will at last be
divided into just two classes; to wit, those who are sealed
with the seal of the living God—that is, have his mark,
or keep his Sabbath—and those who are sealed with the
seal of the beast—that is, have his mark, or keep his
Sabbath. In reference to this issue, the third angel’s
message both enlightens and warns us.” Smith, DR
(1897), 544,545.
“The church of the Reformation was commended
for her patience and faith. Rev. 13:10. But this last
church is commended for her obedience as well as her
patience and faith.” Anderson, UR, 157.
“When the law of God is most derided and brought
into the most contempt, then it is time for every true

406

REVELATION 14
follower of Christ, for those whose hearts have been
given to God, and who are fixed to obey God, to stand
unflinchingly for the faith once delivered to the saints.
‘Then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth
God and him that serveth him not. It is time to fight
when champions are most needed.” (Review &
Herald, 6/8/1897). 7BC, 981.
“The Lord has shown me clearly that the image of
the beast will be formed before probation closes; for it
is to be the great test for the people of God, by which
their eternal destiny will be decided.... [Rev. 13:11-17
quoted]....
“This is the test that the people of God must
have before they are sealed. All who proved their
loyalty to God by observing His law, and refusing to
accept a spurious sabbath, will rank under the banner
of the Lord God Jehovah, and will receive the seal of
the living God. Those who yield the truth of heavenly
origin and accept the Sunday sabbath, will receive the
mark of the beast.” (Letter 11, 1890). 7BC,976.
And the Faith of Jesus.—
“The third angel’s message is the proclamation
of the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus
Christ.
The commandments of God have been
proclaimed, but the faith of Jesus Christ has not been
proclaimed by Seventh-day Adventists as of equal
importance, the law and the gospel going hand in
hand. I cannot find language to express this subject in
its fullness.
“‘The faith of Jesus.’ It is talked of, but not
understood. What constitutes the faith of Jesus, that
belongs to the third angel’s message? Jesus becoming
our sin-bearer that He might become our sin-pardoning
Saviour. He was treated as we deserve to be treated. He
came to our world and took our sins that we might take
His righteousness. And faith in the ability of Christ to
save us amply and fully and entirely is the faith of
Jesus.” Selected Messages, Vol. 3, 172.
“The Lord in His great mercy sent a most precious
message to His people through Elders Waggoner and
Jones. This message was to bring more prominently
before the world the uplifted Saviour, the sacrifice for
the sins of the whole world. It presented justification
through faith in the Surety; it invited the people to
receive the righteousness of Christ, which is made
manifest in obedience to all the commandments of
God. Many had lost sight of Jesus. They needed to
have their eyes directed to His divine person, His merits,
and His changeless love for the human family. All
power is given into His hands, that He may dispense rich
gifts unto men, imparting the priceless gift of His own
righteousness to the helpless human agent. This is the
message that God commanded to be given to the world.
It is the third angel’s message, which is to be
proclaimed with a loud voice, and attended with the
outpouring of His Spirit in a large measure.”

Testimonies to Ministers, 91,92.
“Several have written to me, inquiring if the
message of justification by faith is the third angel’s
message, and I have answered, ‘It is the third angel’s
message, in verity.’” (The Review & Herald, 4/1/1890).
Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 372.
The Loud Cry of the Third Angel.—
“While the work of salvation is closing, trouble
will be coming on the earth, and the nations will be
angry, yet held in check so as not to prevent the work of
the third angel. At that time the ‘latter rain,’ or
refreshing from the presence of the Lord, will come,
to give power to the loud voice of the third angel, and
prepare the saints to stand in the period when the
seven last plagues shall be poured out.” Early
Writings, 85,86.
“In every generation God has sent His servants to
rebuke sin, both in the world and in the church. But the
people desire smooth things spoken to them, and the
pure, unvarnished truth is not acceptable.
Many
reformers, in entering upon their work, determined to
exercise great prudence in attacking the sins of the
church and the nation. They hoped, by the example of a
pure Christian life, to lead the people back to the
doctrines of the Bible. But the Spirit of God came
upon them as it came upon Elijah, moving him to
rebuke the sins of a wicked king and an apostate
people; they could not refrain from preaching the
plain utterances of the Bible—doctrines which they
had been reluctant to present. They were impelled to
zealously declare the truth and the danger which
threatened souls. The words which the Lord gave
them they uttered, fearless of consequences, and the
people were compelled to hear the warning.
“Thus the message of the third angel will be
proclaimed. As the time comes for it to be given with
greatest power, the Lord will work through humble
instruments, leading the minds of those who consecrate
themselves to His service. The laborers will be
qualified rather by the unction of His Spirit than by
the training of literary institutions. Men of faith and
prayer will be constrained to go forth with holy zeal,
declaring the words which God gives them.” Great
Controversy, 606.
“The angel who unites in the proclamation of the
third angel’s message is to lighten the whole earth with
his glory. A work of worldwide extent and unwonted
power is here foretold. The advent move-ment of 184044 was a glorious manifestation of the power of God; the
first angel’s message was carried to every missionary
station in the world, and in some countries there was
the greatest religious interest which has been
witnessed in any land since the Reformation of the
sixteenth century; but these are to be exceeded by the
mighty movement under the last warning of the third
angel.

407

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The work will be similar to that of the Day of
Pentecost. As the ‘former rain’ was given, in the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit at the opening of the
gospel, to cause the upspringing of the precious seed, so
the ‘latter rain’ will be given at its close for the ripening
of the harvest. ‘Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord: His going forth is prepared as the
morning; and He shall come unto us as the rain, as
the latter and former rain unto the earth.’ Hosea 6:3.
‘Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the
Lord your God: for He hath given you the former
rain moderately, and He will cause to come down for
you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain.’
Joel 2:23. ‘In the last days, saith God, I will pour out
of My Spirit upon all flesh.’ ‘And it shall come to
pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the
Lord shall be saved.’ Acts 2:17, 21.
“The great work of the gospel is not to close with
less manifestation of the power of God than marked its
opening. The prophecies which were fulfilled in the
outpouring of the former rain at the opening of the
gospel are again to be fulfilled in the latter rain at its
close. Here are ‘the times of refreshing’ to which the
apostle Peter looked forward when he said: ‘Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord; and He shall send
Jesus.’ Acts 3:19, 20.
“Servants of God, with their faces lighted up
and shining with holy consecration, will hasten from
place to place to proclaim the message from heaven. By
thousands of voices, all over the earth, the warning will
be given. Miracles will be wrought, the sick will be
healed, and signs and wonders will follow the believers.
Satan also works, with lying wonders, even bringing
down fire from heaven in the sight of men. Rev. 13:13.
Thus the inhabitants of the earth will be brought to take
their stand.
“The message will be carried not so much by
argument as by the deep conviction of the Spirit of God.
The arguments have been presented. The seed has been
sown, and now it will spring up and bear fruit. The
publications distributed by missionary workers have
exerted their influence, yet many whose minds were
impressed have been prevented from fully
comprehending the truth or from yielding obedience.
Now the rays of light penetrate everywhere, the truth
is seen in its clearness, and the honest children of God
sever the bands which have held them. Family
connections, church relations, are powerless to stay them
now. Truth is more precious than all besides.
Notwithstanding the agencies combined against the
truth, a large number take their stand upon the Lord's
side.” Great Controversy, 611-612.
“I saw another mighty angel commissioned to
descend to the earth, to unite his voice with the third
angel, and give power and force to his message. Great
power and glory were imparted to the angel, and as he
descended, the earth was lightened with his glory. The

light which attended this angel penetrated everywhere,
as he cried mightily, with a strong voice, ‘Babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation
of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage
of every unclean and hateful bird.’ The message of
the fall of Babylon, as given by the second angel, is
repeated, with the additional mention of the corruptions
which have been entering the churches since 1844. The
work of this angel comes in at the right time to join in
the last great work of the third angel’s message as it
swells to a loud cry. And the people of God are thus
prepared to stand in the hour of temptation, which they
are soon to meet. I saw a great light resting upon
them, and they united to fearlessly proclaim the third
angel’s message.
“Angels were sent to aid the mighty angel from
heaven, and I heard voices which seemed to sound
everywhere, ‘Come out of her, My people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven,
and God hath remembered her iniquities.’ This
message seemed to be an addition to the third message,
joining it as the midnight cry joined the second angel’s
message in 1844. The glory of God rested upon the
patient, waiting saints, and they fearlessly gave the last
solemn warning, proclaiming the fall of Babylon and
calling upon God's people to come out of her that they
might escape her fearful doom.
“The light that was shed upon the waiting ones
penetrated everywhere, and those in the churches
who had any light, who had not heard and rejected
the three messages, obeyed the call and left the fallen
churches. Many had come to years of accountability
since these messages had been given, and the light shone
upon them, and they were privileged to choose life or
death. Some chose life and took their stand with those
who were looking for their Lord and keeping all His
commandments. The third message was to do its work;
all were to be tested upon it, and the precious ones were
to be called out from the religious bodies. A compelling
power moved the honest, while the manifestation of
the power of God brought a fear and restraint upon
their unbelieving relatives and friends so that they
dared not, neither had they the power to, hinder
those who felt the work of the Spirit of God upon
them. The last call was carried even to the poor slaves,
and the pious among them poured forth their songs of
rapturous joy at the prospect of their happy deliverance.
Their masters could not check them; fear and
astonishment kept them silent. Mighty miracles were
wrought, the sick were healed, and signs and wonders
followed the believers. God was in the work, and every
saint, fearless of consequences, followed the convictions
of his own conscience and united with those who were
keeping all the commandments of God; and with power
they sounded abroad the third message. I saw that this
message will close with power and strength far
exceeding the midnight cry.
“Servants of God, endowed with power from on
high with their faces lighted up, and shining with holy

408

REVELATION 14
consecration, went forth to proclaim the message from
heaven. Souls that were scattered all through the
religious bodies answered to the call, and the precious
were hurried out of the doomed churches, as Lot was
hurried out of Sodom before her destruction. God’s
people were strengthened by the excellent glory which
rested upon them in rich abundance and prepared them
to endure the hour of temptation. I heard everywhere a
multitude of voices saying, ‘Here is the patience of the
saints: here are they that keep the commandments of
God, and the faith of Jesus.’” Early Writings, 277-279.
The Saints Gain the Victory.—
“(Mal. 3:2,3 quoted). Those who are living upon
the earth when the intercession of Christ shall cease in
the sanctuary above are to stand in the sight of a holy
God without a mediator. Their robes must be spotless,
their characters must be purified from sin by the blood of
sprinkling. Through the grace of God and their own
diligent effort they must be conquerors in the battle
with evil. While the investigative judgment is going
forward in heaven, while the sins of penitent believers
are being removed from the sanctuary, there is to be a
special work of purification, of putting away of sin,
among God’s people upon earth. This work is more
clearly presented in the messages of Revelation 14.
“When this work shall have been accomplished, the
followers of Christ will be ready for His appearing.
‘Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as
in former years.’ Malachi 3:4. Then the church which
our Lord at His coming is to receive to Himself will be a
‘glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing.’ Ephesians 5:27. Then she will look ‘forth
as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun,
and terrible as an army with banners.’ Song of
Solomon 6:10.” Great Controversy, 425.
“In the issue of the contest all Christendom will be
divided into two great classes—those who keep the
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus, and those
who worship the beast and his image and receive his
mark. Although church and state will unite their power
to compel ‘all, both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond’ (Revelation 13:16), to receive ‘the
mark of the beast,’ yet the people of God will not
receive it. The prophet of Patmos beholds ‘them that
had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his

image, and over his mark, and over the number of his
name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of
God’ and singing the song of Moses and the Lamb.
Revelation 15:2, 3.” Great Controversy, 450.
“The situation of the church when the decree goes
forth that all shall worship the image of the beast on pain
of death, will be precisely that of the three Hebrew
worthies whom Nebuchadnezzar commanded to
worship the golden image. Read carefully Dan. 3. God
saved them by direct interposition. He has promised
thus to interpose for his people; but it will not be
until the time of trouble, such as never was, has fully
opened upon the world.
“...The conflict with the beast and his image is
inevitable; but the issue of this conflict is not a matter of
doubt. God will interpose to save his people. Though
the last act of Satan be to unite all the wicked of the
earth in the worship of the beast, and to attempt the utter
extermination of the saints, yet God has said that the
saints shall triumph!
“And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with
fire: and them that had gotten the victory over the
beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and
over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass,
having the harps of God. And they sing the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints.” Rev. 15:2, 3.
“Glorious indeed will be the triumph of the saints!
Reader, may it be your lot to join in singing that song of
victory upon the sea of glass.” Andrews, TAM, 139,141.
Three Angels Messages To Be Crucified.—
“I saw that as the Jews crucified Jesus, so the
nominal churches had crucified these messages, and
therefore they have no knowledge of the way into the
most holy, and they cannot be benefited by the
intercession of Jesus there. Like the Jews, who offered
their useless sacrifices, they offer up their useless
prayers to the apartment which Jesus has left; and
Satan, pleased with the deception, assumes a religious
character, and leads the minds of these professed
Christians to himself, working with his power, his signs
and lying wonders, to fasten them in his snare.” Early
Writings, 261.

409

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 14:13
And I heard a voice from heaven saying
unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith
the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labours; and their works do follow them.
I Heard A Voice From Heaven Saying, Write.—
“The command to ‘write’ is given twelve times in
the Apocalypse and always just before an important
announcement of special interest and value to the
church. The voice from heaven is doubtless that of
Christ, the Author of the book and the One whom it
reveals. Through His own death and resurrection
Christ made possible the resurrection and future life
of His people.” Bunch, TR, 211.
Blessed Are the Dead Which Die in the Lord From
Henceforth.—
“This is one of the seven so-called beatitudes of
the book of Revelation. The others are found in Rev.
1:3; 16:15; 19:9; 20:6; 22:7,14.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 833.
“John is commanded by a voice from heaven to
write, ‘Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord
from henceforth;’ and the response of the Spirit is,
‘Yea, that they may rest from their labors; and their
works do follow them.’ ‘From henceforth’ must
signify from some particular point of time. What
point?—Evidently from the commencement of the
message in connection with which this is spoken. But
why are those who die after this point of time blessed?”
Smith, DR (1897), 549,550.
“Those who die in faith during the closing crisis
under the third angel’s message will have the
additional privilege of being called forth in the
special resurrection which immediately precedes and
is really a part of the first general resurrection. See
Dan. 12:2. These blessed ‘rest from their labours; and
their works do follow them.’ Their reward of sweet
‘rest’ is in contrast to those who ‘have no rest day nor

night’ because they have rejected God’s last warning
message and worshiped the beast and his image instead
of the Creator. There is no peace or rest for the wicked.
See Isa. 57:20,21. The promise of rest from labor
indicates that those here described have been
especially zealous in missionary activity during the
campaigns of the church militant against the dragon,
beast, and false prophet. Their warfare is over. They
died triumphantly on the battlefield and peacefully rest
in their graves awaiting the call of the Lifegiver on the
resurrection morning. See Dan. 12:13.
“This verse is a sort of parenthetical message
thrown in at an appropriate time and place to console
those who face the alternative of death or the worship of
the beast and his image. It is a heaven-sent message to
encourage faithfulness ‘even unto death.’
The
promise doubtless applies especially from the time when
the worship of the beast is enforced by law with the
sentence of death as the penalty for disobedience. The
language of our text may indicate that the blessed dead,
or at least part of them, are martyrs to their faith in the
closing crisis.” Bunch, TR, 211.
“There are cases where God works decidedly by
His divine power in the restoration of health. But not
all the sick are healed. Many are laid away to sleep in
Jesus. John on the Isle of Patmos was bidden to write:
‘Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labors; and their works do follow them.’
Rev. 14:13. From this we see that if persons are not
raised to health, they should not on this account be
judged as wanting in faith.” Ministry of Healing, 230.
Die in the Lord.—
“The glorious dead in the estimation of the world
are too often the great war heroes who achieved fame
through bloodshed and slaughter. …But the truly
glorious dead are those who ‘die in the Lord’ and who
are called ‘the dead in Christ’ even though they rest in
unknown and unmarked graves. …Their characters
erected for them memorials far more beautiful and
enduring. In the light of Scripture there is a great
difference between those who die in the Lord and those

410

REVELATION 14
who die in their sins. Death ends our probation and
therefore fixes our characters and destiny for weal or
woe; for eternal life or eternal death. ‘In the place
where the tree falleth, there it shall be.’ Eccl. 11:3.
The death of the righteous is not a calamity; it is a
triumph. It brings to an end the warfare against sin and
gives assurance of an eternal reward. Therefore,
‘precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His
saints’ (Ps. 116:15). The ambition to die the death of
the righteous is a worthy goal. Said the ancient prophet,
‘Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his.’ Num. 23:10. But such a death can be
experienced only by those who during life know the
power of Christ’s resurrection.
See Phil. 3:10.
Resurrection from spiritual death must precede
resurrection from physical death in those who receive
the benediction of the two Comforters.” Bunch, TR, 212.

man into the sepulchre of Elisha: and when the man
was let down, and touched the bones of Elisha, he
revived, and stood up on his feet.” 2Kings 13:21.

Rest.—
“Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go that I may
awake him out of sleep. Then said his disciples, Lord, if
he sleep, he shall do well. Howbeit Jesus spake of his
death: but they thought that He had spoken of taking
of rest in sleep.” John 11:11-13.

“The Lord has led out representative men to
proclaim the first, second, and third angels'
messages. We know that God was with His faithful
standard bearers. Many of them held fast their faith until
their hands were palsied by death. I labored with the
workers, bearing the burden in the heat of the day. Our
work was a part of the great web of God's plans, and
nothing can be more offensive to God than to give
discredit to those who have fought a good fight, who
have finished their course, who have kept the faith unto
the end. He says, ‘(Revelation 14:13 quoted).’ They
being dead yet speak. Their words, their influence,
their example, have lived after their death.”
Manuscript Release, Vol.9, 132.

From Their Labours.—
“Gr. kopoi, ‘wearying toil,’ ‘weariness,’ ‘strenuous
effort.’ Compare the use of the word in 2 Cor. 6:5;
11:23,27; 1 Thess. 1:3. Death is a rest from the
wearying toil of life.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 833.
“Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I
am more; in labours more abundant, in stripes above
measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. In
weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in
hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness.” 2 Cor. 11:23,27.
“But in all things approving ourselves as the
ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses,
In stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings,
in fastings;” 2Cor. 6:5.
Their Works Do Follow Them.—
“Because our influence lives on after death it is
impossible to render justice in the meting out of
rewards till the end of human history. Although
righteous Abel has been dead about six millenniums, we
are told that his example and influence ‘yet speaketh’
(Heb. 11:4). The same can be said of all the saints who
are dead, and, therefore, full justice is impossible before
the human race has fully run its course.” Bunch, TR,
200.
“I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to
give every man according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his doings.” Jer. 17:10.
“And it came to pass, as they were burying a man,
that, behold, they spied a band of men; and they cast the

“When a man dies, his influence does not die with
him; but it lives on, reproducing itself. The influence of
the man who was good and pure and holy lives on after
his death, like the glow of the descending sun, casting its
glories athwart the heavens, lighting up the mountain
peaks long after the sun has sunk behind the hill. So
will the works of the pure and the holy and the good
reflect their light when they no longer live to speak and
act themselves. Their works, their words, their
example will forever live. ‘The righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance.’” Testimonies to Ministers,
429.

“The standard-bearers who have fallen in death,
are to speak through the reprinting of their writings.
I am instructed that thus their voices are to be heard.
They are to bear their testimony as to what constitutes
the truth for this time.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 161.

CHRIST’S 2ND COMING
HARVEST OF THE RIGHTEOUS
REVELATION 14:14
And I looked, and behold a white cloud,
and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son
of man, having on his head a golden crown,
and in his hand a sharp sickle.
Upon A White Cloud One Sat.—
“It is the cloud of shining angels that composes
the celestial chariot. See Isa. 19:1; Ps. 104:3,4;
68:17,18.” Bunch, TR, 213.
“A cloud represents the presence of the Deity.
Clouds are also associated with judgment. The above
expression is culled from Daniel 7:13 where Jesus, ‘the

411

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Son of man’ is pictured being transported by the clouds
of heaven’…. In verse 14 we have a representation of
Jesus Christ, amid angels, coming to this world at the
Second Advent in judgment.” Cooke #24-UR, 1.
“The great white cloud I saw was not the holy
place, but entirely separate from the holy and most holy
place, entirely separate from the sanctuary.” Spalding &
Magan, 2.
Son of Man.—
“The term represents the Messiah, the great
deliverer of the race, who was promised in Eden to
Adam and Eve. He appeared first at Bethlehem, but now
‘He appears the second time without sin unto salvation.’
” Cooke, #24-UR, 2.
The Coming of the Son of Man.—
“Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye
shall see him.” Rev. 1:7.
“Soon our eyes were drawn to the East, for a small
black cloud had appeared about half as large as a
man’s hand, which we all knew was the Sign of the Son
of Man. We all in solemn silence gazed on the cloud as
it drew nearer, and became lighter, glorious, and still
more glorious, till it was a great white cloud. The
bottom appeared like fire, a rainbow was over it,
around the cloud were ten thousand angels singing a
most lovely song. And on it sat the Son of Man, on his
head were crowns, his hair was white and curly and lay
on his shoulders. His feet had the appearance of fire, in
his right hand was a sharp sickle, in his left a silver
trumpet. His eyes were as a flame of fire, which
searched his children through and through.”
Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 2, 32,33.
On His Head A Golden Crown.—
“He is no longer a priest , but King of Kings. He
has received His kingdom. This world has been given
to Christ, and now He is coming to take possession.”
Cooke, #24-UR, 3.
“His (Jesus’) crown looked brilliant and glorious.
It was a crown within a crown, seven in number.”
Early Writings, 53,54.
“His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head
were many crowns.” Rev. 19:12.
In His Hand a Sharp Sickle.—
“Christ is declared to be the ‘Sower’ and ‘the Lord
of the harvest’ (Mr. 13:37; 9:38). Jesus said that ‘the
harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are
the angels’ (Matt. 13:39). He said that in the end of the
world the tares would be gathered ‘and burned in the
fire.’ The harvest is the time of separation and
rewarding. Christ came at the time of the first advent for
the purpose of sowing the seeds of gospel truth. The
second advent is the reaping time when He gathers

the fruits of His labors into His garner.” Bunch, TR,
212.
“In this scripture three angels are employed in the
harvest. They probably represent the angelic host. In
the previous passage of scripture (Vs. 6-13) another
three angels are represented as producing the crop. In
the final passage of Rev. 14, three angels are pictured
as reaping the crop.” Cooke, #24-UR, 4.

REVELATION 14:15,16
And another angel came out of the
temple, crying with a loud voice to him that
sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and
reap: for the time is come for thee to reap;
for the harvest of the earth is ripe.
And he that sat on the cloud thrust in
his sickle on the earth; and the earth was
reaped.
Another Angel Cried.—
“It will be noticed that in this line of prophecy,
three angels precede the Son of man on the white cloud,
and three are introduced after that symbol. The opinion
has already been expressed that literal angels are
engaged in the scenes here described. The first three
have charge of the three special messages, and may also
symbolize a body of religious teachers.”
“The message of the fourth angel [of Rev. 14] is
evidently to be uttered after the Son of man, having
finished his priestly work, takes his seat upon the white
cloud, but before he appears in the clouds of heaven. As
the language is addressed to Him who is seated upon the
white cloud, having in his hand a sharp sickle ready to
reap, it must denote a message or prayer on the part
of the church, after their work for the world is done
and probation has ceased, and nothing remains but
for the Lord to appear and take his people to himself.
It is doubtless the day-and-night cry spoken of by our
Lord in Luke 18:7,8 in connection with the coming of
the Son of man. And this prayer will be answered; the
elect will be avenged; for does not the parable read,
‘And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry
day and night unto him?’ He that is seated upon the
cloud will thrust in his sickle, and the saints, under the
figure of the wheat of the earth, will be gathered into
the heavenly garner.” Smith, DR (1897), 550.
“In my distress I called upon the LORD, and
cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his
temple, and my cry came before him, even into his
ears.” Psalm 18:6.
“The Lord has shown me in vision, that Jesus rose
up, and shut the door, and entered the Holy of Holies, at
the 7th month 1844; but Michael’s standing up (Dan.
12:1) to deliver his people, is in the future.

412

REVELATION 14
“This, will not take place, until Jesus has finished
his priestly office in the Heavenly Sanctuary, and lays
off his priestly attire, and puts on his most kingly robes,
and crown, to ride forth on the cloudy chariot, to ‘thresh
the heathen in anger,’ and deliver his people.
“Then Jesus will have the sharp sickle in his hand,
(Rev. 14:14) and then the saints will cry day and night
to Jesus on the cloud, to thrust in his sharp sickle and
reap. This, will be the time of Jacob’s trouble, (Jer.
30:5-8) out of which, the saints will be delivered by the
voice of God.” Word to Little Flock, 12.
With A Loud Voice.—
“Of the latter trio of angels, the first and the third
cry with a loud voice. Likewise, the first and third
angels of the first trio cry with a loud voice. …There
will be a mighty cry around the globe from the
afflicted saints—a cry for deliverance from their
persecutors and would-be slayers. There will also be
a cry from the afflicted saints for God’s approval in
the time of Jacob’s trouble when they are mentally
assailed by Satan. We suggest that this angel, crying
with a loud voice to Christ on the cloud, represents the
cry of the saints around the world. …We suggest that
this cry is illustrated by the parable of …Luke 18:1-8.”
Cooke, #24-UR, 5.
Thrust in Thy Sickle.—
“But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately
he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.”
Mark 4:29
“The husbandman who ‘putteth in the sickle,
because the harvest is come,’ can be no other than
Christ. It is He who at the last great day will reap the
harvest of the earth.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 62,63.
“Mark 4:29 quoted. When the harvest of the earth
is reaped, we shall see the result of our toil; for we shall
see those for whom we have labored and prayed
gathered into the heavenly garner. So shall we enter into
the joy of our Lord, when ‘He shall see of the travail of
His soul, and shall be satisfied.’ Isaiah 53:11.”
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students, 144.
Harvest of the Earth is Ripe.—
“The harvest is the end of the world.’ Matthew
13:39.
“Verses 15-20 describe the great harvest at the end
of all things.
The harvest comprehends two
distinctive events. One is described in vs. 16,17, and
the other in vs. 18-20. The first refers to the gathering
of the righteous, represented here by ripened grain, as
shown in the Greek by the word translated ‘ripe.’ The
second refers to the wicked, represented by the clusters
of ‘fully ripe’ grapes.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 834.
“Before the Son of Man thrusts in his sickle to
gather the precious harvest of the earth, that harvest

must be fully ripened for the heavenly garner. And
before the vine of the earth shall be gathered for the
winepress of the wrath of God, her clusters must also
be fully ripened. Rev. 14:14-19. And the last message
of fearful warning to the people will ripen and
prepare the believing for salvation, and also the
unbelieving for destruction.”
White, James, Bible
Adventism, 70.
“The latter rain, ripening earth’s harvest,
represents the spiritual grace that prepares the church
for the coming of the Son of man. But unless the
former rain has fallen, there will be no life; the green
blade will not spring up. Unless the early showers
have done their work, the latter rain can bring no
seed to perfection.” Testimonies to Ministers, 506.
“Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For
he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting. And let us not be weary in
well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint
not.” Galatians 6:7-9.
Ripe.—
“Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth
not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that,
when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is.” 1John 3:2.
“For the Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel,
and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with
the Lord.” 1 Thess. 4:16,17.
“Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed.”
1Corinthians 15:51,52.
“And they shall see the Son of man coming in the
clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he
shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet,
and they shall gather together his elect from the four
winds, from one end of heaven to the other.”
Matthew 24:30,31.
“The latter rain, falling near the close of the
season, ripens the grain and prepares it for the sickle.
The Lord employs these operations of nature to represent
the work of the Holy Spirit. As the dew and the rain are
given first to cause the seed to germinate, and then to
ripen the harvest, so the Holy Spirit is given to carry
forward, from one stage to another, the process of

413

GEMS FROM REVELATION
spiritual growth. The ripening of the grain represents
the completion of the work of God’s grace in the soul.
By the power of the Holy Spirit the moral image of
God is to be perfected in the character. We are to be
wholly transformed into the likeness of Christ.
“The latter rain, ripening earth’s harvest, represents
the spiritual grace that prepares the church for the
coming of the Son of man. But unless the former rain
has fallen, there will be no life; the green blade will not
spring up. Unless the early showers have done their
work, the latter rain can bring no seed to perfection.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 506.
“‘The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance.’ Gal. 5:22, 23. This fruit can never perish,
but will produce after its kind a harvest unto eternal life.
“ ‘When the fruit is brought forth, immediately
he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.’
Christ is waiting with longing desire for the
manifestation of Himself in His church. When the
character of the Saviour shall be perfectly
reproduced in His people, then He will come to claim
His own. It is the privilege of every Christian, not only
to look for, but to hasten, the coming of our Lord. Were
all who profess His name bearing fruit to His glory, how
quickly the whole world would be sown with the seed of
the gospel! Quickly the last great harvest would be
ripened, and Christ would come to gather the precious
grain.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 68,69.
“The harvest has reached the limit of development.
The saints have reached maturity in spiritual growth and
character development. It indicates that both the
earthly and the latter rains have fallen and
accomplished their mission of bringing the spiritual
harvest to perfection. It also indicates that the reaping
is done at the last hour; that there had been a delay but
that further delay would be impossible.
Perfect
ripeness calls for action. The time of harvest depends
not so much upon a fixed date as upon the fulfillment of
a fixed purpose—the ripeness of the grain. ‘But when
the harvest is ripe, immediately he puttest forth the
sickle, because the harvest is come.’ Mark 4:29.”
Bunch, TR, 213.
The Earth Was Reaped.—
“We all in solemn silence gazed on the cloud as it
drew nearer, and became lighter, glorious, and still more
glorious, till it was a great white cloud. The bottom
appeared like fire; a rainbow was over it, and around the
cloud were ten thousand angels singing a most lovely
song. And on it sat the Son of man, on his head were
crowns, his hair was white and curly and lay on his
shoulders. His feet had the appearance of fire, in his
right hand was a sharp sickle, in his left a silver
trumpet. His eyes were as a flame of fire, which
searched his children through and through. Then all
faces gathered paleness, and those that God had rejected
gathered blackness. Then we all cried out, Who shall be

able to stand? Is my robe spotless? Then the angels
ceased to sing, and there was some time of awful silence,
when Jesus spoke, Those who have clean hands and a
pure heart shall be able to stand; my grace is sufficient
for you. At this, our faces lighted up, and joy filled
every heart. And the angels struck a note higher and
sung again while the cloud drew still nearer the earth.
Then Jesus’ silver trumpet sounded, as he descended on
the cloud, wrapped in flames of fire. He gazed on the
graves of the sleeping saints, then raised his eyes and
hands to heaven and cried, Awake! Awake! Awake!
ye that sleep in the dust, and arise. Then there was a
mighty earthquake. The graves opened, and the dead
came up clothed with immortality. The 144,000
shouted, Hallelujah! as they recognized their friends who
had been torn from them by death, and in the same
moment we were changed and caught up together with
them to meet the Lord in the air.” Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 2,
32,33.
“By this language we are carried down past the
second advent, with its accompanying scenes of
destruction.... Beyond these scenes we must therefore
look for the application of the following verses.” Smith,
DR, 678.

HARVEST OF THE WICKED
REVELATION 14:17,18
And another angel came out of the
temple which is in heaven, he also having a
sharp sickle.
And another angel came out from the
altar, which had power over fire; and cried
with a loud cry to him that had the sharp
sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle,
and gather the clusters of the vine of the
earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.
Another Angel.—
“As the first four angels of this series [in Rev. 14]
denoted a marked movement on the part of the people
of God, the last two may denote the same: for the
saints are to have some part to act in meeting out and
executing the final punishment of the wicked. 1
Corinthians 6:2; Psalm 149:9.” Smith, DR (1897),
551,552.
He Also Having a Sharp Sickle.—
“Two companies. Two sickles. Vs.14,17. Two
harvests. Vs. 15,18. Because there will be two classes
of people when Jesus comes.
“Matt. 13:37-40: The ‘good seed,’ and the
‘Tares.’
“Matt. 24:41: The ‘taken’ and the ‘left.’
“Matt. 24:45,48: The ‘faithful,’ and the ‘evil.’

414

REVELATION 14
“Matt. 25:33: The ‘wise’ and the ‘foolish.’
“Mal. 3:17,18: The righteous and the wicked.
“Two world messages produce two groups of
people. The three messages of Rev. 14:6-12 gather
God’s people out of Babylon to keep the commandments
of God and the Faith of Jesus.
“The three unclean spirits that come out of the
mouth or teachings of the three God-opposing powers
gather the wicked. Rev. 16:13.” Burnside, RWU, 176.
“The two harvests are prepared for the reaping
by the two world messages which gather the
inhabitants of the earth into two groups. The message
of God as symbolized by the three angels gathers the
righteous into groups or bundles for the heavenly garner.
The message of Satan through the beast and false
prophet gathers the wicked into bundles for the lake
of fire. …Those who accept the threefold message are
gathered to Christ, and those who accept the message of
the beast and false prophet are gathered to the Antichrist.
There will be only two classes when Christ returns.”
Bunch, TR, 214.
Another Angel Came Out From the Altar Which Had
Power Over Fire.—
“The angel comes out of the temple, where the
records are kept and the punishment is determined. The
other angel has power over fire. This may have some
connection with the fact that fire is the element by which
the wicked are at last to be destroyed, although, to carry
out the figure, the wicked, having been likened to the
clusters of the vine of the earth, are said to be cast into
the great winepress, which is trodden without the city.
And blood comes out of the winepress, even to the
horses’ bridles. We know that the wicked are doomed to
be swallowed up at last in a flood of all-devouring flame
descending from God out of heaven; but what preceding
slaughter may take place among the doomed host, we
know not. It is not improbable that this language will be
literally fulfilled. As the first four angels of this series
denoted a marked movement on the part of the people of
God, the last two may denote the same: for the saints
are to have some part to act in meeting out and
executing the final punishment of the wicked. 1
Corinthians 6:2; Psalm 149:9.” Smith, DR (1897),
551,552.
“The fire in verse 18 undoubtedly represents
judgment. The altar within the temple is the altar of
incense, and the fire is associated with that altar.
…The altar was associated with the record of sin. ‘The
sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron and with the
point of a diamond: it is graven… upon the horns of
your altars.’ Jer. 17:1. In the Old Testament the blood
of the sin offering was sprinkled upon the horns of the
altar of incense. Thus the altar, we suggest, represents
here the record of the sins of the unsaved, so from the
incense altar comes the fire of God’s judgment or
retribution.” Cooke, #24-UR, 8.

“The angel from the altar had power over fire, the
symbol of judgment. This is doubtless the same angel
described in Rev. 8:3-5. It is Christ who commands that
the harvest of the wicked be gathered and ‘cast into the
great winepress of the wrath of God.’ In the parable
of the wheat and tares it is Christ who sends His
angels to gather the tares for the furnace of fire. See
Mt. 13:38-42.” Bunch, TR, 214.
“And the angel took the censer, and filled it with
fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there
were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an
earthquake.” Revelation 8:5.
Gather the Clusters of the Vine of the Earth.—
“Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come,
get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for
their wickedness is great.” Joel 3:13
“Two vines have been growing in the earth, one of
heavenly origin; the other of the earth, earthy. Christ is
the true vine, and His people are the branches. The vine
of the earth, Satan, has many branches; its growth is
far more luxuriant than the heavenly one, but it is the
vine of Sodom—its ‘grapes are grapes of gall; their
clusters are bitter; their wine is the poison of dragons
[and the cruel venom of asps.’ Dt. 32:32,33.] Terrible
is the vintage when the angels gather the clusters, and
throw them into the great wine press of the wrath of
God.” Haskell, SSP, 264.
“This harvest is also ‘fully ripe.’ It is fully ripe for
punishment and destruction. The outpouring of the
Holy Spirit on ‘all flesh’ ripens both harvests. The
same rain that causes the wheat to grow and mature
to perfection for the sickle, also develops the tares for
the devouring fire. The rejection of the threefold
message under the power of the latter rain brings to
maturity the harvest of sin and rebellion. Sin reaches its
climax in the wicked at the same time that godliness
develops to perfection in the saints. Then the line of
demarcation between saints and sinners will be clear and
distinct and Mal. 3:18 will be fulfilled.” Bunch, TR, 214.
“Then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth
God and him that serveth him not.” Mal. 3:18.
Her Grapes Are Fully Ripe.—
“What is meant by their being ‘fully ripe’? We
suggest this represents two aspects:
“1. It represents the fact that the unsaved are fully
developed in their wickedness. Just as the saved, when
fully ripe, reflect the image of Christ in character, so the
unsaved, when they are fully ripe, fully reflect the image
of the evil one.
“2. It also represents the fact that the unsaved have
reached the peak of rebellion. They have filled up the
cup of their iniquity. In what way? Their cup overflows
with wickedness when they determine to slay the

415

GEMS FROM REVELATION
saints of God.
“We suggest that the cry of the altar angel
represents Heaven’s response to the death decree
against the saints and is a signal for the harvest of the
wicked to commence.” Cooke, #24-UR, 24.
“ ‘But in the fourth generation they shall come
hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not
yet full. Genesis 15:16.’
“The place was called the brook Eshcol, because
of the cluster of grapes which the children of Israel
cut down from thence.” Numbers 13:24
“The children of Israel were about to enter the
Promised Land. The iniquity of the inhabitants was
full. In spying out the land they found a huge cluster
of fully ripe grapes. Just as the grapes were ready for
harvest so the inhabitants, because of their
wickedness, were ready for the harvest.
“ ‘God is slow to anger. He gave the wicked
nations a time of probation that they might become
acquainted with Him and His character. According to
the light given was their condemnation for refusing to
receive the light and choosing their own ways rather than
God’s ways. God gave the reason why He did not at
once dispossess the Canaanites. The iniquity of the
Amorites was not full. Through their iniquity they
were gradually bringing themselves to the point
where God’s forbearance could no longer be
exercised and they would be exterminated. Until the
point was reached and their iniquity was full, the
vengeance of God would be delayed. All nations had a
period of probation. Those who made void God's law
would advance from one degree of wickedness to
another. Children would inherit the rebellious spirit of
their parents and do worse than their fathers before them
until God's wrath would fall upon them.
The
punishment was not less because deferred. (Manuscript
58, 1900). 2BC 1005.’
“Satan is the destroyer. God cannot bless those
who refuse to be faithful stewards. All He can do is to
permit Satan to accomplish his destroying work. We
see calamities of every kind and in every degree coming
upon the earth, and why? The Lord’s restraining power
is not exercised. The world has disregarded the word of
God. They live as though there were no God. Like
the inhabitants of the Noachic world, they refuse to
have any thought of God. Wickedness prevails to an
alarming extent, and the earth is ripe for the
harvest.” 6 Testimonies, 388,389.
“(Rev. 18:15-17 quoted). Such are the judgments
that fall upon Babylon in the day of the visitation of
God’s wrath. She has filled up the measure of her
iniquity; her time has come; she is ripe for destruction.”
Great Controversy, 653.
“And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones
thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a
tower in the midst of it, and also made a winepress

therein: and he looked that it should bring forth
grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. …What
could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have
not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?”
Isaiah 5:2,4.

REVELATION 14:19,20
And the angel thrust in his sickle into
the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth,
and cast it into the great winepress of the
wrath of God.
And the winepress was trodden without
the city, and blood came out of the
winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by
the space of a thousand and six hundred
furlongs.
The Winepress of God’s Wrath.—
“The wrath of God in the seven last plagues will be
world-wide in extent. The winepress represents the
world.” Cooke, #24-UR, 13.
“Men are prone to abuse the long-suffering of God,
and to presume on His forbearance. But there is a point
in human iniquity when it is time for God to interfere;
and terrible are the issues. ‘The Lord is slow to anger,
and great in power, and will not at all acquit the
wicked’ (Na. 1:3). The long-suffering of God is
wonderful, because He puts constraint on His own
attributes; but punishment is nonetheless certain. Every
century of profligacy has treasured up wrath against
the day of wrath; and when the time comes, and the
iniquity is full, then God will do His strange work. It
will be found a terrible thing to have worn out the divine
patience; for the wrath of God will fall so signally and
strongly that it is presented as being unmixed with
mercy; and the very earth will be desolated. It is at the
time of the national apostasy, when, acting on the
policy of Satan, the rulers of the land will rank
themselves on the side of the man of sin—it is then
the measure of guilt is full; the national apostasy is
the signal for national ruin.” Selected Messages, Vol.
2, 372,373.
Wrath of God.—
“Note carefully that both these closing verses of
Rev. 14, and the next two chapters, deal with ‘the wrath
of God.’ They both deal with the same events and the
same time.” Burnside, RWU, 180.
“The wrath of God is exhibited in the seven last
plagues. ‘I saw another sign in heaven, …seven
angels having the seven last plagues, for in them is
filled up the wrath of God.’ Rev. 15:1.” Cooke, #24UR, 13.

416

REVELATION 14
Winepress Was Trodden.—
“In the Old Testament the punishment of the
unsaved is likened to the treading of grapes in a wine
press. ‘The Lord hath trodden underfoot all the
mighty men, the Lord hath trodden the daughter of
Judah as in a wine press.’ Lam. 1:15.
“In Isaiah’s portrayal of the punishment of the
Edomites, the inveterate enemies of Israel, he wrote:
‘Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed
garments from Bozrah? …Wherefore art thou red in
thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth
in the winefat? I have trodden the winepress alone;
…for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them
in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of
vengeance is in mine heart… And I will tread down
the people in mine anger and make them drunken in my
fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.”
Isa. 63:1-6.
“In the punishment and destruction of Edom, God
likened Himself to treading the grapes in the
winepress. This picture is drawn upon by the Revelator
to describe the punishment of the unsaved, when they fill
up their cup of iniquity, as they attempt to destroy the
saints.” Cooke, #24-UR, 9,10.

company.
The angry multitudes are suddenly
arrested. Their mocking cries die away. The objects of
their murderous rage are forgotten. With fearful
forebodings they gaze upon the symbol of God’s
covenant and long to be shielded from its overpowering
brightness.
“By the people of God a voice, clear and
melodious, is heard, saying, ‘Look up,’ and lifting their
eyes to the heavens, they behold the bow of promise.
The black, angry clouds that covered the firmament are
parted, and like Stephen they look up steadfastly into
heaven and see the glory of God and the Son of man
seated upon His throne.” Great Controversy, 635,636.
“The picture is …drawn from OT prophecies
describing the destruction of God’s enemies outside
Jerusalem. [See Joel 2:12,13 below.]” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 834.

“The LORD shall roar from on high, and utter his
voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar
upon his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that
tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the
earth.” Jeremiah 25:30

“I will also gather all nations, and will bring them
down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead
with [punish, execute judgment] them there for my
people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have
scattered among the nations, and parted my land.” Joel
3:2.
“Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the
valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the
heathen round about. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest
is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the
fats overflow; for their wickedness is great.” Joel
3:12,13.

“And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that
with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule
them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.” Rev.
19:11-16.

Blood Came Out of the Winepress.—
“For, behold, the LORD cometh out of his place to
punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the
earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more
cover her slain.” Isaiah 26:21.

Without the City.—
“The city is spiritual Jerusalem, the church of God,
the Remnant. The wine press is trodden outside the
Remnant church. In Rev. 11:2 it declares that the holy
city (Jerusalem), ‘…shall they tread underfoot forty
and two months.’ This was fulfilled by the Papacy,
which for forty two prophetic months, or 1260 years,
trod down the church of God. In the final conflict, the
combined powers of the unsaved, led by the Papacy,
endeavor to tread down the church of God once again,
but this time God intervenes and treads them down
outside the spiritual city of the church. When the
saints are surrounded by the unsaved, who determine to
slay them, then it is that God intervenes and treads the
unsaved down instead.” Cooke, #24-UR, 13.

“After the saints had been delivered by the voice of
God, the wicked multitude turned their rage upon one
another. The earth seemed to be deluged with blood,
and dead bodies were from one end of it to the
other.” Early Writings, 290.

“With shouts of triumph, jeering, and imprecation,
throngs of evil men are about to rush upon their
prey, when, lo, a dense blackness, deeper than the
darkness of the night, falls upon the earth. Then a
rainbow, shining with the glory from the throne of God,
spans the heavens and seems to encircle each praying

“And the slain of the LORD shall be at that day
from one end of the earth even unto the other end of
the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered,
nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.”
Jeremiah 25:33.
“And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD;
Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of
the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather
yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do
sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the
mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink
blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink
the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of
lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of
Bashan. And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink

417

GEMS FROM REVELATION
blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have
sacrificed for you.” Ezekiel 39:17-19.

being so deep that it reaches the bridles of the angelic
horses.” Cooke, #24-UR, 13,14.

Horse’s Bridles.—
“The winepress of the wrath of God produces a
deluge of real blood that reaches ‘even unto the horse
bridles.’ This may have reference to the horses
described in Rev. 19:11-16 where Christ is pictured
riding a white horse followed by armies of heaven
also mounted upon white horses. Christ, the leader of
the heavenly cavalry, is said to be clothed with garments
dipped in blood and He comes with His symbolic
horses and horsemen to tread the winepress of the
wrath of God. This identifies our text with the
second advent of Christ.” Bunch, TR, 215.

A Thousand and Six Hundred Furlongs.—
“A furlong is about an eighth of a mile, 1600
furlongs would be 200 miles.” Bunch, TR, 215.

“In the Old Testament times it was not uncommon,
in treading down the grapes in the winepress to use
horses. In Revelation this practice is drawn upon to
symbolize the destruction of the unsaved.
[Rev.
19:11,14,15 quoted.] In Revelation 14:20 these angelic
horsemen are pictured treading down the unsaved in
the great worldwide wine press of God’s wrath. So
terrific is the slaughter that the blood is symbolized as

“This symbol is drawn from the latter chapters of
the book of Ezekiel in the Old Testament where the
drama of Gog and Magog is presented. This ancient
power was predicted to invade Israel and attempt to
destroy the city and the temple. If Israel had been
faithful, God would have transformed the land of Israel
into a purified, elevated plateau. On it he would have
created a superlative city and temple. The Temple and
city area, called the oblation, would have been
approximately two hundred miles in circumference.
Satan would have inspired Israel’s enemies to invade
Israel, and around the circumference of the oblation
they would have been totally destroyed by God. The
Revelator borrows this picture in Ezekiel and uses it to
represent the complete destruction of the enemies of the
saints in the final conflict.” Cooke, #24-UR, 14.

DIAGRAM OF EARTHLY SANCTUARY—PATTERN OF THE HEAVENALY TEMPLE

418

REVELATION 14

419

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 15
REVELATION 15:1-8
1 And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvelous,
seven angels having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up
the wrath of God.
2 And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire: and them
that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and
over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea
of glass, having the harps of God.
3 And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the
song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints.
4 Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for
thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before
thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.
5 And after that I looked, and, behold, the temple of the
tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened:
6 And the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven
plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts
girded with golden girdles.
7 And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven
golden vials full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever.
8 And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God,
and from his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple,
till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.

REVELATION 15:1
And I saw another sign in heaven,
great and marvelous, seven angels having
the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up
the wrath of God.
Another Sign in Heaven, Great and Marvelous.—
“Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints.” Rev. 15:3.
“What is this sign that is great and marvelous? It is
the exhibition of God’s wrath, the seven last plagues.
If this is great and marvelous, why then do we tend to
shun, even to shift the responsibility of the plagues onto
Satan or upon natural causes?” Cooke, #24-UR, 15.
Seven Angels.—
“The angels, or Messengers of Mercy [Rev. 14:612] are followed by the Angels of Wrath. Thus it has
ever been. The rejectors of Noah’s appeals received the
murky waters of the Deluge. Those who mocked at
Lot’s appeals were mocked by the flames of doom.
Those who despised Jesus were despised by the Romans.
They sowed one cross on Calvary’s hill and they reaped
thousands of crosses. Today Christendom is sowing
disobedience, lawlessness and anarchy—and they shall
reap as they sow. Those who despise mercy’s warning
will soon reap wrath.” Burnside, RWU, 180,181.

The Seven Last Plagues.—
“Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until
the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is
to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms,
to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my
fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the
fire of my jealousy.” Zeph. 3:8.
“And it came to pass, while they were slaying them,
and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and
said, Ah Lord God! Wilt thou destroy all the residue of
Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon
Jerusalem?” Ezekiel 9:8.
“This also indicates they were preceded by other
plagues that were mixed with mercy, so man might learn
righteousness. The seven last plagues are unmixed with
mercy. There were ten plagues that fell on Egypt.
The first three fell on all, both Egyptians and
Israelites. Exodus 8:23: ‘I will put a division between
My people and thy people.’ Margin, ‘a redemption.’
The seven last plagues of Egypt fell only on the
Egyptians. In like manner ‘the Seven Last Plagues’ fall
only on those who have ‘the Mark of the Beast.’”
Burnside, RWU, 183.
“The final judgments are called ‘the seven last
plagues’ because there are no others to follow. The
fill up and finish the wrath of God against sin. There
have been many before, but these are the
consummation.” Bunch, TR, 217.
Plagues Are Not the Seven Trumpets.-“The seven trumpets were classed as plagues, (Rev.
9), but the trumpets are not the seven LAST plagues.
…The purpose of the trumpets was to bring apostates

420

REVELATION 15
to repentance and reformation, but the purpose of the
plagues is to punish the impenitent. They are an
exhibition of the justice of God and no doubt this is what
is ‘great and marvelous’.” Cooke, #24-UR, 15.
In Them Is Filled Up the Wrath of God.—
“The wrath of God is filled up, that is, the cup of
God’s wrath of which He will make the nations drink;
and He will give unto Babylon ‘the cup of the wine of
the fierceness of His wrath.’ [Rev. 16:19.]” Miller,
Evidence, 219.
“God’s judgments will be visited upon those who
are seeking to oppress and destroy His people. His long
forbearance with the wicked emboldens men in
transgression, but their punishment is nonetheless certain
and terrible because it is long delayed. …The nation
with which he bears long, and which he will not smite
until it has filled up the measure of its iniquity in
God’s account, will finally drink the cup of wrath
unmixed with mercy.” Great Controversy, 627.
“The seven last plagues are poured out upon those
who seek to harm the Lord’s people, and when the
plagues are studied with this thought in mind they will
be seen as proofs of the love of God exercised on
behalf of His people.” Were, WATB, 46.
Why Revelation 15: 1 is Inserted Here.—
“Why is this verse (15:1) inserted between the
winepress of Rev. 14:20 and the ‘sea of glass’ of Rev.
15:2? It is the culmination of the scene of punishment of
ch. 14:17-20. It shows what the treading of the wine
press really is—the visitation of the last plagues in which
God’s wrath overflows.
“In ch. 15:1-4 is revealed the culmination of the
harvest; the destiny of the wheat and the tares.
“In the parable of the harvest Jesus declares of the
tares, ‘The angels shall cast them into a furnace of
fire, and there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.’ Mt. 13:41,42. This will be fulfilled, first in the
seven last plagues, and finally in the lake of fire. (Rev.
20.)
“Chapter 15:2-4 reveals the destiny of the
righteous remnant. In the harvest parable Jesus says:
‘Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the
kingdom of their father.’ Mt. 13:43. “ Cooke, #24UR, 15,16.

REVELATION 15:2
And I saw as it were a sea of glass
mingled with fire: and them that had gotten
the victory over the beast, and over his
image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his name, stand on the sea of
glass, having the harps of God.

And I Saw (God’s People Remembered).—
“In this scene the people of God are not forgotten.
The prophet is permitted to anticipate a little in verses 24, and behold them as victors upon the sea of glass.
…Like the bright sun bursting through the midnight
cloud, some scene is presented, or some promise given,
to the humble followers of the Lamb, in every hour of
temptation, as if to assure and reassure them of God’s
love and care for them, and of the certainty of their
final reward. Verily the words of the prophet are
among the true sayings of God: ‘Say ye to the
righteous, that it shall be well with him;’ but ‘Woe
unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him.’ Isaiah
3:10,11.” Smith, DR, 682.
“In the darkest days of her long conflict with evil,
the church of God has been given revelations of the
eternal purpose of Jehovah. His people have been
permitted to look beyond the trials of the present to the
triumphs of the future, when, the warfare having been
accomplished, the redeemed will enter into possession of
the promised land. These visions of future glory,
scenes pictured by the hand of God, should be dear to
His church today, when the controversy of the ages is
rapidly closing and the promised blessings are soon to
be realized in all their fullness.” Prophets & Kings,
722.
The Sea of Glass.—
“And before the throne there was a sea of glass like
unto crystal.” Rev. 4:6.
“The sea of glass, upon which these victors stand, is
the same as that brought to view in chapter 4:6, which
was before the throne in heaven. As we have no
evidence that it has yet changed its location, and the
saints are seen upon it, we have here indubitable proof,
in connection with chapter 14:1-5, that the saints are
taken to heaven to receive a portion of their reward.”
Smith, DR, 682.
“We all entered the cloud together, and were seven
days ascending to the sea of glass, when Jesus brought
the crowns, and with His own right hand placed them on
our heads. He gave us harps of gold and palms of
victory. Here on the sea of glass the 144,000 stood in a
perfect square.” Early Writings, 16.
“We have already learned that the ‘sea of glass’ is
the pavement of the temple of God on Mount Zion.”
Bunch, TR, 218.
Mingled With Fire.—
“Upon the crystal sea before the throne, that sea of
glass as it were mingled with fire—so resplendent is it
with the glory of God—are gathered the company that
have ‘gotten the victory over the beast, and over his
image, and over his mark, and over the number of his
name.’” Great Controversy, 648.

421

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The sea of glass no doubt reflects the glory of
God. In the Old Testament the Lord is pictured as being
bathed in fire. Ex. 19:18; 24:17; Deut. 4:11-12,24; 5:22;
33:2; Daniel 7:9-10; Hebrews 12:29.” Cooke, #24-UR,
16.
Them That Had Gotten the Victory.—
“We need to study the pouring out of the seventh
vial. The powers of evil will not yield up the conflict
without a struggle. But Providence has a part to act in
the battle of Armageddon. When the earth is lighted
with the glory of the angel of Revelation eighteen, the
religious elements, good and evil, will awake from
slumber, and the armies of the living God will take the
field.” Maranatha, 254.
“This is the same group which was revealed in Rev.
14:1-5, and which is symbolized by the number
144,000. This group exists only in the end time, for
only then is the conflict of the beast and his image an
issue.
“…The generation that goes through this conflict
will probably have experienced the greatest contest ever
known to man, a contest similar in some ways to what
Jesus went through in the garden of Gethsemane.
This group will have faced adverse public opinion. They
have been compelled to disobey the laws of the land, to
endure public ridicule and universal contempt. They
have been boycotted, and threatened with starvation.
They have lost family, friends, everything. Finally,
they have faced the death decree, forced to forsake
everything and flee to the mountains or be
imprisoned. The only item they retain is their implicit
faith in God and their confidence in His promises. What
a conflict! What a victory!” Cooke, #24-UR, 17.
“Through trials and persecution, the glory—
character—of God is revealed in His chosen ones. The
church of God, hated and persecuted by the world, are
educated and disciplined in the school of Christ. They
walk in narrow paths on earth; they are purified in the
furnace of affliction. They follow Christ through sore
conflicts; they endure self-denial and experience bitter
disappointments; but their painful experience teaches
them the guilt and woe of sin, and they look upon it with
abhorrence. Being partakers of Christ’s sufferings,
they are destined to be partakers of His glory. In holy
vision the prophet saw the triumph of the people of God.
He says, [Rev. 15:2,3; 7:14,15 quoted].” Mount of
Blessing, 31.
“He [John] saw the church brought into deadly
conflict with the beast and his image, and the worship of
that beast enforced on pain of death. But looking beyond
the smoke and din of the battle, he beheld a company
upon Mount Zion with the Lamb, having, instead of the
mark of the beast, the ‘Father’s name written in their
foreheads.’ And again he saw ‘them that had gotten
the victory over the beast, and over his image, and
over his mark, and over the number of his name,

stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God’
and singing the song of Moses and the Lamb.” 5
Testimonies, 752,753.
“Those who truly obey the Third Angel’s
Message will get the victory over the Beast and over
his Image, and over his mark, and over the number of
his name; they will, at the last, stand on the sea of glass,
having the harps of God; and they will be without fault
before the throne of God. And it will all be through
‘Him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in His
own blood.’” Jones, GNOT, 148.
“Those who escape the plagues are the ones who
got the victory over the beast and his image.” Straw, SR,
94.
“And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they
loved not their lives unto the death.” Rev. 12:11.
The Victory is Gained at the Voice of God.—
“It cannot be said that victory is gained over the
image of the beast till it exists and begins to enforce
obedience by civil law, nor can victory over the mark of
the beast be gained until the character of the beast is fully
developed and the mark of the beast is stamped upon
those who refuse to receive the seal of God. Only those
who live through the closing crisis to the very end can
possibly get complete victory over the dragon, the
beast, and the false prophet, and the mark and
number of their satanic characters and counterfeit
religions.
Our text therefore pictures the living,
translated gospel harvest, gathered from all nations as the
result of the threefold message of the previous chapter.”
Bunch, TR, 218.
“The LORD also shall roar out of Zion, and
utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and
the earth shall shake: but the LORD will be the hope of
his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.”
Joel 3:16.
“It was at midnight that God chose to deliver His
people. As the wicked were mocking around them,
suddenly the sun appeared, shining in his strength, and
the moon stood still. The wicked looked upon the scene
with amazement, while the saints beheld with solemn joy
the tokens of their deliverance. Signs and wonders
followed in quick succession. Everything seemed turned
out of its natural course. The streams ceased to flow.
Dark, heavy clouds came up and clashed against each
other. But there was one clear place of settled glory,
whence came the voice of God like many waters,
shaking the heavens and the earth. There was a
mighty earthquake. The graves were opened, and those
who had died in faith under the third angel’s message,
keeping the Sabbath, came forth from their dusty beds,
glorified, to hear the covenant of peace that God was to
make with those who had kept His law.

422

REVELATION 15
“The sky opened and shut and was in com-motion.
The mountains shook like a reed in the wind and cast out
ragged rocks all around. The sea boiled like a pot and
cast out stones upon the land. And as God spoke the
day and the hour of Jesus’ coming and delivered the
everlasting covenant to His people, He spoke one
sentence, and then paused, while the words were
rolling through the earth. The Israel of God stood with
their eyes fixed upward, listening to the words as they
came from the mouth of Jehovah and rolled through the
earth like peals of loudest thunder. It was awfully
solemn. At the end of every sentence the saints shouted,
‘Glory! Hallelujah!’ Their countenances were lighted up
with the glory of God, and they shone with glory as did
the face of Moses when he came down from Sinai. The
wicked could not look upon them for the glory. And
when the never-ending blessing was pronounced on
those who had honored God in keeping His Sabbath
holy, there was a mighty shout of victory over the
beast and over his image.” Early Writings, 285,286.
Stand on the Sea of Glass.—
“Upon the crystal sea before the throne, that sea
of glass as it were mingled with fire—so resplendent is
it with the glory of God—are gathered the company that
have ‘gotten the victory over the beast, and over his
image, and over his mark, and over the number of his
name.’ With the Lamb upon Mount Zion, ‘having the
harps of God,’ they stand, the hundred and forty and
four thousand that were re-deemed from among
men.” Great Controversy, 648.
“As the twelve tribes, after crossing the Red Sea, all
united in the song of triumph, so the last
representatives of the twelve tribes of Israel on earth,
as they stand a mighty phalanx on the sea of glass before
the throne of God in heaven, will sing the song of Moses
and the Lamb.” Haskelll, CAIS, 226.
Having the Harps of God.—
“They have first learned to spiritually sing on earth
before they can sing in heaven. In the kingdom of grace
on earth they have learned to praise God, to rejoice amid
persecution. As Jesus said, ‘Blessed are ye when men
shall revile you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven:
For so persecuted they the prophets which were sent
before you.’ Mt. 5:10-12. Persecution awaits the
remnant in the near future, and those who learn to sing
amidst conflict and suffering will receive the harps of
God and sing on the sea of glass.” Cooke, #24-UR, 19.

REVELATION 15:3
And they sing the song of Moses the
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and marvellous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy

ways, thou King of saints.
They Sing The Song of Moses.—
“As morning broke [after crossing the Red Sea] it
revealed to the multitudes of Israel all that remained of
their mighty foes—the mail-clad bodies cast upon the
shore. From the most terrible peril, one night had
brought complete deliverance. That vast, helpless
throng—bondmen un-used to battle, women, children,
and cattle, with the sea before them, and the mighty
armies of Egypt pressing behind—had seen their path
opened through the waters and their enemies
overwhelmed in the moment of expected triumph.
Jehovah alone had brought them deliverance, and to
Him their hearts were turned in gratitude and faith.
Their emotion found utterance in songs of praise.
The Spirit of God rested upon Moses, and he led the
people in a triumphant anthem of thanksgiving, the
earliest and one of the most sublime that are known
to man. (Ex. 15:1-16 quoted.)” Patriarchs & Prophets,
287,288.
“Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this
song unto the LORD, and spake, saying, I will sing unto
the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse
and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. The LORD is
my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he
is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my
father’s God, and I will exalt him. The LORD is a man
of war: the LORD is his name.” Exodus 15:1-3.
“This song and the great deliverance which it
commemorates, made an impression never to be effaced
from the memory of the Hebrew people. From age to
age it was echoed by the prophets and singers of Israel,
testifying that Jehovah is the strength and deliverance of
those who trust in Him. That song does not belong to the
Jewish people alone. It points forward to the destruction
of all the foes of righteous-ness and the final victory of
the Israel of God. The prophet of Patmos beholds the
white-robed multitude that have ‘gotten the victory,’
standing on the ‘sea of glass mingled with fire,’ having
‘the harps of God. And they sing the song of Moses
the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb.’
Revelation 15:2, 3.
“ ‘Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
Thy name give glory, for Thy mercy, and for Thy
truth’s sake.’ Psalm 115:1. Such was the spirit that
pervaded Israel’s song of deliverance, and it is the spirit
that should dwell in the hearts of all who love and fear
God. In freeing our souls from the bondage of sin,
God has wrought for us a deliverance greater than
that of the Hebrews at the Red Sea. Like the Hebrew
host, we should praise the Lord with heart and soul and
voice for His ‘wonderful works to the children of
men.’” Patriarchs & Prophets, 289.
“It is the song of Moses and the Lamb—a song
of deliverance. None but the hundred and forty-four

423

GEMS FROM REVELATION
thousand can learn that song; for it is the song of
their experience—an experience such as no other
company have ever had.” Great Controversy, 648,649.
“The song of deliverance is recorded in Exodus
15:1-12. Verses 13-18 are prophetic of the results of this
victory on the wicked of other nations, and verses 19-22
are the sequel to the song. …Those who sang the song
of Moses had just passed through the plagues in which
God poured out His wrath upon the Egyptians. They had
escaped these awful judgments through their faith in the
blood of the lamb sprinkled on the door posts, the sign of
the cross of Calvary. They faced the sentence of death at
the Red Sea and were delivered by faith. See Heb.
11:29. They also witnessed the execution of the divine
sentence of death upon their enemies. In the song of
Moses all glory is given ‘unto the Lord; for He hath
triumphed gloriously.’ They took no glory to themselves whatever. It must be very evident that no
person sang or could sing the song of Moses except
those who passed through the experiences that it was
composed and sung to commemorate.” Bunch, TR,
219.
“The Egyptian plagues were especially typical of
the seven last. …The one is typical of the other just as
the exodus of literal Israel from Egypt is typical of the
exodus of spiritual Israel from Babylon in the last days.
It is for this reason that deliverance in both instances
is celebrated by the singing of the song of Moses.”
Bunch, TR, 223.
The Song of the Lamb.—
“Upon the crystal sea before the throne, that sea of
glass as it were mingled with fire—so resplendent is it
with the glory of God—are gathered the company that
have ‘gotten the victory over the beast, and over his
image, and over his mark, and over the number of his
name.’ With the Lamb upon Mount Zion, ‘having the
harps of God,’ they stand, the hundred and forty and
four thousand that were redeemed from among men;
and there is heard, as the sound of many waters, and as
the sound of a great thunder, ‘the voice of harpers
harping with their harps.’
“And they sing ‘a new Song’ before the throne, a
song which no man can learn save the hundred and
forty and four thousand. It is the song of Moses and
the Lamb—a song of deliverance. None but the
hundred and forty-four thousand can learn that song;
for it is the song of their experience—an experience
such as no other company have ever had. ‘These are
they which follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.’
These, having been translated from the earth, from
among the living, are counted as ‘the first fruits unto
God and to the Lamb.’ Revelation 15:2, 3; 14:1-5.
‘These are they which came out of great tribulation;’
they have passed through the time of trouble such as
never was since there was a nation; they have endured
the anguish of the time of Jacob’s trouble; they have
stood without an intercessor through the final outpouring

of God’s judgments. But they have been delivered, for
they have ‘washed their robes, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb.’ ‘In their mouth was found
no guile: for they are without fault’ be-fore God.
‘Therefore are they before the throne of God, and
serve Him day and night in His temple: and He that
sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.’ They
have seen the earth wasted with famine and pestilence,
the sun having power to scorch men with great heat, and
they themselves have endured suffering, hunger, and
thirst. But ‘they shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any
heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto
living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.’ Rev. 7:14-17.” Great
Controversy, 648,649.
“There is a day just about to burst upon us when
God’s mysteries will be seen, and all His ways
vindicated; when justice, mercy, and love will be the
attributes of His throne. When the earthly warfare is
accomplished, and the saints are all gathered home, our
first theme will be the song of Moses, the servant of God.
The second theme will be the song of the Lamb, the
song of grace and redemption. This song will be
louder, loftier, and in sublimer strains, echoing and reechoing through the heavenly courts. Thus the song of
God’s providence is sung, connecting the varying
dispensations; for all is now seen without a veil between
the legal, the prophetical, and the gospel. The church
history upon the earth and the church redeemed in
heaven all center around the cross of Calvary. This is
the theme, this is the song—Christ all and in all—in
anthems of praise resounding through heaven from
thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand and an
innumerable company of the redeemed host. All unite
in this song of Moses and of the Lamb. It is a new
song, for it was never before sung in heaven.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 433.
Vision Will Sustain Us Through Trial.—
“There are revealed in these last days visions of
future glory, scenes pictured by the hand of God, and
these should be dear to His church. What sustained the
Son of God in His betrayal and trial? He saw of the
travail of His soul and was satisfied. He caught a view
of the expanse of eternity and saw the happiness of those
who through His humiliation should receive pardon and
everlasting life.
He was wounded for their
transgressions, bruised for their iniquities.
The
chastisement of their peace was upon Him, and with His
stripes they were healed. His ear caught the shout of
the redeemed. He heard the ransomed ones singing
the song of Moses and the Lamb.
“We must have a vision of the future and of the
blessedness of heaven. Stand on the threshold of
eternity, and hear the gracious welcome given to
those who in this life have cooperated with Christ,
regarding it as a privilege and an honor to suffer for

424

REVELATION 15
His sake. As they unite with the angels, they cast their
crowns at the feet of the Redeemer, exclaiming:
‘Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power,
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and blessing.... Honor, and glory, and power,
be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb for ever and ever.’ Rev. 5:12, 13.
“There the redeemed ones greet those who directed
them to the uplifted Saviour. They unite in praising Him
who died that human beings might have the life that
measures with the life of God. The conflict is over. All
tribulation and strife are at an end. Songs of victory fill
all heaven as the redeemed stand around the throne
of God. All take up the joyful strain: ‘Worthy, worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, and lives again, a
triumphant conqueror.’” 8 Testimonies, 43,44.
Great and Marvelous are Thy Works.—
“There may be a specific reference here to the
‘works’ of God in the seven last plagues. The ‘sign’
delineating these plagues is described as ‘great and
marvellous’ (Rev. 15:1).” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
836.
“It is a song of infinite grandeur. …It appeals to
the works of God which are a manifestation of His glory.
With immortal vision the saints will be able to
comprehend them as they cannot in the present
state.” Smith, DR, 683.
Just and True are Thy Ways.—
“The song covers another field also, the field of
God’s providence and grace: ‘Just and true are thy
ways, thou King of saints.’ All the dealings of God
with all his creatures in the eyes of the redeemed, and
the sight of all worlds, will be forever vindicated. After
all our blindness, all our perplexities, all our trials, we
shall be able to exclaim at last in the exuberance of
satisfied joy, ‘Just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints.’” Smith, DR, 683.
“He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his
ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity,
just and right is he.” Deut. 32:4.
“By the facts unfolded in the progress of the great
controversy, God will demonstrate the principles of His
rules of government, which have been falsified by Satan
and by all whom he has deceived. His justice will finally
be acknowledged by the whole world, though the
acknowledgment will be made too late to save the
rebellious. God carries with Him the sympathy and
approval of the whole universe as step by step His great
plan advances to its complete fulfillment. He will carry
it with Him in the final eradication of rebellion. It will
be seen that all who have forsaken the divine precepts
have placed themselves on the side of Satan, in
warfare against Christ. When the prince of this world
shall be judged, and all who have united with him shall
share his fate, the whole universe as witnesses to the
sentence will declare, ‘Just and true are Thy ways,

Thou King of saints.’ Revelation 15:3.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 79.
“In the light of the Saviour’s life, the hearts of all,
even from the Creator to the prince of darkness, are
revealed. Satan has represented God as selfish and
oppressive, as claiming all, and giving nothing, as
requiring the service of His creatures for His own glory,
and making no sacrifice for their good. But the gift of
Christ reveals the Father’s heart. It testifies that the
thoughts of God toward us are ‘thoughts of peace, and
not of evil.’ Jer. 29:11. It declares that while God’s
hatred of sin is as strong as death, His love for the sinner
is stronger than death.
Having undertaken our
redemption, He will spare nothing, however dear, which
is necessary to the completion of His work. No truth
essential to our salvation is withheld, no miracle of
mercy is neglected, no divine agency is left
unemployed. Favor is heaped upon favor, gift upon
gift. The whole treasury of heaven is open to those
He seeks to save. Having collected the riches of the
universe, and laid open the resources of infinite power,
He gives them all into the hands of Christ, and says, All
these are for man. Use these gifts to convince him that
there is no love greater than Mine in earth or heaven.
His greatest happiness will be found in loving Me.
“At the cross of Calvary, love and selfishness
stood face to face.
Here was their crowning
manifestation. Christ had lived only to comfort and
bless, and in putting Him to death, Satan manifested the
malignity of his hatred against God. He made it evident
that the real purpose of his rebellion was to dethrone
God, and to destroy Him through whom the love of
God was shown.
“By the life and the death of Christ, the thoughts
of men also are brought to view. From the manger to
the cross, the life of Jesus was a call to self-surrender,
and to fellowship in suffering. It unveiled the purposes
of men. Jesus came with the truth of heaven, and all who
were listening to the voice of the Holy Spirit were drawn
to Him. The worshipers of self belonged to Satan’s
kingdom. In their attitude toward Christ, all would show
on which side they stood. And thus everyone passes
judgment on himself.
“In the day of final judgment, every lost soul will
understand the nature of his own rejection of truth. The
cross will be presented, and its real bearing will be seen
by every mind that has been blinded by transgression.
Before the vision of Calvary with its mysterious Victim,
sinners will stand condemned. Every lying excuse will
be swept away. Human apostasy will appear in its
heinous character. Men will see what their choice has
been. Every question of truth and error in the longstanding controversy will then have been made plain. In
the judgment of the universe, God will stand clear of
blame for the existence or continuance of evil. It will be
demonstrated that the divine decrees are not accessory to
sin. There was no defect in God’s government, no cause
for disaffection. When the thoughts of all hearts shall
be revealed, both the loyal and the rebellious will

425

GEMS FROM REVELATION
unite in declaring, ‘Just and true are Thy ways, Thou
King of saints. Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and
glorify Thy name? ...For Thy judgments are made
manifest.’ Rev. 15:3, 4.” Desire of Ages, 57,58.

REVELATION 15:4
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for
all nations shall come and worship before
thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.
Who Shall Not Fear Thee and Glorify Thy Name.—
“Who would not fear thee, O King of nations?”
Jeremiah 10:7.
“And men were scorched with great heat, and
blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over
these plagues: and they repented not to give him
glory.” Revelation 16:9.
All Nations Shall Come and Worship Before Thee.—
“Is this a prediction of the universal
acknowledgment of God’s righteousness? Will all
nations, will all the unsaved finally worship before God?
Yes!” Cooke, #24-UR, 20,21.
“Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and
given him a name which is above every name:
“That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under
the earth;
“And that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” Phil.
2:9-11
“As if entranced, the wicked have looked upon
the coronation of the Son of God. They see in His
hands the tables of the divine law, the statutes which they
have despised and transgressed. They witness the
outburst of wonder, rapture, and adoration from the
saved; and as the wave of melody sweeps over the
multitudes without the city, all with one voice exclaim,
‘Great and marvelous are Thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of
saints’ (Revelation 15:3); and, falling prostrate, they
worship the Prince of life.
“Satan seems paralyzed as he beholds the glory and
majesty of Christ. He who was once a covering cherub
remembers whence he has fallen. A shining seraph, ‘son
of the morning;’ how changed, how degraded! From
the council where once he was honored, he is forever
excluded. He sees another now standing near to the
Father, veiling His glory. He has seen the crown placed
upon the head of Christ by an angel of lofty stature and
majestic presence, and he knows that the exalted position
of this angel might have been his.
“Memory recalls the home of his innocence and
purity, the peace and content that were his until he

indulged in murmuring against God, and envy of Christ.
His accusations, his rebellion, his deceptions to gain the
sympathy and support of the angels, his stubborn
persistence in making no effort for self-recovery when
God would have granted him forgiveness—all come
vividly before him. He reviews his work among men
and its results—the enmity of man toward his fellow
man, the terrible destruction of life, the rise and fall
of kingdoms, the overturning of thrones, the long
succession of tumults, conflicts, and revolutions. He
recalls his constant efforts to oppose the work of Christ
and to sink man lower and lower. He sees that his hellish
plots have been powerless to destroy those who have put
their trust in Jesus. As Satan looks upon his kingdom,
the fruit of his toil, he sees only failure and ruin. He has
led the multitudes to believe that the City of God would
be an easy prey; but he knows that this is false. Again
and again, in the progress of the great controversy, he
has been defeated and compelled to yield. He knows too
well the power and majesty of the Eternal.
“The aim of the great rebel has ever been to
justify himself and to prove the divine government
responsible for the rebellion. To this end he has bent
all the power of his giant intellect. He has worked
deliberately and systematically, and with marvelous
success, leading vast multitudes to accept his version of
the great controversy which has been so long in progress.
For thousands of years this chief of conspiracy has
palmed off falsehood for truth. But the time has now
come when the rebellion is to be finally defeated and the
history and character of Satan disclosed. In his last
great effort to dethrone Christ, destroy His people,
and take possession of the City of God, the archdeceiver has been fully unmasked. Those who have
united with him see the total failure of his cause.
Christ’s followers and the loyal angels behold the full
extent of his machinations against the government of
God. He is the object of universal abhorrence.
“Satan sees that his voluntary rebellion has unfitted
him for heaven. He has trained his powers to war against
God; the purity, peace, and harmony of heaven would be
to him supreme torture. His accusations against the
mercy and justice of God are now silenced. The
reproach which he has endeavored to cast upon Jehovah
rests wholly upon himself. And now Satan bows down
and confesses the justice of his sentence.
“‘Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify
Thy name? for Thou only art holy: for all nations
shall come and worship before Thee; for Thy
judgments are made manifest.’ Verse 4. Every
question of truth and error in the long-standing
controversy has now been made plain. The results of
rebellion, the fruits of setting aside the divine statutes,
have been laid open to the view of all created
intelligences. The working out of Satan’s rule in contrast
with the government of God has been presented to the
whole universe. Satan’s own works have condemned
him. God’s wisdom, His justice, and His goodness stand
fully vindicated. It is seen that all His dealings in the
great controversy have been conducted with respect to

426

REVELATION 15
the eternal good of His people and the good of all the
worlds that He has created. ‘All Thy works shall praise
Thee, O Lord; and Thy saints shall bless Thee.’ Psalm
145:10. The history of sin will stand to all eternity as a
witness that with the existence of God’s law is bound up
the happiness of all the beings He has created. With all
the facts of the great controversy in view, the whole
universe, both loyal and rebellious, with one accord
declare: ‘Just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of
saints.’” Great Controversy, 668-670.
For Thy Judgments are Made Manifest.—
“The light of heaven encircled the tomb, and the
whole heaven was lighted by the glory of the angel. The
angel approached the grave, and rolling away the stone
as if it had been a pebble, he sat upon it. Then his voice
was heard, Son of God, come forth; thy Father calls
thee; and Jesus came forth from the grave with the
step of a mighty conqueror. There was a burst of
triumph, for the heavenly family were waiting to receive
him; and the mighty angel, followed by the army of
heaven, bowed in adoration before him as he, the
Monarch of heaven, proclaimed over the rent tomb of
Joseph, ‘I am the resurrection, and the life.’ All united
in the song, ‘Great and marvelous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou
King of saints.... Thou only art holy.... Thy judgments
are made manifest.’ ‘Who for the joy that was set
before him endured the cross, despising the shame.’”
Youth Instructor, 7/28/1898.
“God’s judgments are manifested
resurrection of all the righteous saints.” PJ

in

the

REVELATION 15:5
And after that I looked, and, behold, the
temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in
heaven was opened:
The Tabernacle of the Testimony.—
“The place of God’s throne at the time when the
book with the seven seals was delivered to Christ, and
also when the seven trumpets were given to the seven
angels, is the first apartment of the heavenly sanctuary.
But when the seven vials are delivered into the hands of
the seven angels who have the duty of pouring them out,
the second apartment of the heavenly temple is
opened, and they come out from thence to execute the
wrath of God upon men. This opening of the holiest
takes place under the seventh trumpet.
“ [Revelation 15:5-8 quoted.] This opening of the
heavenly temple, which is followed by the pouring out of
the unmingled wrath of God, is an event connected with
the closing up of human probation. And it is certain that
we have in this case the opening of the holiest of all, here
called the tabernacle of the testimony. The expression,
‘tabernacle of the testimony,’ is a familiar term taken
from the Old Testament, and is precisely equivalent to

‘tabernacle of the ten commandments.’ In proof of this,
take the use of this term in the Bible. We begin with the
first use of the Hebrew word gehdooth, and trace it
through the books of Moses. Thus it occurs for the first
time in Ex.16:34: ‘Aaron laid it up before the testimony.’
That is to say, he laid up the pot of manna before the ark
of the ten commandments. (See Heb.9:4.) The next is
Ex.25:16: ‘Thou shalt put into the ark the testimony
which I shall give thee.’ This was the ten
commandments. (See Ex.31:18; Deut.10:4,5.) Again
(Ex.25:21), ‘In the ark thou shalt put the testimony,’ i.e.,
the ten commandments. (See 1Kings8:9.) And now the
ark itself takes its name from what was put in it. ‘The
two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony.’
Ex.25:22. ‘And thou shalt hang up the veil under the
taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the veil
the ark of the testimony; and the veil shall divide unto
you between the holy place and the most holy. And thou
shalt put the mercy-seat upon the ark of the testimony in
the most holy place.’ Ex.26:33,34. Here we have the ark
of the ten commandments assigned to the most holy
place of the tabernacle, and the mercy-seat placed over
the ark. Presently we shall find that this testimony gives
name to the tabernacle itself. As we read onward we
find in Ex.27:21; 30:6,26,36; 31:7,18; 32:15; 34:29, the
terms ‘testimony,’ ‘tables of testimony,’ ‘ark of the
testimony,’ each time by testimony meaning definitely
the ten commandments. The term, ‘tabernacle of
testimony,’ occurs for the first time in Ex.38:21.
“Thus we see that the testimony of the Almighty
gives name to the tables on which it was written, to the
ark in which the tables were placed, and to the tabernacle
itself, whose second apartment received the ark. Next,
we thrice read of the ark of the testimony. Ex.39:35;
40:3,5. And now we are brought to the acts of Moses in
setting up the sanctuary. It is said (Ex.40:20), ‘He took
and put the testimony into the ark,’ i.e., he put the law of
God therein. Then he placed the ark itself within the
tabernacle, and covered the ark of the testimony by
hanging up the second veil. Ex.40:21. In Lev.16:13 the
mercy-seat is said to be upon the testimony. In Lev.24:3,
the veil which hides the ark is called the veil of the
testimony. Next, we read of the tabernacle of the
testimony, in Num.1:50,53. Next, of the ark of the
testimony. Num.4:5; 7:89; Josh.4:16. Next, of the tent of
the testimony. Num.9:15, and of the testimony itself.
Num.17:10. Next, of the tabernacle of witness, or
testimony (for the two words are synonymous).
Num.10:11; 17:7,8; 18:2. In all these texts it is certain
that the ten commandments are called the testimony,
and that they give name to the tables, to the ark, to
the veil, and to the tabernacle, especially to the second
apartment.
“This term has, therefore, a well-defined meaning
in the Scriptures. By the testimony, the tables of the
testimony, the ark of the testimony, the veil of the
testimony, and the tabernacle of the testimony, are meant
respectively the ten commandments. (Ex.31:18), the
tables of the ten commandments (Ex.32:15), the ark of
the ten commandments (Ex.40:20), the veil of the ten

427

GEMS FROM REVELATION
commandments (Ex.40:21; Lev.24:3), and the tabernacle
of the ten commandments (Num.9:15; 10:11). The term,
‘tabernacle of witness,’ or ‘testimony,’ does therefore
definitely signify the tabernacle of the ten
commandments. Now it is remarkable that this term
occurs twice in the New Testament. In Acts 7:44, the
tabernacle of witness, i.e., of the ten commandments, is
mentioned, referring to the earthly sanctuary; and in
Rev.15:5, the heavenly sanctuary is designated by this
same term, the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony
in heaven; and we have proved conclusively that this is
equivalent to the temple of the tabernacle of the ten
commandments in heaven.
“This text is therefore a plain reference to the most
holy place of the heavenly temple, and to the law of God
deposited therein, which gives name to the building.
This apartment of the heavenly temple is opened just
prior to the pouring out of the plagues.” Andrews, JEO,
68-71.

that the seven angels do not receive the vials of the
wrath of God to pour out upon the earth until the
Temple in heaven is opened. That Temple is opened
under the voice of the seventh angel. The third woe is by
reason of the voice of the seventh angel. Rev. 8:13; 9:12;
11:14. The seven plagues are poured out under the
sounding of that angel; hence the plagues are future,
and constitute the third woe.” Andrews, TAM, 116.

“The Ark was called the ‘Ark of the Testimony’
for it contained the tables of Testimony or the Ten
Commandments. The plague Angels came from before
the Ten Commandments. It is because these eternal
principles have been broken that the plagues fall on the
commandment breakers.” Burnside, RWU, 181.

Seven Angels Came Out of Temple.—
“The retribution for defiance of God’s law by
worshipping the beast and his image etc., comes from the
temple. Why the temple? The psalmist gives us the
clue. ‘I was envious… when I saw the prosperity of
the wicked… until I went into the sanctuary [temple],
then understood I their end.’ Ps. 73:3,17. It is in the
heavenly temple that the judgments of God are
determined. The plagues are not the result of natural
forces.
They are dictated by God.
They are
superintended by Christ and the angels. ‘The same
shall drink of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture… and he shall be tormented… in the
presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the
Lamb.’ Rev. 14:10.” Cooke, #25-UR, 3.

Significance of the Law and the Plagues.—
“What is the significance of this introduction to the
plagues which are the outpouring of divine wrath? It is
rebellion against God’s law that brings this
retribution.
‘The law worketh [brings] wrath.’
Romans 4:15. …God’s justice and punishment are not
the result of caprice, emotion or anger, but are based on
righteous principle, His divine law. In His amazing
mercy God provided an atonement for the broken law
that all men might escape the law’s fearful penalty.
However, at the close of the Day of Salvation, this is no
longer available. The law now must take its course. All
who have spurned the mercy of God must take the
consequences.” Cooke, #25-UR, 3.
Was Opened.—
“Verse 5 shows that these plagues fall after the
close of the ministration in the sanctuary, for the
temple is opened before they are poured out.” Smith,
DR, 681.
“The seven angels are represented as receiving the
vials of the wrath of God—the seven last plagues—after
the opening of the Temple of God in heaven. If we
turn to Rev. 11:15-19, we shall find that the opening
of the Temple in heaven is an event that transpires
under the sounding of the seventh angel. And that
account concludes with a brief statement of the events of
the seventh vial, or last plague. Now if we turn to chap.
15:5-8, and 16:1-21, we shall read an expanded view of
the facts stated in chap. 11:15-19, and we shall find that
the two accounts conclude in the same manner, viz., with
the events of the last plague. These scriptures show

“The seven angels received the vials of the wrath of
God sometime after 1844.” PJ.

REVELATION 15:6
And the seven angels came out of the
temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in
pure and white linen, and having their
breasts girded with golden girdles.

With the Seven Plagues.—
“It was impossible for the plagues to be poured out
while Jesus officiated in the sanctuary; but as His work
there is finished, and His intercession closes, there is
nothing to stay the wrath of God, and it breaks with
fury upon the shelterless head of the guilty sinner, who
has slighted salvation and hated reproof.”
Early
Writings, 280.
“Then I saw that Jesus would not leave the most
holy place until every case was decided either for
salvation or destruction, and that the wrath of God
could not come until Jesus had finished His work in
the most holy place, laid off His priestly attire, and
clothed Himself with the garments of vengeance. Then
Jesus will step out from between the Father and man, and
God will keep silence no longer, but pour out His wrath
on those who have rejected His truth. I saw that the
anger of the nations, the wrath of God, and the time to
judge the dead were separate and distinct, one following
the other, also that Michael had not stood up, and that the
time of trouble, such as never was, had not yet
commenced. The nations are now getting angry, but
when our High Priest has finished His work in the

428

REVELATION 15
sanctuary, He will stand up, put on the garments of
vengeance, and the seven last plagues will be poured
out.” Early Writings, 36.
Clothed in Pure and White Linen.—
“A fit emblem of the purity of God’s righteousness
and justice in the infliction of these judgments.” Smith,
DR, 681,682.
Their Breasts Girded With Golden Girdles.—
“And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like
unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the
foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle.”
Rev. 1:13.
“Stand therefore, ...having on the breastplate of
righteousness.” Ephesians 6:14.
“But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on
the breastplate of faith and love.” 1 Thessalonians
5:8.
“With unswerving fidelity they go forth panoplied
in pure white linen, having their breasts girded with
golden girdles. And when their task is done, when the
last vial of God’s wrath is poured out, they return and lay
their emptied vials at the feet of the Lord.” Testimonies
to Ministers, 432.

REVELATION 15:7
And one of the four beasts gave unto
the seven angels seven golden vials full of the
wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever.
One of the Four Beasts.—
“These living beings were shown in comments on
Revelation 4 to be a class of Christ’s assistants in His
sanctuary work. How appropriate that they should be
the ones to deliver to the ministers of vengeance the vials
of the wrath to be poured upon those who have slighted
Christ’s mercy, abused His long-suffering, heaped
contumely upon His name, and crucified Him afresh in
the persecution of His followers!” Smith, DR, 682.
“And the first beast was like a lion….” Rev. 4:7.
“The king’s wrath is as the roaring of a lion….”
Proverbs 19:12.
“And the peaceable habitations are cut down
because of the fierce anger of the LORD. He hath
forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is
desolate because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and
because of his fierce anger.” Jer. 25:37,38.

REVELATION 15:8
And the temple was filled with smoke
from the glory of God, and from his power;

and no man was able to enter into the
temple, till the seven plagues of the seven
angels were fulfilled.
Temple Filled With Smoke From Glory of God.—
“And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy,
holy, is the LORD of hosts: the whole earth is full of his
glory. And the posts of the door moved at the voice of
him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.”
Isaiah 6:3,4
“And he reared up the court round about the
tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the
court gate. So Moses finished the work. Then a cloud
covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the
LORD filled the tabernacle.” Exodus 40:33,34.
“Now when Solomon had made an end of praying,
the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the
burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the
LORD filled the house. And the priests could not enter
into the house of the LORD, because the glory of the
LORD had filled the LORD’s house.” 2 Chronicles 7:2.
“The prayer of Moses, ‘I beseech thee, show me thy
glory,’ is recorded for our benefit. We need to present
ourselves before the Lord every day, praying with
earnest soul-hunger, ‘I beseech thee, show me thy
glory.’
“What was God’s answer to Moses?—‘I will make
all my goodness pass before thee.... And the Lord passed
by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will
by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, and upon the children’s
children, unto the third and to the fourth generation.’
“It is the glory of God to be merciful, full of
forbearance, kindness, goodness, and truth. But the
justice shown in punishing the sinner is as verily the
glory of the Lord as is the manifestation of his
mercy.” Review & Herald, 3/10/1904
“Christ’s work is finished; and as He, with those
who have ministered with Him for fallen man, passes
from the temple, the glory of God bursts forth in all its
grandeur, until His train filled the temple.” Haskell, SSP,
267.
“That long-ago infilling of glory marked the
commencement of priestly ministry in Solomon’s temple.
The end-time glory foreseen in Rev. 15 will soon
mark the termination of priestly ministry in the
heavenly sanctuary.” Maxwell, God Cares, 447.
And From His Power.—
“Then the earth shook and trembled; the
foundations also of the hills moved and were shaken,

429

GEMS FROM REVELATION
because he was wroth. There went up a smoke out of
his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals
were kindled by it.” Psalm 18:7,8.
“Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works!
Through the greatness of thy power shall thine
enemies submit themselves unto thee.” Psalm 66:3.
No Man Was Able to Enter Into the Temple.—
“Literally, ‘no one.’ This undoubtedly means
that the time for intercession is past; no one can enter
and have access to the mercy seat. The time of
preparation is over; now the time has come for the
pouring out of the unmingled wrath of God.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 837.
“No man enters the temple during the plagues. 1.
The Man Christ Jesus no longer offers pardon. The day
of mercy has closed.
The Plagues begin when
probation’s hour closes.” Burnside, RWU, 181.
“So fearful is the wrath of God that not even an
angel can abide in His presence. ‘It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God.’ Heb. 10:31.
‘Knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade men.’ 2
Cor. 5:11. The recipients of this wrath are the rejectors
of the three angel’s messages of Rev. 14:6-12. What a
warning! This speaks of the tremendous importance of
these three messages.” Cooke, #25-UR, 5.
“These seven last plagues fill up the wrath of God.
While these are falling no one is able to enter the temple.
This would indicate that probation closes before they
begin to fall.” Straw, SR, 93.
“Our text indicates that the services of the temple of
God cease while the wrath of God falls upon the
despisers of His love and grace. There is no longer a
mediator between God and man and the righteous living
must live through the seven last plagues without an
intercessor. They are able to do this because they
have become victors over sin before the close of
probation and have been fitted for the experience
through the perfecting work of the latter rain.”
Bunch, TR, 221.
“They that were ready went in with Him to the
marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also
the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But
He answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you
not.” Mt. 25:10-12.
God’s People Protected During This Time.—
“He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most
High shall abide under the shadow of the Al-mighty. I
will say of the LORD, He is my refuge and my fortress:
my God; in him will I trust.” Ps. 91:2.
“In comparison with the millions of the world,

God’s people will be, as they have ever been, a little
flock; but if they stand for the truth as revealed in His
word, God will be their refuge. They stand under the
broad shield of Omnipotence. God is always a
majority.” Acts of the Apostles, 590.
“The marking or sealing of the saints, seems to be
shadowed forth by the marking of the side posts and
upper door posts of the houses of all Israel, before the
Lord passed through Egypt, to slay the firstborn of the
Egyptians.
“Israel was safe; for God was their protector in that
perilous night. The true Israel of God will be safely
protected, when Christ rules the nations with a ‘rod of
iron,’ and dashes them ‘in pieces like a potter’s vessel;’
for He has promised to give his angels charge over them,
to keep them in all their ways.
“Those who keep the word of Christ’s ‘patience’ in
this time of waiting and trial, will then be kept ‘FROM
the hour of temptation, (or trial) which shall come on
all the WORLD, to try them that dwell upon the
earth.’
“Those who do every well-known duty to God, and
his children: and confess their faults to God, and to one
another: and are healed from their faults: will safely rest
in the arms of the holy angels, while the burning wrath
of God is being poured out on those who have rejected
his counsel, and commandments.” White, James, et. al.,
WTLF, 3.
Preparation Needed.—
“I saw that many were neglecting the preparation so
needful and were looking to the time of ‘re-freshing’
and the ‘latter rain’ to fit them to stand in the day of the
Lord and to live in His sight. Oh, how many I saw in
the time of trouble without a shelter! They had
neglected the needful preparation; therefore they could
not receive the refreshing that all must have to fit them to
live in the sight of a holy God. Those who refuse to be
hewed by the prophets and fail to purify their souls in
obeying the whole truth, and who are willing to believe
that their condition is far better than it really is, will
come up to the time of the falling of the plagues, and
then see that they needed to be hewed and squared for
the building. But there will be no time then to do it and
no Mediator to plead their cause before the Father.
Before this time the awfully solemn declaration has gone
forth, ‘He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he
which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is
holy, let him be holy still.’ I saw that none could share
the "refreshing" unless they obtain the victory over
every besetment, over pride, selfishness, love of the
world, and over every wrong word and action. We
should, therefore, be drawing nearer and nearer to the
Lord and be earnestly seeking that preparation necessary
to enable us to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord.
Let all remember that God is holy and that none but holy
beings can ever dwell in His presence.” Early Writings,
71.

430

REVELATION 15
“Seek ye the LORD, all ye meek of the earth,
which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness,
seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of
the LORD’s anger.” Zephaniah 2:3.
Vision of Jesus Leaving the Heavenly Sanctuary.—
“As Jesus moved out of the most holy place, I heard
the tinkling of the bells upon His garment; and as He left,
a cloud of darkness covered the inhabitants of the earth.
There was then no mediator between guilty man and
an offended God. While Jesus had been standing
between God and guilty man, a restraint was upon
the people; but when He stepped out from between
man and the Father, the restraint was removed and
Satan had entire control of the finally impenitent. It
was impossible for the plagues to be poured out while
Jesus officiated in the sanctuary; but as His work there is
finished, and His intercession closes, there is nothing to
stay the wrath of God, and it breaks with fury upon the
shelterless head of the guilty sinner, who has slighted
salvation and hated reproof. In that fearful time, after
the close of Jesus’ mediation, the saints were living in
the sight of a holy God without an intercessor. Every
case was decided, every jewel numbered. Jesus tarried a
moment in the outer apartment of the heavenly
sanctuary, and the sins which had been confessed while
He was in the most holy place were placed upon Satan,
the originator of sin, who must suffer their punishment.
“Then I saw Jesus lay off His priestly attire and
clothe Himself with His most kingly robes. Upon His
head were many crowns, a crown within a crown.
Surrounded by the angelic host, He left heaven. The
plagues were falling upon the inhabitants of the earth.
Some were denouncing God and cursing Him. Others
rushed to the people of God and begged to be taught
how they might escape His judgments. But the saints
had nothing for them. The last tear for sinners had been
shed, the last agonizing prayer offered, the last burden
borne, the last warning given. The sweet voice of mercy
was no more to invite them. When the saints, and all
heaven, were interested for their salvation, they had
no interest for themselves. Life and death had been set
before them. Many desired life, but made no effort to
obtain it. They did not choose life, and now there was no
atoning blood to cleanse the guilty, no compassionate
Saviour to plead for them, and cry, ‘Spare, spare the
sinner a little longer.’ All heaven had united with Jesus,
as they heard the fearful words, ‘It is done. It is
finished.’ The plan of salvation had been accomplished,
but few had chosen to accept it. And as mercy’s sweet
voice died away, fear and horror seized the wicked.
With terrible distinctness they heard the words, ‘Too
late! too late!’” Early Writings, 279-281.

judgment.
“And he saw that there was no man, and wondered
that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought
salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained
him.
“For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and
an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the
garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with
zeal as a cloak. According to their deeds, accordingly he
will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompense to his
enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence.”
Isaiah 59:14-18.
“I saw that Jesus’ work in the sanctuary will soon
be finished. And after His work there is finished, He will
come to the door of the first apartment, and confess the
sins of Israel upon the head of the Scape Goat. Then He
will put on the garments of vengeance. Then the
plagues will come upon the wicked, and they do not
come till Jesus puts on that garment, and takes His
place upon the great white cloud. Then while the
plagues are falling, the Scape Goat is being led away.
He makes a mighty struggle to escape, but he is held fast
by the hand that leads him. If he should effect his
escape, Israel would lose their lives. I saw that it would
take time to lead away the Scape Goat into the land of
forgetfulness after the sins were put on his head.
“The great white cloud I saw was not the holy
place, but entirely separate from the holy and most holy
place, entirely separate from the sanctuary.
“Then the angel repeated these words, and said,
‘This is the time spoken of in Isaiah. He saw that there
was not man, and wondered that there was no
intercessor. He had no mediator between God and man,
and these plagues could be withheld no longer, for Jesus
had ceased to plead for Israel, and they were covered
with the covering of the Almighty God, and then they
could live in the sight of a holy God, and those who were
not covered, the plagues fell upon them, for they had
nothing to shelter or protect them from the wrath of
God.’” Spalding & Magan, 2.
Till the Seven Plagues Were Fulfilled. Time.—
“Therefore shall her plagues come in one day,
death, and mourning, and famine….” Rev. 18:8.

“And judgment is turned away backward, and
justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter. Yea, truth faileth; and he that
departeth from evil maketh himself a prey: and the
LORD saw it, and it displeased him that there was no

431

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 16
REVELATION 16:1-21
1 And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven
angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God
upon the earth.
2 And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth;
and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had
the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.
3 And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea; and it
became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in
the sea.
4 And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and
fountains of waters; and they became blood.
5 And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O
Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged
thus.
6 For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou
hast given them blood to drink; for they are worthy.
7 And I heard another out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God
Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.
8 And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun; and
power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.
9 And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the
name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they
repented not to give him glory.
10 And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the
beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed
their tongues for pain,
11 And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains
and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.
12 And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the
kings of the east might be prepared.
13 And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of
the mouth of the false prophet.
14 For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go
forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather
them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty.
15 Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and
keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.
16 And he gathered them together into a place called in the
Hebrew tongue Armageddon.
17 And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and
there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the
throne, saying, It is done.
18 And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and
there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon
the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.
19 And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities
of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before
God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath.
20 And every island fled away, and the mountains were not
found.
21 And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every
stone about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God
because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was
exceeding great.

REVELATION 16:1
And I heard a great voice out of the
temple saying to the seven angels, Go your
ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of
God upon the earth.
The Time of the Plagues.—
“The description of this first plague clearly reveals
at once the time when it shall fall upon the earth, for it is
poured out upon those who have the mark of the
beast, and who worship his image—the very work
against which the third angel warns us. This is
conclusive proof that these judgments are not poured
out till after this angel closes his work, and that the
very class who hear his warning, and reject it, are the
ones to receive the first drops from the overflowing vials
of God’s indignation.
“…Under the fifth plague, men blaspheme God
because of their sores, the same sores, of course, caused
by the out-pouring of the first plague. This shows that
these plagues all fall upon one and the same
generation of men, some being, no doubt, swept off by
each one, yet some surviving through the terrible scenes
of them all.
“These plagues are the wine of God’s wrath
without mixture, threatened by the third angel. (Rev.
14:10; 15:1.) Such language cannot be applied to any
judgments visited upon the earth while Christ pleads
with His Father in behalf of our fallen race. Therefore
we must locate them in the future, when probation
shall have closed.
“Another and more definite testimony on the
beginning and duration of these plagues is found in these
words: ‘And the temple was filled with smoke from
the glory of God, and from his power; and no man
was able to enter into the temple, till the seven
plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.’ Rev. 15:8.
The temple here introduced is evidently that which is
mentioned in Rev. 11:19: ‘The temple of God was
opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple
the ark of his testament.’ In other words, we have
before us the heavenly sanctuary. When the seven
angels with the seven golden vials receive their
commission, the temple is filled with smoke from the
glory of God, and no being can enter into the temple, or
sanctuary, till they have fulfilled their work. There will
therefore be no ministration in the sanctuary during this
time. Consequently, these vials are not poured out till
the close of the ministration in the tabernacle above,
but immediately follow that event. Christ is then no

432

REVELATION 16
longer a mediator. Mercy, which has long stayed the
hand of vengeance, pleads no more. The servants of
God are all sealed. What could then be expected but that
the storm of vengeance should fall, and earth be swept
with the besom of destruction?” Smith, DR, 685-687.
“And at that time shall Michael stand up, the
great prince which standeth for the children of thy
people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as
never was since there was a nation even to that same
time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered,
every one that shall be found written in the book.” Dan.
12:1.

cause men to fully realize they have been rebelling
against God. They will be led to know God is in
control.” Metcalf, GPDR, 140.
A Great Voice Out of the Temple.—
“The plagues commence with… ‘A great voice out
of the temple.’ Rev. 16:1. They end in the same
manner…’There came a great voice out of the
temple.’ Vs. 17. Why out of the temple? God is
enthroned there. The plagues are under his direction.
He is in control. They will not get out of hand. This
is an assurance to the saints.” Cooke, #25-UR, 8.

“That which distinguishes the seven last plagues
from those that precede them is that they follow the
close of probation when there is no longer a mediator
before the mercy seat. They cannot fall till Christ
ceases to be Priest and becomes King. See Dan. 12:1,2.
They follow the divine decree recorded in Rev.
22:11,12.” Bunch, TR, 223,224.

“Jehovah of hosts, the Lord God Almighty, the
just, the true, and the holy, has given them their work
to do. With unswerving fidelity they go forth panoplied
in pure white linen, having their breasts girded with
golden girdles. And when their task is done, when the
last vial of God’s wrath is poured out, they return and lay
their emptied vials at the feet of the Lord.” Testimonies
to Ministers, 432.

“I saw Jesus lay off His priestly attire and clothe
Himself with His most kingly robes. Upon His head
were many crowns, a crown within a crown.
Surrounded by the angelic host, He left heaven. The
plagues were falling upon the inhabitants of the
earth.’” Early Writings, 281.

Go Your Ways.—
“The fact that at the time of the fifth plague men
are still suffering from the sores of the first plague
clearly implies that the plagues are poured out
successively and within a comparatively short period
of time.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 838.

“The same angel who visited Sodom is sounding
the note of warning, ‘Escape for thy life.’ The bottles of
God’s wrath cannot be poured out to destroy the
wicked and their works until all the people of God
have been judged, and the cases of the living as well as
the dead are decided.” Testimonies to Ministers, 446.

“These plagues are not universal, or the
inhabitants of the earth would be wholly cut off. Yet
they will be the most awful scourges that have ever been
known to mortals.” Great Controversy, 628,629.

“When Christ ceases His intercession in the
sanctuary, the unmingled wrath threatened against those
who worship the beast and his image and receive his
mark (Revelation 14:9,10), will be poured out.” Great
Controversy, 627.
The Purpose of the Plagues.—
“Prior to the outpouring of the seven last plagues,
on numerous occasions calamities have been permitted
by God for the purpose of awakening men to their true
relationship to Him. Isaiah declared, ‘For he bringeth
down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he
layeth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it even
to the dust…. For when thy judgments are in the
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness.’ Is. 26:5,9.
“However, when the seven last plagues are released
upon the wicked God’s purpose is not to convert them.
The plagues will have no softening or converting power.
The seven last plagues do not effect repentance. The
reaction to the plagues will be blasphemy of God by the
wicked.
“Why are these seven last plagues poured out?
What purpose do they serve? …It is God’s purpose to

Pour Out the Vials of Wrath of God Upon Earth.—
“And it came to pass, while they were slaying
them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried,
and said, ‘Ah Lord God! Wilt thou destroy all the
residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon
Jerusalem?” Ezekiel 9:8.
“God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth; the
LORD revengeth, and is furious; the LORD will take
vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath
for his enemies.” Nahum 1:2,3.
“Here we are called to look into the ‘armory’ of
the Lord, and behold the ‘weapons of his indignation.’
Jer.50:25. Here are brought forth the treasures of hail,
which have been reserved against the time of trouble,
against the day of battle and war. Job 38:22, 23.” Smith,
DR, 687.
“John also was a witness of the terrible scenes that
will take place as signs of Christ’s coming. He saw
armies mustering for battle, and men’s hearts failing
them for fear. He saw the earth moved out of its place,
the mountains carried into the midst of the sea, the
waves thereof roaring and troubled, and the mountains
shaking with the swelling thereof. He saw the vials of

433

GEMS FROM REVELATION
God’s wrath opened, and pestilence, famine, and
death come upon the inhabitants of the earth.”
Review & Herald, 1/11/1887.
The Seven Plagues. Their Awfulness.—
“I saw that the seven last plagues were soon to be
poured out upon those who have no shelter; yet the
world regarded them no more than they would so many
drops of water that were about to fall. I was then made
capable of enduring the awful sight of the seven last
plagues, the wrath of God. I saw that His anger was
dreadful and terrible, and if He should stretch forth His
hand, or lift it in anger, the inhabitants of the world
would be as though they had never been, or would suffer
from incurable sores and withering plagues that would
come upon them, and they would find no deliverance,
but be destroyed by them. Terror seized me, and I fell
upon my face before the angel and begged of him to
cause the sight to be removed, to hide it from me, for
it was too dreadful. Then I realized, as never before,
the importance of searching the Word of God carefully,
to know how to escape the plagues which that Word
declares shall come on all the ungodly who shall worship
the beast and his image and receive his mark in their
foreheads or in their hands. It was a great wonder for me
that any could transgress the law of God and tread down
His holy Sabbath, when such awful threatenings and
denunciations were against them.” Early Writings,
64,65.
The Seven Last Plagues Similar to Those of Egypt.—
“These seven last plagues have had their
shadows in the plagues which God sent on slaveholding Egypt, when He delivered His people, the Jews,
from their Egyptian bondage, the least of which plagues
destroyed Pharaoh and his host, just in the moment when
Israel were shouting deliverance on the banks of the Red
Sea. So likewise, in the seven last plagues, they are
poured out upon spiritual Egypt, slave-holding
Babylon, who has enslaved the people of God for
centuries, and has trafficked in the bodies and souls
of men. She, like Egypt, has appointed task-masters
over the church, and has endeavored to strangle her
children in the birth. She has commanded the kings
and rulers of the earth to destroy the children of the
church, as did the Egyptians the Hebrew midwives; but
the church has found favor in the eyes of some of the
kings and princes of the earth and the earth has helped
the woman, and her children are not all dead.” Miller,
Evidence, 219,220.
“As Yahweh vindicated His covenant and liberated
Israel from the house of bondage by means of a series of
plagues, so Christ will bring about the final
deliverance of His faithful people by sending again a
series of plagues in which the wrath of God is
completed.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 143.
Plagues Directed Against Idolatry.—
“For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which

the LORD had smitten among them: upon their gods
also the LORD executed judgments.” Numbers 33:4.
“The seven last plagues are likewise directed
against the idolatry of the last generation.” Bunch,
TR, 224.
Plagues Different From the Trumpets.—
“We have noticed more than once that there are
striking similarities between the seven plagues and the
seven trumpets. …On closer examination, however, the
differences outweigh the similarities. For example,
though it is true that both the first trumpet and the first
plague affect the earth, the first trumpet causes ‘a third
of the earth,’ ‘a third of the trees’ and ‘all green grass’ to
be burned up; but the first plague causes ‘foul and evil
sores’ to break out on ‘the men who bore the mark of
the beat and worshiped its image.’
Compare
Revelation 8:7 with 16:2.
“The third trumpet and the third plague both affect
rivers and springs, but the third trumpet only makes the
water ‘bitter,’ whereas the third plague turns it into
‘blood.’ …Even more striking, whereas the fourth
trumpet causes sun, moon, and stars to be dimmed, the
fourth plague does the opposite. It causes the sun to
‘scorch men with fire; men were scorched by the
fierce heat.’
“Some similarities exist in every case, but notable
differences show that trumpets and plagues are not
the same.” Maxwell, God Cares, 429,430.
(See additional comments under Rev. 8:2.)

THE FIRST PLAGUE
REVELATION 16:2
And the first went, and poured out his
vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome
and grievous sore upon the men which had
the mark of the beast, and upon them which
worshipped his image.
Plague is Literal.—
“There is no apparent reason why this should not be
regarded as strictly literal. These plagues are almost
identical with those which God inflicted upon the
Egyptians as He was about to deliver His people from
the yoke of bondage, the reality of which is seldom, if
ever, called in question. God is now about to reward
His people with their final deliverance and redemption,
and his judgments will be manifested in a manner no less
literal and terrible.” Smith, DR, 687.
The First Poured Out His Vial Upon the Earth.—
“These [first four] plagues are not universal, or
the inhabitants of the earth would be wholly cut off.
Yet they will be the most awful scourges that have ever

434

REVELATION 16
been known to mortals. All the judgments upon men,
prior to the close of probation, have been mingled with
mercy. The pleading blood of Christ has shielded the
sinner from receiving the full measure of his guilt; but
in the final judgment, wrath is poured out unmixed with
mercy.” Great Controversy, 628,629.
A Noisome and Grievous Sore.—
“The LORD shall smite thee in the knees, and in
the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from
the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.” Deut.
28:27,35.
“A noisome, a grievous sore, indicates the
dissolution of the body afflicted, and that the constitution
is laboring under some inward disease, or affected by
contagion from without. It is therefore a fit emblem to
represent the exposure of the corruptions of the
church of Rome, and breaking out of those loathsome
diseases of internal abominations which had been hid
for ages from the world by the cunning craftiness of
this Papal beast.” Miller, Evidence, 220,221.
“These running sores produce great pain and
are loathsome and nauseating to the sight and smell.
They are similar to the sixth plague of Egypt which was
a ‘boil breaking out with blains’ or blisters. See Ex.
9:8-12. It was called ‘the botch of Egypt’ and ‘a sore
botch that cannot be healed.’ See Deut. 28:27,35.”
Bunch, TR, 224.
“Against this ‘sore’ the vaunted miracle-working
power of the spirits now cooperating with apostate
Christianity (Rev. 13:13,14; 18:2; 19:20) apparently
proves unavailing (see on ch. 16:14).” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 839.
“Neither of you have seen the necessity of health
reform, but when the plagues of God shall be all
around you, you will then see the principles of health
reform and strict temperance in all things—that
temperance alone is the foundation of all the graces
that come from God, the foundation of all victories to
be gained.” Temperance, 201.
“Sin in mind and muscle (forehead and hand) is
met with loathsome sores.” Maxwell, God Cares, 431.
Similar Plague Upon Egypt.—
“And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood
before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward
heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains
upon man, and upon beast.
“And the magicians could not stand before Moses
because of the boils; for the boil was upon the
magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.” Ex. 9:8-11.
The Mark of the Beast.—
(See Rev. 13:16 for identification of the mark as
enforced Sunday worship by the state.)

Upon the Men Which Had the Mark of the Beast and
Upon Them Which Worshipped His Image.—
“Then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth
God and him that serveth him not.” Mal. 3:18.
“This first installment of the wrath of God (vs. 1)
falls upon those who have failed to heed either the
third angel’s message, which warned them against
worshiping ‘the beast and his image’ (ch. 14:9), or
God’s final call to come out of mystic Babylon (ch.
18:1-4).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 840.
“It seems appropriate that the first plague of the
seven [that] falls on those in modern harlot Babylon who
are guilty of spiritual fornication should be the terrible
disease that comes as the result of physical
uncleanness.” Bunch, TR, 224.
First Plague is Worldwide.—
“Is this plague worldwide? Yes! Because the mark
of the beast will be world-wide. ‘All the world
wondered after the beast. …All that dwell on the
earth shall worship him.’ Rev. 13:3,8. ...Will the
plagues fall on every member of the race? No! They
fall on the rejectors of Christ, but they do not fall upon
those who ‘keep the commandments of God and have
the faith of Jesus.’ Seeing that the three angels’
messages go to ‘every nation, kindred, tongue and
people’, that is, the whole world, the plagues then must
be worldwide, but not universal.” Cooke, #25-UR,
10,11.
God Protects the Righteous.—
“Before the first angel, holding his vial, left the
temple, all men had been divided into two classes—
those who are sealed with the seal of the living God, and
those who worship the beast, or his image, and bear his
mark. The grievous sores come upon those having the
mark of the beast. When disease is abroad in the land,
it is rebuked only by a strong spiritual atmosphere.
Christ was fully charged with life, which is the result of
soul union with the fountain head; and as He could touch
the leper and cause health to flow from Him to the
diseased man, so in the time of the first plague, those
who are clothed with spiritual life will resist disease.
Even the physical man will be protected by the
strength of the soul union with the Father.” Haskell,
SSP, 276.
“Because thou hast made the LORD, which is my
refuge, even the most High, thy habitation; There shall
no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh
thy dwelling.” Psalm 91:9,10.
“And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the
voice of the LORD thy God, and wilt do that which is
right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his

435

GEMS FROM REVELATION
commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put
none of these diseases upon thee, which I have
brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the LORD that
healeth thee.” Exodus 15:26.

THE SECOND PLAGUE
REVELATION 16:3
And the second angel poured out his vial
upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a
dead man: and every living soul died in the
sea.
The Second Plague.—
“A more infectious and deadly substance can
scarcely be conceived of than the blood of a dead man;
and the thought that the great bodies of water on the
earth, which are doubtless meant by the term sea, will be
changed to such a state under this plague, presents a
fearful picture.” Smith, DR, 689.
Blood of a Dead Man.—
“Doubtless in consistency, odor, and color, but
not necessarily in composition.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 840.
“It is a recognized medical fact that in the
conducting of autopsies, extreme care is required
because the blood of a dead person contains very toxic
qualities and is extremely putrid.” Cooke, #25-UR,
12.
“Moses smote the waters before Pharaoh and his
great men, and they saw the waters which they were
adoring turned to blood. It was a putrid mass for
seven days, and all the fish that were in it died. The
people could not use the water for any purpose.”
Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 4a, 55.
Every Living Soul.—
“The word for ‘soul’ (psuche) is used of animal
life as well as of human life (see on Matt. 10:28; cf. on
Ps. 16:10).
In Rev. 8:9 psuche is translated
‘creatures,’ obviously referring to marine life. In
Gen. 8:1 the Hebrew equivalent (nephesh, ‘living thing’)
is similarly used of animals (cf. Job 12:10).” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 840.
“In whose hand is the soul of every living thing,
and the breath of all mankind.” Job 12:10.
“We have here the remarkable fact that the term
living soul is applied to irrational animals, the fish
and living creatures of the sea. This is, we believe, the
only instance of such an application in the Authorized
Version. In the original languages, however, it occurs
frequently, showing that the term as applied to man in

the beginning (Gen.2:7) cannot be taken as furnishing
any evidence that he is endowed with an immaterial and
immortal essence called the soul.” Smith, DR, 689.
Every Living Soul Died in the Sea.—
“There is but a step between life and death. A
change of a few degrees in temperature, would kill all
life, both animal and vegetable; deprive an animal of
the life-giving oxygen, and in a few moments, life is
extinct.” Haskell, SSP, 277.
“When we visualize the mammoth amount of life in
the oceans, what a horrendous calamity this will be.
Probably the dead sea-life by the multiplied millions of
tons will be washed ashore layer upon layer, maybe for
miles in extent. Not only will the harbors, river mouths,
and beaches be choked with rotting flesh, but the
overpowering stench will pollute the air for miles and
make life a misery.” Cooke, #25-UR, 12

THE THIRD PLAGUE
REVELATION 16:4-7
4 And the third angel poured out his
vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters;
and they became blood.
5 And I heard the angel of the waters
say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art,
and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast
judged thus.
6 For they have shed the blood of saints
and prophets, and thou hast given them
blood to drink; for they are worthy.
7 And I heard another out of the altar
say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy judgments.
The Third Plague.—
“Such is the description of the terrible retribution
for the ‘blood of saints’ shed by violent hands, which
will be given to those who have done, or wish to do,
such deeds. And though the horrors of that hour when
the fountains and rivers of water shall be like blood,
cannot now be realized, the justice of God will stand
vindicated, and his judgments approved. Even the
angels are heard exclaiming, Thou art righteous, O
Lord, because thou hast judged thus; for they have
shed the blood of saints and prophets. Even so, Lord
God Almighty, true and righteous are thy
judgments.” Smith, DR, 689.
Upon the Rivers and Fountains of Waters.—
“Since the days of creation, God has, by the

436

REVELATION 16
flowing streams and the wells of water, typified
salvation, which is full and free. As a teacher on earth,
Christ used the waters of Jacob’s well, to illustrate the
life of the Spirit, which wells up into everlasting life.
The smitten rock in the wilderness, from which flowed
the water for the thirty millions in Israel’s camp, was
God’s voice saying, ‘Come unto Me and drink.’
…Those who have exchanged life for death, will see
the rivers turned to blood—a type of the blood of
Christ, which they have spurned; and the lives of
saints which they have lightly regarded.” Haskell,
SSP, 278,279.

Duration of 3rd Plague.—
“It would seem that none of the human family
could long survive a continuance of a plague to terrible
as this. It must therefore be limited in its duration, as
was the similar one on Egypt. Ex.7:17-21,25.” Smith,
DR, 690.
“And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto
Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the
waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers,
and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of
water, that they may become blood; and that there may
be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels
of wood, and in vessels of stone.
“And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD
commanded; …and all the waters that were in the river
were turned to blood. And the fish that was in the
river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians
could not drink of the water of the river; and there
was blood throughout all the land of Egypt. And
seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had
smitten the river.” Exodus 7:18-21.
“The overflowing of the Nile being the source of
food and wealth for all Egypt, the river was worshiped as
a god, and the monarch came thither daily to pay his
devotions. Here the two brothers again repeated the
message to him, and then they stretched out the rod and
smote upon the water. The sacred stream ran blood,
the fish died, and the river became offensive to the
smell. The water in the houses, the supply preserved
in cisterns, was likewise changed to blood. But ‘the
magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments,’ and

‘Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he
set his heart to this also.’ For seven days the plague
continued, but without effect. Patriarchs & Prophets,
265.
“All liquids will be red and repulsive. The natural
reaction will be that the population will refuse to drink.
The fourth plague compels them to drink.” Cooke,
#25-UR, 13.
The Angel of the Waters.—
“Doubtless the third plague-angel.” Bunch, TR,
226.
Thou Art Righteous, O Lord.—
“One of the ministers of vengeance declares, ‘And
I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art
righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be,
because Thou hast judged thus.’ These heavenly
beings, in executing the mandate of God, ask no
questions, but do as they are bid. Jehovah of hosts, the
Lord God Almighty, the just, the true, and the holy,
has given them their work to do. With un-swerving
fidelity they go forth panoplied in pure white linen,
having their breasts girded with golden girdles. And
when their task is done, when the last vial of God’s
wrath is poured out, they return and lay their emptied
vials at the feet of the Lord.” Testimonies to Ministers,
432.
Saints and Prophets.—
“Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy
apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on
her.” Rev. 18:20.
They Have Shed the Blood of Saints and Prophets.—
“ The angel of God declares: (Rev. 16:5,6 quoted).
By condemning the people of God to death, they have
as truly incurred the guilt of their blood as if it had
been shed by their hands. In like manner Christ
declared the Jews of His time guilty of all the blood of
holy men which had been shed since the days of Abel;
for they possessed the same spirit and were seeking to
do the same work with these murderers of the prophets.”
Great Controversy, 627.
“And in her was found the blood of prophets, and
of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.”
Rev. 18:24.
“The reason is given. The nations have craved for
blood. The persecuting church shed the blood of
millions. She was drunk with the blood of the saints.
Those who come in for the plagues have followed the
Papacy, so they share its fate. The angels that have
seen all, approve. We do well to withhold our judgment
until we too can see and hear all. Then all will approve
of God’s righteous judgments. Rev. 15:3,4; 19:1,2. The
wicked have just condemned the saints to death. Rev.
13:15.” Burnside, RWU, 183.

437

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“It may be asked how the last generation of the
wicked can be said to have shed the blood of saints and
prophets, since the last generation of saints are not to be
slain. Reference to Matt.23:34, 35; 1John 3:15, will
explain. These scriptures show that guilt attaches to
motive no less than to action. No generation ever
formed a more determined purpose to devote the saints
to indiscriminate slaughter than the present generation
will, not far in the future. (See chapter 12:17; 13:15.) In
motive and purpose, they do shed the blood of saints
and prophets, and are every whit as guilty as if they
were able to carry out their wicked intentions.”
Smith, DR, 689,690.
“And I will feed them that oppress thee with their
own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own
blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I
the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty
One of Jacob.” Is. 49:26.

and John sees them ‘at the foot of the altar’ (Weymouth),
or ‘under the altar’ in their graves where their shed
blood constitutes a continual cry for vengeance upon
their persecutors.” Bunch, TR, 44.
True and Righteous are Thy Judgments.—
“We are inclined to think that these judgments are
too severe and cruel, but it is because we cannot see
them from heaven’s viewpoint. The angels, whose
ability to love is far greater than ours can possibly be,
fully approve of them. They are in a far better position
to judge than are we. Wisdom demands that we
withhold judgment till we reach the kingdom and get
a vision of sin and rebellion from the viewpoint of
celestial beings. Then the redeemed will join the
unfallen universe in unanimously approving of God’s
dealings with sin and sinners. See Rev. 15:3,4; 19:1,2.
When the blackness of sin is fully realized, the
righteousness of God’s judgments will be manifest to
all His creatures.” Bunch, TR, 225.

“The wicked upon whom these plagues are poured
have thirsted for the blood of the righteous and decreed
their death. Their thirst for blood will be fully
satisfied when the very water that sustains their life is
turned to blood. See Isa. 49:26. Then the cry of the
blood of martyrs for vengeance will be fully answered.
See Rev. 6:10.” Bunch, TR, 226.

“How do they know His judgments are true and
righteous? Because they were witnesses to the
judgment scene. This is why they declare: ‘Thou art
righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be,
because thou hast judged thus.’ Revelation 16:5.
Goldstein, 1844MS, 86.

I Heard Another Out of the Altar Say.—
“We remember that in Revelation 6:9-11 the
martyrs are portrayed as being ‘under the altar.’ The
altar has witnessed sufferings enough, the frightful
persecution during the great tribulation of the 1260 years
and many another persecution besides. Now it too
shares the satisfaction of the angel of waters and
sings in verse 7, (vs.7 quoted).” Maxwell, God Cares,
428.

THE FOURTH PLAGUE

“And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw
under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, and for the testimony which they held:
And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O
Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth?” Rev. 6:9,10.
The Altar.—
“In the typical temple there were two altars: the
altar of incense in the holy place, and the altar of burnt
offerings in the court where the victims were slain
and the sacrifices offered. The blood of the sacrificial
victims was poured out at the foot of the altar on which
they were offered. See Lev. 4:7. ...Christ was offered in
sacrifice on the altar of Calvary. He was slain ‘without
the gate’ in the court of the heavenly sanctuary which is
in this earth (Rev. 11:1,2), and for three days He
remained in the tomb ‘under the altar,’ where His blood
constituted a cry for vengeance upon His enemies.
Likewise the millions of martyrs of the Middle Ages
were slain on the altar of sacrifice and martyrdom,

REVELATION 16:8
And the fourth angel poured out his vial
upon the sun; and power was given unto him
to scorch men with fire. And men were
scorched with great heat, and blasphemed
the name of God, which hath power over
these plagues: and they repented not to give
him glory.
Fourth Angel Poured Out His Vial Upon the Sun.—
“It is worthy of notice that every succeeding plague
tends to augment the calamity of the previous ones and
to heighten the anguish of the guilty sufferers. We have
now a noisome and grievous sore preying upon men,
inflaming their blood, and pouring its feverish influence
through their veins. In addition to this, they have only
blood to allay their burning thirst. As if to crown all,
power is given unto the sun, and it pours upon them a
flood of fire, and they are scorched with great heat.”
Smith, DR, 690.
“According to the Greek the first three plagues are
poured out ‘into’ (eis) the earth, the sea, and the
fountains and rivers of waters, respectively. The next
three are poured out ‘upon’ (epi) the sun, the beast’s
throne, and the river Euphrates, respectively. The

438

REVELATION 16
seventh is poured out ‘into’ (eis…) the air. What
distinction, if any, Inspiration may have intended is not
clear.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 841.
Men Were Scorched With Great Heat.—
“The sun, which has shone alike upon the just and
the unjust, which, in its very beams, is a reflection of the
smile of God, becomes, when His Spirit is withdrawn,
a heat which scorches men as with fire. God, whose
countenance is life to those who are in harmony with
Him, is a consuming fire to His enemies.” Haskell, SSP,
279.
“In the plague that follows, power is given to the
sun ‘to scorch men with fire. And men were scorched
with great heat.’ Verses 8, 9. The prophets thus
describe the condition of the earth at this fearful time:
‘The land mourneth; ...because the harvest of the
field is perished.... All the trees of the field are
withered: because joy is withered away from the sons
of men.’ ‘The seed is rotten under their clods, the
garners are laid desolate.... How do the beasts groan!
the herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have
no pasture.... The rivers of water are dried up, and
the fire hath devoured the pastures of the
wilderness.’ ‘The songs of the temple shall be
howlings in that day, saith the Lord God: there shall
be many dead bodies in every place; they shall cast
them forth with silence.’ Joel 1:10-12, 17-20; Amos
8:3.
“These plagues are not universal, or the inhabitants
of the earth would be wholly cut off. Yet they will be
the most awful scourges that have ever been known to
mortals. All the judgments upon men, prior to the close
of probation, have been mingled with mercy. The
pleading blood of Christ has shielded the sinner from
receiving the full measure of his guilt; but in the final
judgment, wrath is poured out unmixed with mercy.
“In that day, multitudes will desire the shelter of
God’s mercy which they have so long despised.
‘Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I
will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread,
nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the
Lord: and they shall wander from sea to sea, and
from the north even to the east, they shall run to and
fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find
it." Amos 8:11, 12.” Great Controversy, 628,629.

Solar Eruption in Line With Earth

“It is doubtless the heat of the sun during the fourth
plague that produces the terrible drought and famine
pictured in Joel 1:15-20. This will be the climax of a
series of droughts and famines of increasing severity that
will constitute harbingers of the coming judgments. The
cutting off of the water and food supply of the wicked
will convince them that their boycott against the
righteous has not only failed but that the tables have
turned and they are being punished for their
persecution of God’s people. Under this fourth
judgment the very source of the temporal blessings of
life is transformed into an agency of fearful torture and
destruction.” Bunch, TR, 226.
Commandment-Keepers Protected.—
“The people of God will not be free from
suffering; but while persecuted and distressed, while
they endure privation and suffer for want of food
they will not be left to perish. That God who cared for
Elijah will not pass by one of His self-sacrificing
children. He who numbers the hairs of their head will
care for them, and in time of famine they shall be
satisfied. While the wicked are dying from hunger and
pestilence, angels will shield the righteous and supply
their wants. To him that ‘walketh righteously’ is the
promise: ‘Bread shall be given him; his waters shall
be sure.’ ‘When the poor and needy seek water, and
there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the
Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them.’ Isaiah 33:15, 16; 41:17.
“ ‘Although the fig tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the
olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be
no herd in the stalls;’ yet shall they that fear Him
‘rejoice in the Lord’ and joy in the God of their
salvation. Habakkuk 3:17, 18.
“ ‘The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade
upon thy right hand. The sun shall not smite thee by day,
nor the moon by night. The Lord shall preserve thee
from all evil: He shall preserve thy soul.’ ‘He shall
deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from
the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with His
feathers, and under His wings shalt thou trust: His
truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt not be
afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that
flieth by day; nor for the pestilence that walketh in
darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at
noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten
thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh
thee. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see
the reward of the wicked. Because thou hast made the
Lord, which is my refuge, even the Most High, thy
habitation; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall
any plague come nigh thy dwelling.’ Psalms 121:5-7;
91:3-10.
“Yet to human sight it will appear that the people
of God must soon seal their testimony with their blood as
did the martyrs before them. They themselves begin to

439

GEMS FROM REVELATION
fear that the Lord has left them to fall by the hand of
their enemies. It is a time of fearful agony. Day and
night they cry unto God for deliverance.” Great
Controversy, 629,630.

demonstrate themselves to be what they really are—
devoted servants of Satan. The refusal to repent
proves them to be altogether and unalterably
opposed to God.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 841.

“They [the 144,000] have seen the earth wasted
with famine and pestilence, the sun having power to
scorch men with great heat, and they themselves have
endured suffering, hunger, and thirst. But ‘they shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither
shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes.’ Rev. 7:14-17.” Great Controversy, 648.

To Give Him Glory.—
“That is, acknowledge Him to be ‘true and
righteous’. Those suffering from the plagues refuse to
admit themselves in the wrong and God in the right,
even in the face of severe judgments that would lead
honest, contrite men to amend their ways (cf. Isa.
26:9,10). Their hearts prove to be utterly hardened
and unsusceptible to either divine mercy or severity.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 841.

Men Blasphemed the Name of God.—
“In the wilderness a cloud overshadowed the camp
by day. God was as a ‘shadow of a great rock in a
weary land.’ ‘He that dwelleth in the secret place of
the most High shall abide under the shadow of the
Almighty.’ But those without a shelter, who suffer from
the intense heat, which withers every living thing, and
prostrates man and beast, blaspheme God and repent
not.” Haskell, SSP, 280.
“Under the fourth plague men begin to blame Him
for their misery and to realize, at last, that they are
fighting against Him.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 841.
“The sins of blasphemy and willful Sabbathbreaking received the same punishment, being equally
an expression of contempt for the authority of God.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 409.
They Repented Not.—
“During the falling of these plagues, men of
science, who have advocated the power of the human
intellect and the wisdom of man, will doubtless offer
scientific reasons for the disease on land and sea. The
magicians of Egypt first imitated the wonders which
came by the hand of Moses; and when they could no
longer do that, they gave a reason for each miracle,
assigning some natural cause; and as soon as the
plague was removed, Pharaoh would say in his heart,
‘I thought for a time it was a divine providence upon the
land, but doubtless, as the magicians say, it was due to
such and such a cause,’ and Pharaoh hardened his heart.
As men did then, so will they do in the end of time; for
men’s hearts are the same in all generations.
“The repentance of Pharaoh was like that of Cain—
it was sorrow for suffering, not sorrow for sin. This will
be the same in the days of the last plagues.” Haskell,
SSP, 278.
“Instead of acknowledging their guilt they proceed
to lay the blame for their miserable plight upon those
who have remained true and loyal to God (see Early
Writings, 34; Great Controversy, 624).
In utter
perversity they refuse to yield to His will, and

THE FIFTH PLAGUE
REVELATION 16:10,11
And the fifth angel poured out his vial
upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom
was full of darkness; and they gnawed their
tongues for pain,
And blasphemed the God of heaven
because of their pains and their sores, and
repented not of their deeds.
The Vial Poured Out Upon the Seat of the Beast and
His Kingdom.—
“Gr. thronos, ‘throne’ (see on ch. 13:2). ‘The seat
of the beast’ is apparently his headquarters.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 841.
“It is poured upon the seat of the beast, the papacy.
The seat of the beast is wherever the papal See is
located, which has been thus far, and without doubt will
continue to be, the city of Rome.” Smith, DR, 690,691.
“The headquarters of the papal kingdom that had
so long kept millions in spiritual darkness will be
visited with a darkness so dense and terrible that it
will be painfully felt, as was the darkness during one of
the plagues of Egypt….
“Those who worshiped the beast will find that the
beast cannot protect them, for the very object of their
worship is also smitten.” Bunch, TR, 227.
His Kingdom.—
“And all the world wondered after the beast.”
Rev. 13:3.
“‘His Kingdom’ probably embraces all those who
are subjects of the pope in an ecclesiastical point of
view, wherever they may be.” Smith, DR, 691.
“Except for the small remnant that still resists his
supremacy Satan numbers the world as his subjects, and

440

REVELATION 16
it is through the revived papacy in particular that he
seeks to secure undisputed control over the entire human
race…. It would therefore appear that for the
duration of this plague the entire world in enveloped
in a pall of darkness.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 842.
His Kingdom Was Full of Darkness.—

“While men grope unrepentantly for light in a spiritually
dark world (see ch. 16:8,9) God sends upon them
literal darkness, symbolic of the deeper spiritual night
that is yet to enshroud the earth (see on vs. 13.14).”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 842.
“They had shut out light by rejection. They had
loved what God hates and hated what God loves. They
had rejected light, so now they get darkness.”
Burnside, RWU, 183,184.
“The great day of the LORD is near, it is near, and
hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the LORD:
the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.
“That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and
distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick
darkness.
“…And I will bring distress upon men, that they
shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned
against the LORD: and their blood shall be poured out
as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Neither their silver
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of
the LORD’s wrath; but the whole land shall be
devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make
even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the
land.” Zeph. 1:14-18.
“The people of God—some in prison cells, some
hidden in solitary retreats in the forests and the
mountains—still plead for divine protection, while in
every quarter companies of armed men, urged on by
hosts of evil angels, are preparing for the work of death.
It is now, in the hour of utmost extremity, that the God
of Israel will interpose for the deliverance of His chosen.
Saith the Lord; ‘Ye shall have a song, as in the night
when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness of heart, as
when one goeth ...to come into the mountain of the Lord,
to the Mighty One of Israel. And the Lord shall cause
His glorious voice to be heard, and shall show the

lighting down of His arm, with the indignation of His
anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with
scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.’ Isaiah 30:29,
30.
“With shouts of triumph, jeering, and imprecation,
throngs of evil men are about to rush upon their prey,
when, lo, a dense blackness, deeper than the darkness
of the night, falls upon the earth. Then a rainbow,
shining with the glory from the throne of God, spans the
heavens and seems to encircle each praying company.
The angry multitudes are suddenly arrested. Their
mocking cries die away. The objects of their murderous
rage are forgotten. With fearful forebodings they gaze
upon the symbol of God’s covenant and long to be
shielded from its overpowering brightness.” Great
Controversy, 635.
“Nothing to relieve against the darkness and terror
of the night, as the light of a candle. The nights as well
as the days will be without light. Houses at night will
be pitch black.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 173.
Similar to Egyptian Plague.—
“And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine
hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the
land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt. And
Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there
was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three
days: They saw not one another, neither rose any from
his place for three days: but all the children of Israel had
light in their dwellings.” Exodus 10:21-23.
“Suddenly a darkness settled upon the land, so
thick and black that it seemed a ‘darkness which may
be felt.’ Not only were the people deprived of light, but
the atmosphere was very oppressive, so that
breathing was difficult. ‘They saw not one another,
neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the
children of Israel had light in their dwellings.’ The sun
and moon were objects of worship to the Egyptians; in
this mysterious darkness the people and their gods alike
were smitten by the power that had undertaken the cause
of the bondmen. Yet fearful as it was, this judgment is
an evidence of God’s compassion and His unwillingness
to destroy. He would give the people time for
reflection and repentance before bringing upon them
the last and most terrible of the plagues.” Patriarchs
& Prophets, 272.
“The light shines only upon the houses of Israel.
Each little company is still overshadowed by that cloud
which is a protection from the heat and a light in the
night. It is the same cloudy pillar which guided ancient
Israel.” Haskell, SSP, 282.
“And the LORD will create upon every dwelling
place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud
and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence.” Isa.
4:5.

441

GEMS FROM REVELATION

They Gnawed Their Tongues For Pain.—
“The same power that caused unnumbered millions
of martyrs to gnaw their tongues for pain on the rack and
the stake, now receive the terrible penalty meted out by
the eternal law of justice and retribution. They are
judged as they judged. What they gave to others comes
back upon their own heads….
“The tongues of the papal leaders have spoken
blasphemies against God, His name, His sanctuary, and
His truth, and now because of physical and mental
anguish they punish their own tongues. They gnaw
their tongues for pain and remorse.” Bunch, TR, 227.
Their Sores.—
“An important fact is established by this testimony.
The plagues do not at once destroy all their victims, for
some who were at first smitten with sores, we find
still living under the fifth vial, and gnawing their
tongues for pain.” Smith, DR, 690.
“These noisome ulcers doubtless continue to prey
upon the wicked till all the plagues are finished.”
Bunch, TR, 227.

THE SIXTH PLAGUE
REVELATION 16:12
And the sixth angel poured out his vial
upon the great river Euphrates; and the
water thereof was dried up, that the way of
the kings of the east might be prepared.
Sixth and Seventh Plagues (Parallel to Deliverance
From Babylon).—
“Revelation 17-18 are a further elaboration of
the sixth and seventh plagues.” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 154.
“The fall of Babylon the Great (the seventh
plague, 16:17-19) follows immediately after the
judgment on ‘the great river Euphrates’ (the sixth
plague, 16:12) with the result that ‘its water was
dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the
East’ (16:12). Thus, the drying up of the great
Euphrates River (as the sixth plague) evidently prepares
the way for the arrival of the kings from the East (as part
of the seventh plague).
“This apocalyptic sequence of the drying up of the
great river Euphrates followed by the subsequent fall of
Babylon and the coming of the kings from the East will
remind the Bible reader of the OT prophecies about the
fall of ancient Babylon.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 375.
“The sixth and seventh plagues on Babylon the
Great reflect the ancient drying up of the Euphrates and

the subsequent fall of Babylon by the conquering armies
of Cyrus. Just as the collapse of that ancient empire
brought freedom to the Israelite captives, so the
typologically expressed prophecy of the destruction of
spiritual Babylon indicates deliverance for God’s
end-time people from their foe.” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 133,134.
God’s People Delivered from Egypt and Babylon
Linked.—
“John’s vision of the plagues links Egypt (where
the Jews were held as slaves) with Babylon (where
they were held as exiles). His vision also links the
Jews’ glorious release from Egyptian slavery with their
happy return from Babylonian exile. God fought against
the Egyptian army at the Red Sea. He supported King
Cyrus in his attack on Babylon, which involved drying
up the Euphrates. In each instance God worked
miraculously to release His people from bondage.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 442.
“The imagery of four apocalyptic plagues is
apparently drawn from the book of Exodus, but the sixth
and seventh plagues are quite evidently drawn from the
prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah concerning to the fall
of Babylon (Isa. 13; 44-47; Jer. 50:51). The fusion of
the defeat of Egypt and the fall of Babylon in the
description of the future plagues on a world in
rebellion against God and His covenant people thus
doubly assures the church of the end-time. Her
exodus-redemption is absolutely secure.” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 381.
Euphrates River.—
“The waters which thou sawest, where the whore
sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and
tongues.” Rev. 17:15.
“The Euphrates represents the people over
whom mystical Babylon holds sway. …The waters of
the Euphrates would thus be the ‘many waters’ of ch.
17:1-3,15 on which mystical Babylon sits, the
‘inhabitants of the earth,’ whom she makes ‘drunk
with the wine of her fornication’ (ch. 17:2;…)” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 842,843.
“Modern Babylon trusts in her ‘Euphrates’ (the
support of the world’s populations) as naively as
ancient Babylon did in hers (the literal river).” Maxwell,
God Cares, 441.
“O thou [Babylon] that dwellest upon many
waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the
measure of thy covetousness.” Jer. 51:13.
The Water Thereof Was Dried Up.—
“Drying up of the water represents the drying
up of support by those multitudes who had been
deluded by the woman and her spiritual daughters.
The Bible declares that they ‘shall hate the whore, and

442

REVELATION 16
shall make her desolate …and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire.’ Rev. 17:16. Unfortunately, that
awakening will come too late to reverse the fate of those
who will have already been sealed in apostasy and
error.” Crews, TUSU, 2.
“The judgment is set in motion when political
rulers and multitudes of all nations suddenly realize
God’s verdict on religious Babylon and unitedly
withdraw their support from her. They will reverse
their loyalty into active hate, into such a hostility that
they will completely demolish Babylon. This sudden
dissolution of her constituent parts destroys Babylon.
“It seems the burden of Revelation 17 to reveal that
this surprising shift in political support away from
Babylon’s religious leadership is God’s own verdict
(17:17). The surprise is that God will bring about the
self-destruction of Babylon by way of her own
supporters. The Euphrates’ waters, the sustaining
multitudes (17:15), will suddenly be caused to dry up, to
withdraw their strength. The beast with ten horns
suddenly becomes the harlot’s hater instead of her illicit
lover, and destroys her completely (17:16).” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 386,387.
“The drying up of the Euphrates could only mean
that when God pours out His vial of judgment in the 6th
plague those people who had previously been obedient
to the wishes and designs of the Babylonian whore
now refuse any longer to execute her nefarious
designs; but, instead, turn upon her to destroy her. This
is not merely a matter of logic, for the angel, after
explaining the meaning of the waters of the river
Euphrates to refer to the nations and people doing the
bidding of the Babylonian whore, immediately proceeds
to state what the drying up of the waters of the
Euphrates refers to. He says: ‘And the ten horns
which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.’ Were,
WATB, 88.
“A revulsion sets in. Revelation 17:16 says that the
horns (the nations of the whole world) will turn against
the harlot (the great city Babylon); ‘they will make her
desolate and naked, and devour her flesh and burn her up
with fire.’ Now notice verse 17, ‘For God has put it
into their hearts (the hearts of the nations) to carry
out his purpose.’ We are at once reminded that the
drying up of the river Euphrates in the sixth plague
proceeds from God. And angel of God dries up the
Euphrates. At the moment when millions and millions
of people around the world suddenly see through the
hypocrisy of their spiritual leaders and loath the
clergy in whom they have reposed their confidence,
God claims to have had a part in bringing about their
new insight. [Rev. 17:17.] His angel pours out the new
enlightenment. The resulting sense of disillusionment is
an overwhelming ‘plague’ indeed.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 442.

“When the voice of God turns the captivity of His
people, there is a terrible awakening of those who have
lost all in the great conflict of life. While probation
continued they were blinded by Satan’s deceptions, and
they justified their course of sin. The rich prided
themselves upon their superiority to those who were less
favored; but they had obtained their riches by violation
of the law of God. They had neglected to feed the
hungry, to clothe the naked, to deal justly, and to love
mercy. They had sought to exalt themselves and to
obtain the homage of their fellow creatures. Now they
are stripped of all that made them great and are left
destitute and defenseless. They look with terror upon the
destruction of the idols which they preferred before their
Maker. They have sold their souls for earthly riches and
enjoyments, and have not sought to become rich toward
God. The result is, their lives are a failure; their
pleasures are now turned to gall, their treasures to
corruption. The gain of a lifetime is swept away in a
moment. The rich bemoan the destruction of their grand
houses, the scattering of their gold and silver. But their
lamentations are silenced by the fear that they
themselves are to perish with their idols.
“The wicked are filled with regret, not because of
their sinful neglect of God and their fellow men, but
because God has conquered. They lament that the result
is what it is; but they do not repent of their wickedness.
They would leave no means untried to conquer if they
could.
“The world see the very class whom they have
mocked and derided, and desired to exterminate, pass
unharmed through pestilence, tempest, and earthquake.
He who is to the transgressors of His law a devouring
fire, is to His people a safe pavilion.
“The minister who has sacrificed truth to gain
the favor of men now discerns the character and
influence of his teachings. It is apparent that the
omniscient eye was following him as he stood in the
desk, as he walked the streets, as he mingled with men in
the various scenes of life. Every emotion of the soul,
every line written, every word uttered, every act that led
men to rest in a refuge of falsehood, has been scattering
seed; and now, in the wretched, lost souls around him, he
beholds the harvest.
“Saith the Lord: ‘[Jeremiah 8:11; Ezekiel 13:22
quoted].’
“‘[Jeremiah 23:1,2; 25:34, 35, margin’, quoted.]
“Ministers and people see that they have not
sustained the right relation to God. They see that they
have rebelled against the Author of all just and righteous
law. The setting aside of the divine precepts gave rise to
thousands of springs of evil, discord, hatred, iniquity,
until the earth became one vast field of strife, one sink of
corruption. This is the view that now appears to those
who rejected truth and chose to cherish error. No
language can express the longing which the disobedient
and disloyal feel for that which they have lost forever—
eternal life. Men whom the world has worshiped for their
talents and eloquence now see these things in their true

443

GEMS FROM REVELATION
light. They realize what they have forfeited by
transgression, and they fall at the feet of those whose
fidelity they have despised and derided, and confess that
God has loved them.
“The people see that they have been deluded.
They accuse one another of having led them to
destruction; but all unite in heaping their bitterest
condemnation upon the ministers. Unfaithful pastors
have prophesied smooth things; they have led their
hearers to make void the law of God and to persecute
those who would keep it holy. Now, in their despair,
these teachers confess before the world their work of
deception. The multitudes are filled with fury. "We are
lost!" they cry, "and you are the cause of our ruin;" and
they turn upon the false shepherds. The very ones that
once admired them most will pronounce the most
dreadful curses upon them. The very hands that once
crowned them with laurels will be raised for their
destruction. The swords which were to slay God's people
are now employed to destroy their enemies. Everywhere
there is strife and bloodshed. Great Controversy, 654656.
“And the multitude of all the nations that fight
against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her
munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a
night vision. It shall even be as when an hungry man
dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and
his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth,
and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold,
he is faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the
multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount
Zion.” Isaiah 29:7,8.
The East.—
“Rev. 7:2 ‘from the sunrising’ means from
Heaven exactly the same designation in Rev. 16:12.”
Were, KTCFS, 32.
“T.W. Christie …says, ‘East is ever connected
with Christ and His children. 2 Pet. 1:19; Rev.22:16;
Mal. 4:2; Isa. 60:20.’” Were, KTCFS, 34.
“Through the tender mercy of our God;
whereby the Dayspring from on high hath visited us.”
Luke 1:78.
“The Hebrew word [for sunrising] is pronounced
mitzrach. It is also used a few times in symbolic
prophecy, and in such instances it is applied to Christ
just like the Greek word in the New Testament. Two
sample verses illustrating this fact can be found in Isaiah
41, verses 2 and 25, where ‘the righteous man from the
east’, or ‘from the rising of the sun’, can be no other
than Christ Himself.” Were, KTCFS, 35.
The Way of Kings of the East Might Be Prepared.—
“ ‘Way’ is figurative—the ‘way’ by which the
situation on earth is prepared for Christ and the armies of
heaven to triumph over Babylon (vs. 19) and ‘the kings

of the earth’ (vs. 14). …The ‘way’ will be ‘prepared’
by the withdrawal of human support from mystical
Babylon.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 844.
“They will come in the seventh plague.” PJ.
Kings of the East.—TYPICAL FULFILLMENT:
“Cyrus, the Persian army general, indeed came
from the east in God’s providence (Isa. 41:2.25) and
took Babylon ‘without battle.’ He surprised its
defenders by diverting the Euphrates which bisected the
city. This took place in literal fulfillment of prophecy.
“Yahweh would ‘open doors before him so that the
gates will not be shut’ (Isa. 45:1). Both the redemptive
motivation was stressed (‘for the sake of Jacob my
servant, of Israel my chosen,’ 45:4), and the divine
purpose (‘He [Cyrus] will rebuild my city and set my
exiles free,’ and restore the temple, 45:13; 44:28).
“God bestowed on Cyrus, therefore, the honorable
titles of ‘his anointed [one]’ and ‘my shepherd’ (45:1;
44:28), titles that elevate Cyrus’ acts of judgment on
Babylon and of redemption for Israel (see Ezra 1:1-4) to
form a dramatic type of the Messiah’s holy war
against apocalyptic Babylon. In the type it was
Yahweh Himself who spoke to the Euphrates, ‘Be dry,
and I will dry up your streams’ (Isa. 44:27). Cyrus was
only Yahweh’s agent in God’s judgment on Babylon.”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 385.
“That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up
thy rivers.” Isa. 44:27.
“Who raised up the righteous man from the east,
called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and
made him rule over kings?
“I have raised up one from the north, and he shall
come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my
name: and he shall come upon princes as upon morter,
and as the potter treadeth clay.” Isaiah 41:2,25.
Kings
of
the
East.—ANTI-TYPICAL
FULFILLMENT:
“The Scriptures describe only one rescue operation
from the east after that final gathering of the nations.
‘For as the lightening cometh out of the east, and
shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of
the Son of man be.’ Matt. 24:27. It is from that same
direction that the sealing angel ascends to mark the
saints for their deliverance. ‘And I saw another angel
ascending from the east, having the seal of the living
God.’ Rev. 7:2.
“The prophet Ezekiel identifies the east as God’s
special place of abode and operation. ‘And, behold, the
glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the
east.’ Ezekiel 43:2. These verses leave no doubt that
the kings of the east symbolize the glorious
intervention of Jesus and the armies of heaven in
dealing with the warring factions of this earth.” Crews,
TUSU, 3.

444

REVELATION 16
“And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white
horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and
True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war.
…And the armies which were in heaven followed him
upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and
clean.” Rev. 19:11,14.
“ ‘The Pulpit Commentary’ remarks concerning
Rev. 16:12: ‘The Kings of the East’ are certainly ranged
on the side of God. Many writers see an allusion to
Christ and His saints. The Sun is a frequent figure of
Christ in the Scriptures (cf. Mal. 4:2, Zech. 3:8; 6:12,
LXX., Luke 1:78, also Rev. 7:2; 12:1; 22:16. The Kings
of the East may thus be identified with the armies of
Rev. 19:11-16.”
“T.W. Christie, B.A., in his ‘The Book of
Revelation’ (p. 273), says: ‘East is ever connected with
Christ and His children. 2 Peter 1:19; Rev. 22:16; Mal.
4:2; Isa. 60:20.’
“…One of the foremost scholars and writers of the
Advent Movement, designated the ‘dean of Seventh-day
Adventist writers,’ George McCready Price, M.A., says:
‘It does seem reasonable that “the kings of the east”
must be the antagonists of ‘the kings of the whole
world’; for the latter are under the control of evil
spirits, and hence the former must be the ones on the
Lord’s side, and must be the ones employed for the
destruction of the spirit-led enemies.’
“ANOTHER prominent scholar and writer in the
Advent Movement, S. H. Lindt, in his brochure, ‘The
Kings of the East,’ states: ‘The kings of the east are set
forth in contradistinction to the kings of the earth in Rev.
16, indicating that they are a separate and a distinct
group and cannot be considered a part of this world
because the kings of the earth and the whole world are
included in the words of verse 14.’” Were, KTCFS, 3335.
We know that Christ is a King, but who are these
other kings mentioned in Rev. 16:12? Why is Jesus
called: “Lord of lords and King of kings” Rev. 19:16;
1Tim. 6:15? Let the Bible supply the answer. They are:
“1) Those who are washed by His blood: And
from Jesus Christ, …the prince of the kings of the
earth. Unto him that loved us, …and hath made us kings
and priests unto God and his Father. Rev 1:5-6
“2) Those redeemed from every nation: “And
hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we
shall reign on the earth.” Rev 5:9-10
“3) Those who are with Him when Babylon is
overthrown. “These shall make war with the Lamb, and
the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords,
and King of kings: and they that are with him are
called, and chosen, and faithful.” Rev. 17:14
“We fully understand that the “kings” in the
expression “King of kings” ALSO refers to earthly,
worldly potentates whom God ultimate has jurisdiction
over Dan. 4:17. The Bible speaks clearly about the
“kings of the earth” Rev. 16:14; 6:15 but the drying up
of the waters of the Euphrates will not help prepare the

way for these “kings” but actually contribute to their
overthrow.” Skeete, CR16, 5,6.
Why Are They Called Kings of the East?
“They are sealed by the angel ascending from
the east, having the seal of the living God. Rev 7:2-3
“They are the people that trouble the king of the
north: “But tidings out of the east and out of the north
shall trouble him: …And at that time shall Michael stand
up…” Dan 11:44-12:1 (The kings of the east will have
troubled the king of the north during the Loud Cry
before probation has closed.)
“They are the Movement that comes from the
Temple and lightens the earth: “Afterward he brought
me to the gate, even the gate that looketh toward the
east: 2) And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came
from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise
of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory.”
Ezekiel 43:1-2 (See Rev. 18:1).
“In the O.T. times, Cyrus and his uncle were the
kings of the east that destroyed Babylon. Cyrus, who the
Bible says would subdue nations in Isa 45:1 is also
described as “…a ravenous bird from the east” in Isa.
46:11. Jesus is the Great King who will lead an army of
144,000 kings against spiritual Babylon during the Loud
Cry movement. Just when the Romish-LucifericGlobalist Church thought that they had the whole world
under their dominion, the 144,000 will burst onto the
world stage like lightning coming out of the east Matt.
24:27. Jesus—in one sense—will have begun to come in
the out pouring of the Latter Rain John 14:18. This holy
company is represented as coming out of the east like the
sun rising because they signify that a new spiritual day is
dawning.” Skeete, CR16, 6.
“Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, And hath made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father.” Rev 1:5,6.
“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne.” Rev. 3:21.
Angels Also Kings.—
“‘KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.’
Rev. 19:16. This title suggest that there must be other
kings under Christ. These could not be earthly kings
because all earthly kings, by supporting spiritual
Babylon, will be destroyed at the Second Advent. Who
then are other ‘kings’ that will be with Christ? The
answer is that there are heavenly kings. There are
kingly powers in the unfallen universe. The apostle Paul
wrote, ‘Now unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the church the
manifold wisdom of God.’ Eph. 3:10.
“In heavenly places there are principalities. A
principality is a domain, ruled over by a prince,
indicating kingly power. Ephesians 1:20,21 repeats the
fact that in ‘the world to come’ there are
‘principalities and powers.’ Our great God shares
His rule. He delegates responsibility amongst his

445

GEMS FROM REVELATION
intelligent creatures. Our God is not a dictator.
Christ has… ‘created thrones, dominions and
principalities in heavenly places.’ Col. 1:16.
“There are heavenly beings to whom God has
delegated kingly or ruling authority. …When Isaiah
described how Lucifer coveted the position of God (the
Son), he spoke of him as having a throne. ‘I will exalt
my throne above the stars [angels] of God.’ Is.
14:13.” Cooke, #28-UR, 16,18
“The angels would sing a lovely song, then they
would cease singing and take their crowns from their
heads and cast them glittering at the feet of the lovely
Jesus….” Early Writings, 66.
Might Be Prepared.—
“How does the drying up of the river Euphrates as
we have perceived it above ‘prepare the way for the
kings from the east’? Jesus will not return to harvest
the earth’s grain and grapes until both the grain and
grapes are fully ripe. See Revelation 14:14-20. In
Christ’s parable about the wheat and the weeds (or tares,
KJV), both wheat and weeds [tares] were to grow
together till the harvest. Only when both are ripe can
the harvesters be certain of the difference.
“…Under the seven last plagues the characters of
people on the two sides are plainly manifested. Rebels
against God become confirmed in their rebellion,
refusing to repent, continuing to blaspheme, and eager, if
possible, to take the lives of God’s followers. God’s
people remain faithful in their obedience, preferring,
if necessary, to lay down their lives rather than
dishonor God.
“Once the two camps are unequivocally
differentiated, once the wheat and tares, the grain and
grapes, are fully ripe, there is no reason for further
delay. There will be nothing more that God can do to
save the wicked and nothing more that He needs to do
for the righteous—except deliver them.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 443.

REVELATION 16:13
And I saw three unclean spirits like
frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon,
and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of
the mouth of the false prophet.
Unclean Spirits.—
“In the Gospels the term ‘unclean spirit’ is used
interchangeably with ‘devil’ (See Mk. 1:27,34;
3:11,15; 6:7; etc.). See Rev. 18:2; cf. 5 Testimonies,
472,473.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 844.
“The demons that Jesus cast out of their help-less
victims are often spoken of as ‘unclean spirits.’ Any
influence that leads to sin and spiritual bondage is foul
and unclean. The purpose of the gospel is to deliver
from the power of Satan and to cleanse from sin and

righteousness.” Bunch, TR, 229.
“Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is
become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every
foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful
bird.” Rev. 18:2
Three Unclean Spirits.—
“Today in the professedly Christian world there has
been a tremendous revival of the powers of the occult.
This revival commenced in 1848 with the
manifestation of modern spiritualism. Under various
guises this deceptive power has rapidly spread
throughout the western world and is making its mark
in every strata of society.” Cooke, #26-UR, 3.
“When Protestantism shall stretch her hand across
the gulf to grasp the hand of the Roman power, when
she shall reach over the abyss to clasp hands with
spiritualism, when, under the influence of this threefold
union, our country shall repudiate every principle of its
Constitution as a Protestant and republican government,
and shall make provision for the propagation of papal
falsehoods and delusions, then we may know that the
time has come for the marvelous working of Satan
and that the end is near.” 5 Testimonies, 451.
Like Frogs.—
“Foul, loathsome creatures that croak constantly.
…The spirits of evil are also noisy. They are said to
‘peep and mutter.’ (Isa. 8:19).” Bunch, TR, 229.
“Although the plagues from God were always more
impressive than those produced by the magical arts of
Pharaoh’s court magicians, the various counterfeits
gave Pharaoh a series of excuses to reject God’s
appeals to him. It turned out, however, that the plague
of frogs was the last plague that Pharaoh’s magicians
were able to duplicate (Ex. 8:18,19). The frogs were the
last deception prior to the Exodus. That’s why there are
frogs in Revelation 16:13. They signal that the message
of Revelation 16 has to do with the last deception of
earth’s history.” Paulien, End-Time, 114.
“A large share of the periodicals and books that,
like the frogs of Egypt, are overspreading the land,
are not merely commonplace, idle, and enervating, but
unclean and degrading. Their effect is not merely to
intoxicate and ruin the mind, but to corrupt and
destroy the soul.” Education, 189.
Out of the Mouth.—
“These unclean spirits come ‘out of the mouth’ of
each of the three divisions of and the spokesmen for
Babylon.
The mouth represents the center of
influence and power. It sends forth the words and
messages that bless or curse the world; that save or
condemn mankind. See James 3:10-12; Rev. 1:16; 9:17;
11:5; 12:15; 19:15,21. Our text shows that false
teaching and lying deceptions will be the means of

446

REVELATION 16
gathering the nations to their doom.” Bunch, TR, 230.
“Unclean spirits come out of the mouth—
teachings. In Zech. 13:2,3, an unclean spirit is linked
with a false prophet. Having rejected the truth of God
in the messages of the Three Angels, (Rev. 14:6-16), the
rejectors are deceived by the Three False Spirits.”
Burnside, RWU, 195.
The Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet—a Trinity.—
“They are a counterfeit trinity. This counterfeit
trinity is based on the concept of the trinity itself. The
dragon, beast, and false prophet are three
manifestations of one being—Satan. (The true Godhead
is composed of three distinct eternal Beings—Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit..) PJ
“Satan’s trinity even pretends to create an image of
the beast, as God created man in His own image. God
breathed into man the breath of life. A member of
Satan’s trinity breathes life into the image of the
beast.
“God sends three angels preaching the final
messages at judgment hour. His angels call on every
nation, tribe, tongue, and people to believe the gospel
and worship the God who created heaven and earth.
Satan sends out three demons with messages from the
mouth of the dragon, beast, and false prophet to
assemble the nations for their great battle against the
Lamb.
“God offers to stamp us with the seal of God.
Satan offers the mark of the beast.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 444.
“In Revelation 13 …we find a three-part
counterfeit of the Trinity—the dragon, the sea beast, and
the land beast. The dragon seems to be the counterfeit
of God the Father. He is clearly the leader of the
group, calling up the others and giving them their
orders (Rev. 12:17; 13:1,2).
“The sea beast is clearly a counterfeit of Jesus
Christ, the second person of the Godhead. It has 10
horns and seven heads (Rev. 13:1). But as strange as the
sea beast looks, it is not the only character in Revelation
to have 10 horns and seven heads. In chapter 12 the
dragon also has seven heads and 10 horns (verse 3). The
dragon and the sea beast are look-alikes! The
Christian reader of Revelation would recall John 14:9:
‘Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father.’ The sea
beast of Revelation 13 has the same kind of
relationship with the dragon that Jesus had with His
Father.
“There are further parallels. In verse 2 the dragon
gives the sea beast ‘his power and his throne and
great authority.’ This reminds one of Matthew 28:18,
where Jesus said: ‘All authority in heaven and on earth
has been given to me.’ Who gave Him that authority?
His Father. Just as Jesus received His authority from
the father, so the sea beast receives his from the dragon.
Among other things, the sea beast also has a death and

a resurrection like Christ (Rev. 13:3) and counterfeits
Christ’s three and a half years of ministry (42
months—verse 5). So the sea beast is clearly intended
to be a counterfeit of Jesus Christ.
“The land beast promotes the interests of the sea
beast (verses 12,14,15), just as the Holy Spirit does
not speak of Himself but instead glorifies Jesus (John
16:13,14). The role of the Holy Spirit is to promote
Christ. The role of the land beast is to promote the sea
beast, the counterfeit of Christ. And just as the great
act of the Holy Spirit was to bring fire down out of
heaven (Acts 2), so the greatest act of the land beast is
to bring fire down from heaven to earth in a great
counterfeit of the Holy Spirit’s work. (Rev. 13:13
quoted).
“At the end, the land beast performs a counterfeit
of Pentecost! For what purpose? To prove to the
world that the counterfeit trinity is the true God.”
Paulien, End-Time, 109-111.
The Dragon.—
“The dragon is said to be Satan (Revelation 12:9);
he it was that moved upon Herod to put the Saviour to
death. But the chief agent of Satan in making war upon
Christ and His people during the first centuries of the
Christian Era was the Roman Empire, in which
paganism was the prevailing religion. Thus while the
dragon, primarily, represents Satan, it is, in a secondary
sense, a symbol of pagan Rome.” Great Controversy,
438.
“The dragon or serpent power in Rev. 12 continues
down through the Christian era to the last days.
Therefore the dragon involves more than pagan Rome.
In prophecy, a beast represents a political power (Dan.
7:17), therefore the dragon (which is a beast) must
represent political powers that are used by Satan to
oppose the cause of God. What political powers were
used by Satan to oppose His people after the fall of
pagan Rome? Rome’s territory was occupied by the
Gothic barbarians who formed themselves into the ten
kingdoms of Western Europe. Most of these powers of
Europe at various times were effective agents of Satan in
opposing God’s people. In Rev. 12:3, the dragon is
described as having ‘ten horns.’ These represent the ten
divisions of Western Rome (Dan. 7:24). Whenever one
reads of the ten horns in Daniel or revelation, they
always represent, at least, or initially, the ten kingdoms
of Western Europe. Thus the original kingdoms of
Western Europe are clearly a part of the dragon power.
The same author quoted above [Ellen G. White] lays
down a principle as to what constitutes the dragon
power:
“Kings, rulers and governors have placed upon
themselves the brand of antichrist and are
represented as the dragon who goes to make war with
the saints—with those who keep the commandments of
God and who have the faith of Jesus.” Testimonies to
Ministers, 39.
“If the dragon of Rev. 12:3-4 was pagan Rome and

447

GEMS FROM REVELATION
in Rev. 12:4-16 was the ten kingdoms of Western
Europe, who then comprises the dragon in verse 17 in
the end time? The answer is ‘kings, rulers and
governors (who) have placed themselves under the
brand of antichrist.’ The earthly antichrist is the
Papacy. The dragon, therefore, of verse 17 represents
the political powers who in the last days, place
themselves under the brand of the Papacy and make
war on God’s people.” Cooke, #26-UR, 7,8.
(The Dragon is also described in Rev. 12.)
Evil Spirits Out of the Mouth of the Dragon.—
“According to the prediction of Rev. 16, the
bewitching powers of spiritism are to come ‘out of the
mouth of the dragon.’ This could mean that the
political powers of the world are to especially come
under the control of spiritistic powers. There are
concrete examples of how the forces of the occult
have influenced some of these powers in the past.
“In the interval between the two World Wars, the
people of Germany became very involved in the practice
of witchcraft. It has been suggested that it was this
influence that prepared the soil for the reception of
Nazism by which Adolph Hitler was enables to seize
control of the German nation. It is also well established,
that during World War II, Mussolini and Hitler were
influenced by the occult. Mussolini did nothing of
importance without first consulting his astrologer.
Hitler also spent many hours of the night in
communication with unseen powers. Leading spiritists
of Europe have admitted that Hitler was deeply involved
in the occult. According to the famous American
medium, Jean Dixon, Franklin D. Roosevelt, during
World War II, spent many hours with his war chiefs
in contact with occult powers, to obtain direction for
the conduct of the war. Today, witchcraft, sorcery,
astrology and numerous other forms of the occult are
riddling the Western world. We believe that this could
be preparing the ground for the fulfillment of the
prediction of Rev. 16:13-14.” Cooke, #26-UR, 12,13.
Spiritualism in the United States White House.—
“For Ronald Reagan, like Calvin Coolidge and
Theodore Roosevelt before him, important decisions
required at least a quick glance to the stars. The
Philadelphia Inquirer, for example, insisted that ‘the
signing of the U.S. Soviet treaty eliminating mediumrange nuclear missiles’ had been signed at 1:30 p.m. on
December 8, 1987 based on advice from an astrologer.
In addition, many papers reported that Ronald Reagan
had postponed his inauguration 9 minutes as governor of
California till 12:10 a.m. on Jan. 2, 1967 based on
astrology calculations. In the White House, Nancy
Reagan planned almost all presidential travel, press
conferences, and even the president’s cancer surgery
based on information she was receiving from her
astrologer.” Time, 5/16/1988.
The Beast.—

“From the days of Martin Luther to the present,
Bible commentators have recognized the papacy as the
fulfillment of the score of biblical tests relating to the
beast power. It was to rise among the nations of
Western Europe, uprooting three tribes, speaking
blasphemy, persecuting all opponents, ruling for 1,260
years, and finally receiving a deadly wound [that would
be later healed].” Crews, TUSU, 3.
“In chapter 13 (verses 1-10) is described another
beast, ‘like unto a leopard,’ to which the dragon gave
‘his power, and his seat, and great authority.’ This
symbol, as most Protestants have believed, represents
the papacy, which succeeded to the power and seat and
authority once held by the ancient Roman empire. Of
the leopardlike beast it is declared: ‘There was given
unto him a mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies….
And he opened his mouth in
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name, and
His tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And
it was given unto him to make war with the saints,
and to overcome them: and power was given him
over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.’ This
prophecy, which is nearly identical with the description
of the little horn of Daniel 7, unquestionably points to
the papacy.” Great Controversy, 439.
(The Beast is described in Rev. 13:1-10.)
Out of the Mouth of the Beast.—
“This means that according to the prediction, ‘the
spirits of devils’ are to take possession of the Papacy
and speak and work through it, to influence the rest of
the world to unite against God and His people. There is
ample evidence to show that in the past as well as the
present, the powers of spiritism have resided within the
Papacy.
“ ‘Not only does the Roman Catholic church hold
festivals to honor the departed spirits of loved ones, but
it claims to have within the church, members who claim
to receive messages from the dead. Instead of calling
this practice of the occult, necromancy, the Roman
Catholic church calls it mysticism. And instead of
calling the people who perform this abomination
(mediums), they are called ‘mystics.’ R.A. Anderson,
‘The Antichrist and 666’, p. 168.
“Roman Catholicism is famous for its miracles and
so-called responses from departed saints. Some miracles
are inexplicable from a human point of view. The
miracles at Lourdes, that great Catholic center of
Mariolatry, speak of a supernatural power. At Lourdes,
there are not only Catholic, but Protestant and nonreligious doctors. They all admit that miracles occur.
These miracles confirm in the mind of the Catholic that
God is in the Catholic church. The miracles also
convince many Protestants that God must be in the
Catholic church. Thirdly, the miracles in the Church of
Rome declare to the world at large that God is in the
Catholic church. Lourdes is impressive. One who is
unaware of the warnings of scripture in regard to the

448

REVELATION 16
deceptive and alluring influence of evil spirits, would
be soundly convinced that the power of God is
present at Lourdes.” Cooke, #26-UR, 4,5.
The False Prophet.—
(That the false prophet represents apostate
Protestantism in the United States, see comments under
Rev. 19:20 and Rev. 13:14.)
“The false prophet, instead of representing the
United States as a political entity only, would extend
to the ‘image of the beast’ and portray fallen,
compromised Protestantism doing the work of the first
beast, or Catholicism.” Crews, TUSU, 4.
Out of the Mouth of the False Prophet.—
“If ‘the spirits of devils’ are to come out of the
mouth of the false prophet, they must first enter into the
Protestant or non-Catholic churches and take control.
For many decades, non-Catholic leaders have revealed a
favorable attitude towards spiritism. This is to be
expected when the majority of the clergy cling to the
doctrine of the immortality of the soul, upon which
spiritism is based.
“A striking example of spiritistic infiltration of
Protestantism is the ‘charismatic movement.’
Thousands of sincere people are led to believe that they
receive the Holy Spirit in the form of so-called speaking
in tongues. The evidence however, shows that the
power involved in this movement, is a form of
spiritism, an impersonation of the Holy Spirit. This
charismatic movement is pervading the Protestant
churches as well as a section of the Catholic church
and it is quite apparent that its aim is to unify all
Christians and lead them towards Rome. This is
exactly what the prediction of Rev.16 includes. The
spirits of devils will gather or unite the whole world.
Undoubtedly, we will witness prolific manifestations of
spiritism in the future within the non-Catholic churches,
and the political leadership of the world.” Cooke, #26UR, 16,17.
“Through the two great errors, the immortality
of the soul and Sunday sacredness, Satan will bring
the people under his deceptions. While the former lays
the foundation of spiritualism, the latter creates a bond
of sympathy with Rome. The Protestants of the United
States will be foremost in stretching their hands across
the gulf to grasp the hand of spiritualism; they will reach
over the abyss to clasp hands with the Roman power;
and under the influence of this threefold union, this
country will follow in the steps of Rome in trampling
on the rights of conscience.” Great Controversy, 588.
“The lamb-horned beast is called the false prophet,
a counterpart of the Holy Spirit, the avenue of true
prophecy. In John 16 the Holy Spirit leads us into all
truth and into the worship of God, but the false prophet
teaches lies and persuades people to worship the
beast.” Maxwell, God Cares, 444.

End-time Church/State Powers.—
NAME
CIVIL
RELIGIOUS
ASPECT
ASPECT
KINGS
SPIRITUALISM
DRAGON
OF EARTH
PAGANISM
VATICAN
CATHOLICISM
BEAST
CITY
UNITED
APOSTATE
FALSE
STATES
PROTESTANTISM
PROPHET

REVELATION 16:14
For they are the spirits of devils,
working miracles, which go forth unto the
kings of the earth and of the whole world, to
gather them to the battle of that great day of
God Almighty.
They Are the Spirits of Devils.—
“Satan has long been preparing for his final effort
to deceive the world. The foundation of his work was
laid by the assurance given to Eve in Eden: ‘Ye shall not
surely die.’ ‘In the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing
good and evil.’ Genesis 3:4, 5. Little by little he has
prepared the way for his masterpiece of deception in the
development of spiritualism. He has not yet reached the
full accomplishment of his designs; but it will be reached
in the last remnant of time. Says the prophet: [Rev.
16:13,14 quoted]. Except those who are kept by the
power of God, through faith in His word, the whole
world will be swept into the ranks of this delusion.
The people are fast being lulled to a fatal security, to be
awakened only by the outpouring of the wrath of God.”
Great Controversy, 561.
“We must not trust the claims of men. They
may, as Christ represents, profess to work miracles in
healing the sick. Is this marvelous, when just behind
them stands the great deceiver, the miracle worker who
will yet bring down fire from heaven in the sight of
men?
“Nor can we trust impressions. The voice or
spirit that says to a man, You are under no obligation to
obey the law of God; you are holy and sinless, while he
is trampling on the divine law, is not the voice of Jesus;
for He declares: ‘I have kept my Father’s
commandments’ (John 15:10). And John testifies: ‘He
that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him’
(1 John 2:4).
“Then how can these manifestations of great
power, and these wonderful impressions, be accounted
for, except on the ground that they are given through
the influence of that miracle-working spirit that has
gone forth to deceive the whole world, and infatuate
them with strong delusion that they shall believe a

449

GEMS FROM REVELATION
lie? He is pleased when men and women claim to
possess great spiritual power, and yet disregard the law
of God, because through their disobedience they mislead
others, and he can use them as effective agents in his
work.” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 49.
“Revelation 16:14 says that these frogs are
‘spirits of demons.’ …In the New Testament, demons
function in behalf of evil much as the angels of God
function in behalf of good. The three frogs are,
therefore, the demonic counterparts of the three good
angels of Revelation 14:6-12. Both groups of angels
have a mission to the whole world (verse 6; 16:14), one
trio calling the world to worship God and the other
seeking to gather the people of the world into the
service of the unholy trinity. (Rev. 16:14 quoted).
“Three angels speak on behalf of the true God
throughout the world, and three angels speak on behalf
of the demonic trinity throughout the world. …Not only
is there a counterfeit of the Godhead at the end, but
also there is a counterfeit of God’s end-time message.
“…At the end, the fire that falls from heaven does
not mark the identity of the true God. Instead, it testifies
in support of the counterfeit trinity. The fire, so to
speak, will fall on the wrong altar. It will counterfeit
Elijah and the counterfeit three angels who bring fire
down from heaven to earth (Rev. 13:13,14). All the
evidence of the five senses will suggest on that day that
the counterfeit trinity is the true God.” Paulien, EndTime, 115,116.
Working Miracles.—
“The Protestants of the United States will be
foremost in stretching their hands across the gulf to
grasp the hand of spiritualism; they will reach over
the abyss to clasp hands with the Roman power; and
under the influence of this threefold union, this country
will follow in the steps of Rome in trampling on the
rights of conscience.
“As spiritualism more closely imitates the
nominal Christianity of the day, it has greater power
to deceive and ensnare. Satan himself is converted,
after the modern order of things. He will appear in the
character of an angel of light. Through the agency of
spiritualism, miracles will be wrought, the sick will be
healed, and many undeniable wonders will be
performed. And as the spirits will profess faith in the
Bible, and manifest respect for the institutions of the
church, their work will be accepted as a manifestation of
divine power.
“The line of distinction between professed
Christians and the ungodly is now hardly
distinguishable. Church members love what the world
loves and are ready to join with them, and Satan
determines to unite them in one body and thus strengthen
his cause by sweeping all into the ranks of spiritualism.
Papists, who boast of miracles as a certain sign of the
true church, will be readily deceived by this wonderworking power; and Protestants, having cast away the
shield of truth, will also be deluded. Papists, Protestants,

and worldlings will alike accept the form of godliness
without the power, and they will see in this union a
grand movement for the conversion of the world and the
ushering in of the long-expected millennium.
“Through spiritualism, Satan appears as a
benefactor of the race, healing the diseases of the
people, and professing to present a new and more
exalted system of religious faith.” Great Controversy,
588.589.
“Satan will have power to bring before us the
appearance of forms purporting to be our relatives or
friends now sleeping in Jesus. It will be made to
appear as if these friends were present; the words that
they uttered while here, with which we were familiar,
will be spoken, and the same tone of voice that they had
while living will fall upon the ear. All this is to deceive
the saints and ensnare them into the belief of this
delusion.” Early Writings, 87.
“The time is at hand when Satan will work
miracles to confirm minds in the belief that he is God.
All the people of God are now to stand on the platform
of truth as it has been given in the third angel’s message.
All the pleasant pictures, all the miracles wrought,
will be presented in order that, if possible, the very
elect shall be deceived. The only hope for anyone is to
hold fast the evidences that have confirmed the truth in
righteousness. Let these be proclaimed over and over
again, until the close of this earth’s history.” (Review &
Herald, 9/9/1906). Medical Ministry, 14,15.
“Even him, whose coming is after the working of
Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,
And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them
that perish; because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved.” 2 Thess. 2:9,10.
“While these ‘miracles’ are performed by demons,
they use human agents as their mediums. See Rev.
13:13,14; Matt. 24:24; 2 Thess. 2:9-12.” Bunch, TR,
230.
The Kings of the Earth and of the Whole World.—
“With whom the kings of the earth have
committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth
have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.”
Rev. 17:2.
“The ‘kings’ are the political powers of earth, in
contrast with the threefold religious union of v.13,
which summon the nations of earth to unite in a crusade
to destroy God’s people. This universal religio-political
combine aspires to rule the world.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 845.
Go Forth Unto the Kings of the Earth and of the Whole
World, To Gather Them.—
“As out of Zion the angels and human messengers
of the Lord go forth to gather the saints, so out of

450

REVELATION 16
Babylon go forth the evil spirits and their human
spokesmen to gather the wicked to that false worship
that ends in ruin.” Bunch, TR, 230.
“The line of distinction between professing
Christians and the ungodly is now hardly distinguishable. Church-members love what the world loves, and
are ready to join with them; and Satan determines to
unite them in one body and thus strengthen his cause by
sweeping all into the ranks of Spiritualism. Papists who
boast of miracles as a certain mark of the true church,
will be readily deceived by this wonder-working power;
and Protestants, having cast away the shield of truth, will
also be deluded. Papists, Protestants, and worldlings
will alike accept the form of godliness without the
power, and they will see in this union a grand
movement for the conversion of the world, and the
ushering in of the long-expected millennium.” Spirit
of Prophecy, Vol. 4, 406.
“Fearful sights of a supernatural character will
soon be revealed in the heavens, in token of the power
of miracle-working demons. The spirits of devils will
go forth to the kings of the earth and to the whole
world, to fasten them in deception, and urge them on
to unite with Satan in his last struggle against the
government of heaven. By these agencies, rulers and
subjects will be alike deceived. Persons will arise
pretending to be Christ Himself, and claiming the title
and worship which belong to the world’s Redeemer.
They will perform wonderful miracles of healing and
will profess to have revelations from heaven
contradicting the testimony of the Scriptures.
“As the crowning act in the great drama of
deception, Satan himself will personate Christ. The
church has long professed to look to the Saviour’s
advent as the consummation of her hopes. Now the
great deceiver will make it appear that Christ has
come. In different parts of the earth, Satan will manifest
himself among men as a majestic being of dazzling
brightness, resembling the description of the Son of God
given by John in the Revelation. Rev. 1:13-15. The
glory that surrounds him is unsurpassed by anything
that mortal eyes have yet beheld. The shout of
triumph rings out upon the air: ‘Christ has come! Christ
has come!’ The people prostrate themselves in adoration
before him, while he lifts up his hands and pronounces a
blessing upon them, as Christ blessed His disciples when
He was upon the earth. His voice is soft and subdued,
yet full of melody. In gentle, compassionate tones he
presents some of the same gracious, heavenly truths
which the Saviour uttered; he heals the diseases of the
people, and then, in his assumed character of Christ, he
claims to have changed the Sabbath to Sunday, and
commands all to hallow the day which he has blessed.
He declares that those who persist in keeping holy the
seventh day are blaspheming his name by refusing to
listen to his angels sent to them with light and truth.
This is the strong, almost overmastering delusion.
Like the Samaritans who were deceived by Simon

Magus, the multitudes, from the least to the greatest,
give heed to these sorceries, saying: This is ‘the great
power of God.’ Acts 8:10.
“But the people of God will not be misled. The
teachings of this false christ are not in accordance with
the Scriptures. His blessing is pronounced upon the
worshipers of the beast and his image, the very class
upon whom the Bible declares that God's unmingled
wrath shall be poured out.” Great Controversy, 624625.
“Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD, until
the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is
to gather the nations, that I may assemble the
kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even
all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured
with the fire of my jealousy.” Zeph. 3:8.
To Gather Them to the Battle.—
“The ‘gathering’ of Israel in preparation for the day
of the Lord, referred to by the Lord’s servant in Early
Writings, p. 74-76, is explained on p. 86 to refer to the
‘union’ of God’s people, ‘and to the fact that He had
begun to unite and to raise up His people.’
“…Not only when referring to the spiritual
‘gathering together’ of Israel does God’s servant employ
the word ‘union’ or ‘united,’ but also when describing
the strengthening of the opposing forces. ‘The agencies
of evil are combining their forces, and consolidating.
They are strengthening for the last great crisis’ (9
Testimonies, Page 11). Commenting upon the
‘gathering’ of the tares (see Matthew 13: 30, 40), God’s
servant says: ‘Can we not see how earnestly Satan is at
work binding the tares, in bundles, uniting the elements
of his kingdom, that he may gain control of the world?
This work of binding up the tares is going forward far
more rapidly than we imagine’ (5 Testimonies, p. 384).
‘They [men] have united. They are represented in God’s
Word as being bound in bundles to be burned. Satan is
uniting his forces for perdition’ (6 Testimonies, p. 242).
“In giving an inspired explanation of the
‘gathering’ of the nations to ‘Armageddon,’ mentioned
in Revelation 16: 14, God’s servant explicitly shows that
the word ‘gather’ refers to the spiritual ‘union’ of the
elements of Satan’s kingdom. ‘The spirits of devils will
go forth to the kings of the earth and to the whole world
[obviously the reference is to Revelation 16:13, 14], to
fasten them in deception, and urge them on to unite with
Satan in his last struggle against the government of
Heaven’ (Great Controversy, p. 623). With such clear
and definite statements from the Spirit of Prophecy there
should be no question as to the meaning of the gathering
to Armageddon.
“‘Every soul that is not fully surrendered to God
will form an alliance [‘unite’ or ‘gather’] with Satan
against heaven and join in battle against the Ruler of the
universe’ (Testimonies To Ministers, p. 465). By
comparing this statement with Weymouth’s Translation
of Revelation 16:14, we readily see that God’s servant is
again interpreting the meaning of the ‘gathering’ to

451

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Armageddon-a uniting of the forces of good and evil
‘against the government of Heaven,’ and not a gathering
of nations literally to Palestine.” Were, KONAJ, 93-94.

the Greek word polemos, which is often translated
‘war’ rather than ‘battle.’ It may be either a single
encounter or a series.” Anderson, UR, 167.

“The Spirit of God is gradually withdrawing
from the world. Satan is also mustering his forces of
evil, going forth ‘unto the kings of the earth and of the
whole world,’ to gather them under his banner, to be
trained for ‘the battle of that great day of God
Almighty’ [Rev. 16:14].” (Manuscript 1a, 1890).
7BC, 983.

“A terrible conflict is before us. We are nearing
the battle of the great day of God Almighty. That
which has been held in control is to be let loose. The
angel of mercy is folding her wings, preparing to step
down from the throne, and leave the world to the control
of Satan. The principalities and powers of earth are in
bitter revolt against the God of heaven. They are filled
with hatred against those who serve him, and soon, very
soon, will be fought the last great battle between good
and evil. The earth is to be the battlefield—the scene
of the final contest and the final victory. Here, where
for so long Satan has led men against God, rebellion is to
be forever suppressed.” Review & Herald, 5/13/1902.

“But while already nation is rising against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom, there is not now a general
engagement. As yet the four winds are held until the
servants of God shall be sealed in their fore-heads.
Then the powers of earth will marshal their forces for
the last great battle.” 6 Testimonies, 14.
“This gathering consists of …efforts put forth by
the threefold religious union to secure united action on
the part of the political powers of earth for the purpose
of waging war on the remnant of God’s people.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 845.
“Satan knows that his usurped authority will soon
be forever at an end. His last opportunity to gain control
of the world is now before him, and he will make most
decided efforts to accomplish the destruction of the
inhabitants of the earth. Those who believe the truth
must be as faithful sentinels on the watch-tower, or Satan
will suggest specious reasonings to them, and they will
give utterance to opinions that will betray sacred, holy
trusts. The enmity of Satan against good will be
manifested more and more as he brings his forces into
activity in his last work of rebellion; and every soul that
is not fully surrendered to God, and kept by divine
power, will form an alliance with Satan against
heaven, and join in battle against the Ruler of the
universe.” Testimonies to Ministers, 464.
“Satan has long been preparing for his final effort
to deceive the world. The foundation of his work was
laid by the assurance given to Eve in Eden: ‘Ye shall not
surely die.’ ‘In the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good
and evil.’ Genesis 3:4, 5. Little by little he has prepared
the way for his masterpiece of deception in the
development of spiritualism. He has not yet reached the
full accomplishment of his designs; but it will be reached
in the last remnant of time. Says the prophet: [Revelation
16:13, 14 quoted]. Except those who are kept by the
power of God, through faith in His word, the whole
world will be swept into the ranks of this delusion.
The people are fast being lulled to a fatal security, to be
awakened only by the outpouring of the wrath of God.”
Great Controversy, 561.
Battle.—
“The word ‘battle’ in this verse is translated from

God’s People Gathered For the Battle.—
“Blow the trumpet in Zion; sound an alarm in the
holy mountain. Gather the host of the Lord, with
sanctified hearts, to hear what the Lord will say unto
His people; for He has increased light for all who will
hear. Let them be armed and equipped, and come up
to the battle—to the help of the Lord against the
mighty. God Himself will work for Israel. Every lying
tongue will be silenced. Angels’ hands will overthrow
the deceptive schemes that are being formed. The
bulwarks of Satan will never triumph. Victory will
attend the third angel’s message. As the Captain of
the Lord’s host tore down the walls of Jericho, so will
the Lord’s commandment-keeping people triumph,
and all opposing elements be defeated. Let no soul
complain of the servants of God who have come to them
with a heaven-sent message. Do not any longer pick
flaws in them, saying, ‘They are too positive; they talk
too strongly.’ They may talk strongly; but is it not
needed? God will make the ears of the hearers tingle if
they will not heed His voice or His message. He will
denounce those who resist the word of God.” “1888”,
1647.
“It is an incontrovertible fact that the book of
Revelation places God’s faithful people at the center
of the battle of Armageddon. They are addressed
specifically in this setting by Christ’s appeal to be ready
for His imminent coming:
(Rev. 16:15 quoted).
Revelation urges upon the church the arresting message
that Armageddon will be the final contest between the
combined forces of Satan on the one hand and Christ
with His chosen and faithful followers on the other.
Two passages explain this alignment of Armageddon
with clarity: (Rev. 17:14; 19:11,14-16,19 quoted.)”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 377.
“As we approach the last crisis, it is of vital
moment that harmony and unity exist among the
Lord’s instrumentalities. The world is filled with
storm and war and variance. Yet under one head—the
papal power—the people will unite to oppose God in

452

REVELATION 16
the person of His witnesses. This union is cemented by
the great apostate. While he seeks to unite his agents in
warring against the truth he will work to divide and
scatter its advocates. Jealousy, evil surmising, evilspeaking, are instigated by him to produce discord and
dissension. The members of Christ’s church have the
power to thwart the purpose of the adversary of souls.
At such a time as this let them not be found at variance
with one another or with any of the Lord’s workers.
Amidst the general discord let there be one place
where harmony and unity exist because the Bible is
made the guide of life.” 7 Testimonies, 182.
Battle of That Great Day of God Almighty.—
“The Armageddon prophecy is located in the unit
of the seven last plagues (Rev. 16), after the description
of the sixth plague (vs.16). The actual battle is not
described in verse 16. It will take place consequently
during the seventh plague. Surprisingly, the final, or
seventh, plague describes the terrifying events in nature
that will accompany the second advent of Christ, with
this clarification: ‘God remembered Babylon the Great
and gave her the cup filled with the wine of the fury of
his wrath.’ (16:19).
“The battle of Armageddon and the destruction
of universal Babylon, therefore, coincide. These
cannot be divorced from each other. Armageddon is
explained within Revelation 16 as the divine judgment
and destruction of Babylon.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 375.
“This battle is one in which the nations unite to
destroy the people of God, and is therefore primarily a
religious conflict.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 845.
“Four mighty angels hold back the powers of this
earth till the servants of God are sealed in their
foreheads. The nations of the world are eager for
conflict; but they are held in check by the angels.
When this restraining power is removed, there will
come a time of trouble and anguish.
Deadly
instruments of warfare will be invented. Vessels, with
their living cargo, will be entombed in the great deep.
All who have not the spirit of truth will unite under the
leadership of Satanic agencies. But they are to be kept
under control till the time shall come for the great
battle of Armageddon.”
(Letter 79, 1900).
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 1, 145.

Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and
King of kings: and they that are with him are called,
and chosen, and faithful.” Rev. 17:14.
“And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white
horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and
True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make
war….
“And the armies which were in heaven followed
him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and
clean.
“And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that
with it he should smite the nations….
“And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth,
and their armies, gathered together to make war
against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.
And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet
that wrought miracles before him, with which he
deceived them that had received the mark of the beast,
and them that worshipped his image. These both were
cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.”
Rev. 19:11,14,15,19,20.
That Great Day.—
“The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the
haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the
LORD alone shall be exalted in that day.
“For the day of the LORD of hosts shall be upon
every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one
that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low: And
upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted
up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, And upon all the
high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up,
And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall,
And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant
pictures. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed
down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low:
and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that day.”
Isa. 2:11-17.

REVELATION 16:15
Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he
that watcheth, and keepeth his garments,
lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

“The dragon was wroth with the woman, and went
to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep
the commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ.” Rev. 12:17.

Caution Given.—
“After John’s description in Revelation 16 of that
miracle-working power which was to gather the world to
the last great conflict, the symbols are dropped and the
trumpet voice once more gives a certain sound:
‘Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that
watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame’ [Rev. 16:15]. After the
transgression of Adam and Eve they were naked, for the
garment of light and security had departed from them. ”
Last Day Events, 249.

“These shall make war with the Lamb, and the

“But what is the force of the caution thrown out in

“The battle of Armageddon is soon to be fought.
He on whose vesture is written the name, King of kings,
and Lord of lords, is soon to lead forth the armies of
heaven.” 6 Testimonies, 406.

453

GEMS FROM REVELATION
verse 15? Probation must have closed, and Christ have
left his mediatorial position, before the plagues begin to
fall. Is there danger of falling after that? It will be
noticed that this warning is spoken in connection with
the working of the spirits. The inference therefore is that
it is retroactive, applying from the time these spirits
begin to work to the close of probation; that by a use
of tenses sometimes occurring in the Greek language, the
present tense is put for the past; as if it had read, Blessed
is he that hath watched and kept his garments, as the
shame and nakedness of all who have not done this
will at this time especially appear.” Smith, DR, 700.
“The time is not far distant when the test will come
to every soul. The mark of the beast will be urged upon
us. Those who have step by step yielded to worldly
demands and conformed to worldly customs will not
find it a hard matter to yield to the powers that be,
rather than subject themselves to derision, insult,
threatened imprisonment, and death. The contest is
between the commandments of God and the
commandments of men. In this time the gold will be
separated from the dross in the church. True godliness
will be clearly distinguished from the appearance and
tinsel of it. Many a star that we have admired for its
brilliancy will then go out in darkness. Chaff like a
cloud will be borne away on the wind, even from places
where we see only floors of rich wheat. All who assume
the ornaments of the sanctuary, but are not clothed
with Christ’s righteousness, will appear in the shame
of their own nakedness.” 5 Testimonies, 81.
I Come As a Thief.—
“That is, to the ungodly.” 7SDABC 845
“But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that
day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the
children of light, and the children of the day: we are not
of the night, nor of darkness.” 1Th 5:4,5.
“But know this, that if the goodman of the house
had known in what watch the thief would come, he
would have watched, and would not have suffered his
house to be broken up.” Matt. 24:43.
“And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness,
and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares.
“For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth.
Watch ye
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted
worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass,
and to stand before the Son of man.” Luke 21:34-36.
Jesus Comes As a Thief Upon Babylon.—
“To come ‘like a thief’ means to come at an
unexpected moment.” Maxwell, God Cares, 429.
“From these verses also we notice that the

coming of Jesus ‘as a thief’ is related to the drying up
of the river Euphrates and the appearing of the
‘kings of the east.’ And even the Battle of Armageddon
is tied to these events. Do these phrases sound familiar?
They should, because the same language is used in Isaiah
44:27 to describe the fall of ancient Babylon. Cyrus
actually ‘dried; up’ the Euphrates River and thus
delivered the literal Jews from Babylonian captivity.
After referring to Cyrus as ‘the righteous man from the
east’ in Isa. 41:2, Isaiah speaks of him as one who would
‘dry up thy rivers’ and ‘open …the two leaved gates.’
Is. 44:27,28; 45:1.
“Historians recognize these as references to the
clever battle plan of King Cyrus to enter the city via the
water gates through the wall, after the water had been
diverted from its channel. Since the river flowed
through the midst of Babylon, this ruse was a perfect
means of access into the city while the drunken king
partied with his military leaders.” Crews, TUSU, 2.
“For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the
Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. …But ye,
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should
overtake you as a thief.
“Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us
watch and be sober. For they that sleep sleep in the
night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the
night [the night when Babylon fell].”
1 Thess.
5:2,4,6,7.
“‘If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come
on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour
I will come upon thee.’ Rev. 3:3. The advent of Christ
will surprise the false teachers. They are saying, ‘Peace
and safety.’ Like the priests and teachers before the fall
of Jerusalem, they look for the church to enjoy earthly
prosperity and glory. The signs of the times they
interpret as foreshadowing this. But what saith the word
of Inspiration? ‘Sudden destruction cometh upon
them.’ 1 Thess. 5:3. Upon all who dwell on the face of
the whole earth, upon all who make this world their
home, the day of God will come as a snare. It comes
to them as a prowling thief.
“The world, full of rioting, full of godless pleasure,
is asleep, asleep in carnal security. Men are putting afar
off the coming of the Lord. They laugh at warnings.
The proud boast is made, ‘All things continue as they
were from the beginning.’ ‘Tomorrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant.’ 2 Peter 3:4; Isa.
56:12. We will go deeper into pleasure loving. But
Christ says, ‘Behold, I come as a thief.’ Rev. 16:15. At
the very time when the world is asking in scorn, ‘Where
is the promise of His coming?’ the signs are fulfilling.
While they cry, ‘Peace and safety,’ sudden destruction
is coming. When the scorner, the rejecter of truth, has
become presumptuous; when the routine of work in the
various money-making lines is carried on without regard
to principle; when the student is eagerly seeking
knowledge of everything but his Bible, Christ comes
as a thief.” Desire of Ages, 635.

454

REVELATION 16
Herald, 11/27/1900.
“The judgment is now passing in the sanctuary
above. For many years this work has been in progress.
Soon—none know how soon—it will pass to the cases
of the living. In the awful presence of God our lives are
to come up in review. At this time above all others it
behooves every soul to heed the Saviour’s admonition:
‘Watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.’
Mark 13:33. ‘If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will
come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what
hour I will come upon thee.’ Revelation 3:3.
“When the work of the investigative judgment
closes, the destiny of all will have been decided for life
or death. Probation is ended a short time before the
appearing of the Lord in the clouds of heaven. Christ in
the Revelation, looking forward to that time, declares:
‘He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous let
him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy
still. And, behold, I come quickly; and My reward is
with Me, to give every man according as his work shall
be.’ Revelation 22:11, 12.
“The righteous and the wicked will still be living
upon the earth in their mortal state—men will be
planting and building, eating and drinking, all
unconscious that the final, irrevocable decision has been
pronounced in the sanctuary above. Before the Flood,
after Noah entered the ark, God shut him in and shut the
ungodly out; but for seven days the people, knowing not
that their doom was fixed, continued their careless,
pleasure-loving life and mocked the warnings of
impending judgment. ‘So,’ says the Saviour, ‘shall also
the coming of the Son of man be.’ Matthew 24:39.
Silently, unnoticed as the midnight thief, will come
the decisive hour which marks the fixing of every
man’s destiny, the final withdrawal of mercy's offer
to guilty men.
“‘Watch ye therefore: ...lest coming suddenly He
find you sleeping.’ Mark 13:35, 36. Perilous is the
condition of those who, growing weary of their watch,
turn to the attractions of the world. While the man of
business is absorbed in the pursuit of gain, while the
pleasure lover is seeking indulgence, while the daughter
of fashion is arranging her adornments—it may be in
that hour the Judge of all the earth will pronounce
the sentence: ‘Thou art weighed in the balances, and
art found wanting.’ Daniel 5:27.” Great Controversy,
490,491.
Blessed is He that Watcheth.—
“Jesus says, ‘Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is
he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he
walk naked, and they see his shame.’ Here is the great
burden to be carried by each one. Are my sins
forgiven? Has Christ, the burden-bearer, taken away
my guilt? Have I a clean heart, purified by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ? Woe be to any soul
who is not seeking a refuge in Christ. Woe be to all who
shall in any way divert the mind from the work, and
cause any soul to be less vigilant now.” Review &

“I was then made capable of enduring the awful
sight of the seven last plagues, the wrath of God. I saw
that His anger was dreadful and terrible, and if He
should stretch forth His hand, or lift it in anger, the
inhabitants of the world would be as though they had
never been, or would suffer from incurable sores and
withering plagues that would come upon them, and they
would find no deliverance, but be destroyed by them.
Terror seized me, and I fell upon my face before the
angel and begged of him to cause the sight to be
removed, to hide it from me, for it was too dreadful.
Then I realized, as never before, the importance of
searching the Word of God carefully, to know how to
escape the plagues which that Word declares shall
come on all the ungodly who shall worship the beast
and his image and receive his mark in their foreheads
or in their hands.” Early Writings, 64.
“Go to God for yourselves, pray for divine
enlightenment, that you may know that you do know
what is truth, that when the wonderful miracleworking power of Satan shall be displayed, and the
enemy shall come as an angel of light, you may
distinguish between the genuine work of God and the
imitative work of the powers of darkness. Ministers
may do a great work for God if Jesus abides in the heart
by faith. ‘Without me,’ says Christ, ‘ye can do
nothing.’ I would that I had the power to present before
you your sacred, solemn responsibility.” Review &
Herald, 12/24/1889.
Garments.—
“Why would this peculiar interruption take place in
the midst of a description of Armageddon? These
clothes are the garments of salvation and refer
directly to the ‘fine linen’ of that robe of
righteousness described in Revelation 19:8.” Crews,
TUSU, 2.
“And to her was granted that she should be arrayed
in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the
righteousness of saints.” Rev. 19:8.
“A decree went forth to slay the saints, which
caused them to cry day and night for deliverance. This
was the time of Jacob’s trouble. Then all the saints cried
out with anguish of spirit, and were delivered by the
voice of God. The 144,000 triumphed. Their faces were
lighted up with the glory of God. Then I was shown a
company who were howling in agony. On their
garments was written in large characters, ‘Thou art
weighed in the balance, and found wanting.’ I asked
who this company were. The angel said, ‘These are they
who have once kept the Sabbath and have given it up.’ I
heard them cry with a loud voice, ‘We have believed in
Thy coming, and taught it with energy.’ And while they
were speaking, their eyes would fall upon their garments
and see the writing, and then they would wail aloud. I

455

GEMS FROM REVELATION
saw that they had drunk of the deep waters, and fouled
the residue with their feet—trodden the Sabbath
underfoot—and that was why they were weighed in
the balance and found wanting.” Early Writings, 36.
Shame Of Nakedness.—
“[To Babylon:] Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I will take
vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.” Is. 47:3.
“…She took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and
gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.
And they eyes of them both were opened, and they knew
that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves
together, and made themselves aprons.” Gen. 2:6,7.
“And when Moses saw that the people were
naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto their
shame among their enemies.)” Exodus 32:25.
”Shall any one of us let the shame of our
nakedness appear in the use of our God-given faculties
of speech, and in the use of our pen? Shall we not
consider that Christ’s righteousness in His perfect
obedience to His Father’s commandments was the
cause of His crucifixion. By perfect obedience to the
law of Jehovah we are to magnify the law and make it
honorable.” Counsels to Writers, 100.

REVELATION 16:16
And he gathered them together into a
place called in the Hebrew tongue
Armageddon.
He Gathered Them Together.—
“The kings of the earth are united in mind and
purpose.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 845.
“They have taken crafty counsel against thy people,
and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said,
Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation;
that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
“For they have consulted together with one
consent: they are confederate against thee.” Psalm
83:3-5.
“These have one mind, and shall give their power
and strength unto the beast.”
“For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his
will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the
beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.” Rev.
17:13,17.
Into a Place.—
“This would be the ‘condition,’ or frame of
mind, into which the kings of the earth are gathered—
the compact to annihilate the people of God.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 845.

“The battle of the day of God Almighty will not be
confined to any one land in particular. The issues are
much larger than many have imagined. It is not
geographical location that the Lord is emphasizing as
much as revelation of issues at stake. The Holy Land
will be involved, because every land of earth will be a
scene for this last great struggle. ‘The Kings of the
earth and of the whole world’ (verse 14) will be
involved. It would be physically impossible to gather
all the armies of the world on one battle-field. …In
this death struggle between the combined powers of
darkness and hate and the legions of light and love, the
whole world will be the battlefield, and so terrible will
be the slaughter of that day that ‘they shall not be
lamented, neither gathered, nor buried.’ Jer. 25:33.”
Anderson, UR, 167.
“The brief period of unanimity among the
nations of the world, at which time they all agree to
destroy God’s people, will end abruptly, for God
intervenes to save His remnant people. Then, there will
be worldwide confusion and slaughter among all the
nations and peoples of the world. Of that time, the end
of Satan’s earthly kingdom, God says: ‘I will shake the
heavens and the earth; and I will overthrow
kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the
kingdom of the heathen (nations) …and the horse
and riders shall come down, every one by the sword of
his brother.’ (Haggai 2:21,22). In a number of places in
the Scriptures the same picture is presented—see Zech.
14:13; Judges 7:22; 1 Sam. 14:20; 2 Chron. 20:23; Ezek.
38:21. ‘The swords which were to slay God’s people are
now employed to destroy their enemies. Everywhere
there is strife and bloodshed….
The work of
destruction begins among those who have professed to
be the spiritual guardians of the people. The false
watchmen are the first to fall. There are none to pity or
to spare.’ (Great Controversy, 656).” Were, KTCFS,
29,30.
Armageddon.—
“In Isa. 14:13, where har-mo’ed is translated
‘mount of the congregation,’ or ‘mount of assembly,’
and designates the mountain on which Solomon’s
Temple stood, to the north of ancient Jerusalem, Lucifer
is represented as aspiring to replace God as Israel’s
sovereign ruler.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 846.
The Two Sides in the Great Battle.—
“The great conflict that Satan created in the
heavenly courts is soon, very soon, to be forever
decided. Soon all the inhabitants of the earth will
have taken sides, either for or against the government
of heaven.” 7 Testimonies, 141.
“As we approach the last crisis, it is of vital
moment that harmony and unity exist among the Lord’s
instrumentalities. The world is filled with storm and war
and variance.
Yet under one head—the papal
power—the people will unite to oppose God in the

456

REVELATION 16
person of His witnesses. This union is cemented by the
great apostate.” 7 Testimonies, 182.
“Armageddon is presented as the climactic battle of
the great controversy between the forces of good and
evil, which started in heaven and will end on earth (12:79, 12).” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 374.
“There are only two parties in our world, those
who are loyal to God, and those who stand under the
banner of the prince of darkness. Satan and his angels
will come down with power and signs and lying wonders
to deceive those who dwell on the earth, and if possible
the very elect. The crisis is right upon us. Is this to
paralyze the energies of those who have a knowledge of
the truth? Is the influence of the powers of deception so
far reaching that the influence of the truth will be
overpowered?
“The battle of Armageddon is soon to be fought.
He on whose vesture is written the name, King of kings
and Lord of lords, leads forth the armies of heaven
on white horses, clothed in fine linen, clean and
white.” (Manuscript 172, 1899). 7BC, 982.
“We need to study the pouring out of the seventh
vial. The powers of evil will not yield up the conflict
without a struggle. But Providence has a part to act in
the battle of Armageddon. When the earth is lighted
with the glory of the angel of Revelation eighteen, the
religious elements, good and evil, will awake from
slumber, and the armies of the living God will take the
field.
“Four mighty angels hold back the powers of this
earth till the servants of God are sealed in their
foreheads. The nations of the world are eager for
conflict; but they are held in check by the angels.
When this restraining power is removed, there will come
a time of trouble and anguish. Deadly instruments of
warfare will be invented. Vessels, with their living
cargo, will be entombed in the great deep. All who have
not the spirit of truth will unite under the leadership
of satanic agencies. But they are to be kept under
control till the time shall come for the great battle of
Armageddon.
“Every form of evil is to spring into intense
activity. Evil angels unite their powers with evil men,
and as they have been in constant conflict and
attained an experience in the best modes of deception
and battle, and have been strengthening for centuries,
they will not yield the last great final contest without a
desperate struggle. All the world will be on one side or
the other of the question. The battle of Armageddon
will be fought, and that day must find none of us
sleeping. Wide awake we must be, as wise virgins
having oil in our vessels with our lamps....
“The power of the Holy Ghost must be upon us,
and the Captain of the Lord’s host will stand at the head
of the angels of heaven to direct the battle.” (Manuscript
175, 1899). 7BC, 983.

“The early denominational view of Armageddon
was expressed by James White in an editorial of the
Review and Herald, January 21, 1862: ‘The great
battle is not between nation and nation; but between
earth and heaven.’” Were, KTCFS, 7.
Why the Battle?—
“The Sabbath question is to be the issue in the
great final conflict in which all the world will act a
part.” 6 Testimonies, 352.
The Battle of Armageddon: The Enemy Attack.—
“As the decree issued by the various rulers of
Christendom against commandment keepers shall
withdraw the protection of government and abandon
them to those who desire their destruction, the people
of God will flee from the cities and villages and
associate together in companies, dwelling in the most
desolate and solitary places. Many will find refuge in
the strongholds of the mountains. Like the Christians of
the Piedmont valleys, they will make the high places of
the earth their sanctuaries and will thank God for ‘the
munitions of rocks.’ Isaiah 33:16. But many of all
nations and of all classes, high and low, rich and poor,
black and white, will be cast into the most unjust and
cruel bondage. The beloved of God pass weary days,
bound in chains, shut in by prison bars, sentenced to be
slain, some apparently left to die of starvation in dark
and loathsome dungeons. No human ear is open to hear
their moans; no human hand is ready to lend them help.
“Will the Lord forget His people in this trying
hour? Did He forget faithful Noah when judgments
were visited upon the antediluvian world? Did He forget
Lot when the fire came down from heaven to consume
the cities of the plain? Did He forget Joseph surrounded
by idolaters in Egypt? Did He forget Elijah when the
oath of Jezebel threatened him with the fate of the
prophets of Baal? Did He forget Jeremiah in the dark
and dismal pit of his prison house? Did He forget the
three worthies in the fiery furnace? or Daniel in the den
of lions?
“‘Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my
Lord hath forgotten me. Can a woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet
will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon
the palms of My hands.’ Isaiah 49:14-16. The Lord
hosts has said: ‘He that toucheth you toucheth the
apple of His eye.’ Zech. 2:8.
“Though enemies may thrust them into prison, yet
dungeon walls cannot cut off the communication
between their souls and Christ. One who sees their
every weakness, who is acquainted with every trial, is
above all earthly powers; and angels will come to them
in lonely cells, bringing light and peace from heaven.
The prison will be as a palace; for the rich in faith
dwell there, and the gloomy walls will be lighted up with
heavenly light as when Paul and Silas prayed and sang
praises at midnight in the Philippian dungeon. Great
Controversy, 626,627.

457

GEMS FROM REVELATION

Angelic Forces in the Battle.—
“Yet to human sight it will appear that the people
of God must soon seal their testimony with their blood as
did the martyrs before them. They themselves begin to
fear that the Lord has left them to fall by the hand of
their enemies. It is a time of fearful agony. Day and
night they cry unto God for deliverance. The wicked
exult, and the jeering cry is heard: ‘Where now is your
faith? Why does not God deliver you out of our hands if
you are indeed His people?’ But the waiting ones
remember Jesus dying upon Calvary's cross and the
chief priests and rulers shouting in mockery: ‘He saved
others; Himself He cannot save. If He be the King of
Israel, let Him now come down from the cross, and
we will believe Him.’ Matthew 27:42. Like Jacob, all
are wrestling with God. Their countenances express
their internal struggle. Paleness sits upon every face.
Yet they cease not their earnest intercession.
“Could men see with heavenly vision, they would
behold companies of angels that excel in strength
stationed about those who have kept the word of
Christ's patience.
With sympathizing tenderness,
angels have witnessed their distress and have heard their
prayers. They are waiting the word of their Commander
to snatch them from their peril. But they must wait yet a
little longer. The people of God must drink of the cup
and be baptized with the baptism. The very delay, so
painful to them, is the best answer to their petitions. As
they endeavor to wait trustingly for the Lord to work
they are led to exercise faith, hope, and patience, which
have been too little exercised during their religious
experience. Yet for the elect’s sake the time of trouble
will be shortened. ‘Shall not God avenge His own
elect, which cry day and night unto Him? ...I tell you
that He will avenge them speedily.’ Lk. 18:7,8. The
end will come more quickly than men expect. The
wheat will be gathered and bound in sheaves for the
garner of God; the tares will be bound as fagots for the
fires of destruction.
“The heavenly sentinels, faithful to their trust,
continue their watch. Though a general decree has
fixed the time when commandment keepers may be put
to death, their enemies will in some cases anticipate the
decree, and before the time specified, will endeavor to
take their lives. But none can pass the mighty
guardians stationed about every faithful soul. Some
are assailed in their flight from the cities and villages;
but the swords raised against them break and fall
powerless as a straw. Others are defended by angels
in the form of men of war.
“In all ages, God has wrought through holy
angels for the succor and deliverance of His people.
Celestial beings have taken an active part in the
affairs of men. They have appeared clothed in garments
that shone as the lightning; they have come as men in the
garb of wayfarers. Angels have appeared in human form
to men of God. They have rested, as if weary, under the
oaks at noon. They have accepted the hospitalities of
human homes. They have acted as guides to benighted

travelers. They have, with their own hands, kindled the
fires at the altar. They have opened prison doors and set
free the servants of the Lord. Clothed with the panoply
of heaven, they came to roll away the stone from the
Saviour’s tomb.
“In the form of men, angels are often in the
assemblies of the righteous; and they visit the
assemblies of the wicked, as they went to Sodom, to
make a record of their deeds, to determine whether they
have passed the boundary of God’s forbearance. The
Lord delights in mercy; and for the sake of a few who
really serve Him, He restrains calamities and prolongs
the tranquility of multitudes. Little do sinners against
God realize that they are indebted for their own lives to
the faithful few whom they delight to ridicule and
oppress.
“Though the rulers of this world know it not, yet
often in their councils angels have been spokes-men.
Human eyes have looked upon them; human ears have
listened to their appeals; human lips have opposed their
suggestions and ridiculed their counsels; human hands
have met them with insult and abuse. In the council hall
and the court of justice these heavenly messengers have
shown an intimate acquaintance with human history;
they have proved themselves better able to plead the
cause of the oppressed than were their ablest and most
eloquent defenders. They have defeated purposes and
arrested evils that would have greatly retarded the
work of God and would have caused great suffering
to His people. In the hour of peril and distress ‘the
angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that
fear Him, and delivereth them.’ Psalm 34:7.” Great
Controversy, 630-632
Time of the Battle of Armageddon.—
“We need to study the pouring out of the seventh
vial. The powers of evil will not yield up the conflict
without a struggle. But Providence has a part to act in
the battle of Armageddon.” (Manuscript 175, 1899).
7BC, 983.
“I saw that the four angels would hold the four
winds until Jesus’ work was done in the sanctuary, and
then will come the seven last plagues. These plagues
enraged the wicked against the righteous; they thought
that we had brought the judgments of God upon
them, and that if they could rid the earth of us, the
plagues would then be stayed. A decree went forth to
slay the saints, which caused them to cry day and night
for deliverance. This was the time of Jacob’s trouble.
Then all the saints cried out with anguish of spirit,
and were delivered by the voice of God. The one
hundred and forty-four thousand triumphed. ” Life
Sketches, 117.

THE SEVENTH PLAGUE
REVELATION 16:17

458

REVELATION 16

And the seventh angel poured out his
vial into the air; and there came a great
voice out of the temple of heaven, from the
throne, saying, It is done.
The Seventh Plague.—
“The gathering of the nations has taken place under
the sixth vial, and the battle remains to be fought
under the seventh; and here are brought to view the
instrumentalities with which God will slay the wicked.
At this time it may be said, ‘The Lord hath opened his
armory, and hath brought forth the weapons of his
indignation.’ Jer. 50:25.” Smith, DR, 702.
“Babylon’s criminal career reaches a climax under
the sixth plague, whereas the sentence decreed is
executed under the seventh.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 849.
“The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through
kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among
the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.”
Psalm 110:5,6.
Into the Air.—
“Some of the plagues are local in their application,
but this one is poured out into the air. The
atmosphere envelops the whole earth, and it follows
that this plague will envelop equally the habitable
globe. It will be universal. The very air will be
deadly.” Smith, DR, 701,702.
A Great Voice Out of the Temple of Heaven.—
“The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter
His voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the
earth shall shake; but the Lord will be the hope of His
people, and the strength of the children of Israel.” Joel
3:16.
“Therefore prophesy thou against them all these
words, and say unto them, The LORD shall roar from on
high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation; he
shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he shall give a
shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the
inhabitants of the earth.
“…And the slain of the LORD shall be at that
day from one end of the earth even unto the other end
of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither
gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the
ground.” Jeremiah 25:30,33.
“Whose voice then shook the earth: but now he
hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the
earth only, but also heaven.” Hebrews 12:26.
“Soon we heard the voice of God like many
waters, which gave us the day and hour of Jesus'
coming. The living saints, 144,000 in number, knew

and understood the voice, while the wicked thought it
was thunder and an earthquake. When God spoke the
time, He poured upon us the Holy Ghost, and our
faces began to light up and shine with the glory of
God, as Moses' did when he came down from Mount
Sinai.” Early Writings, 15.
“The powers of heaven will be shaken at the
voice of God. Then the sun, moon, and stars will be
moved out of their places. They will not pass away, but
be shaken by the voice of God.” Early Writings, 41.
“I saw that God will in a wonderful manner
preserve His people through the time of trouble. As
Jesus poured out His soul in agony in the garden, they
will earnestly cry and agonize day and night for
deliverance. The decree will go forth that they must
disregard the Sabbath of the fourth commandment, and
honor the first day, or lose their lives; but they will not
yield, and trample under their feet the Sabbath of the
Lord, and honor an institution of papacy. Satan’s host
and wicked men will surround them, and exult over
them, because there will seem to be no way of escape for
them. But in the midst of their revelry and triumph,
there is heard peal upon peal of the loudest thunder. The
heavens have gathered blackness, and are only
illuminated by the blazing light and terrible glory from
heaven, as God utters His voice from His holy
habitation.
“The foundations of the earth shake; buildings
totter and fall with a terrible crash. The sea boils like
a pot, and the whole earth is in terrible commotion.
The captivity of the righteous is turned, and with sweet
and solemn whisperings they say to one another: ‘We
are delivered. It is the voice of God.’ With solemn
awe they listen to the words of the voice. The wicked
hear, but understand not the words of the voice of God.
They fear and tremble, while the saints rejoice. Satan
and his angels, and wicked men, who had been exulting
that the people of God were in their power, that they
might destroy them from off the earth, witness the glory
conferred upon those who have honored the holy law of
God. They behold the faces of the righteous lighted up
and reflecting the image of Jesus. Those who were so
eager to destroy the saints cannot endure the glory
resting upon the delivered ones, and they fall like dead
men to the earth. Satan and evil angels flee from the
presence of the saints glorified. Their power to annoy
them is gone forever.” 1 Testimonies, 353,354.
“In Isa. 30:27-31 the Lord couples up the defeat of
the Assyrian army around Jerusalem, as the Lord then
intervened on behalf of His people, with the deliverance
of God’s people in the last days when ‘the Lord shall
cause His glorious voice to be heard, and shall shew
the lighting down of His arm, with the indignation of
His anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire,
with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones. For
through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be
beaten down.’ This is the passage of Scripture which

459

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the Lord’s servant employs when depicting the
deliverance of God’s people by the voice of God at the
opening of the 7th plague.” Were, WATB, 84.
It is Done.—
“In the context of Rev. 16:17 the dramatic
announcement marks the moment when the revelation of
the mystery of iniquity is complete, when the true
character of the universal religio-political union of vs.
13,14,19, is unmasked.
“God permits the forces of evil to advance to the
point of apparent success in their sinister design to
eradicate the people of God. As the moment appointed
in the death decree arrives and the wicked rush forward
with shouts of triumph to annihilate the saints (Great
Controversy, 631,635; Early Writings, 283,285), the
voice of God is heard declaring, ‘It is done.’ This
declaration terminates the time of Jacob’s trouble,
delivers the saints, and ushers in the seventh plague
(Early Writings, 36,37,282-285; Great Controversy,
635,636; 1 Testimonies, 353,354.)”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 846,847.
“Four [times] …this is pronounced.
“1. On Calvary when Christ’s atoning sacrifice
was made.
“2. When probation closes.
“3. When the seventh plague is poured and the
wrath of God is ‘filled up’ or finished.
“4. When every trace of sin gives place to a
renewed heaven and earth.” Burnside, RWU, 227.

REVELATION 16:18
And there were voices, and thunders,
and lightnings; and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were
upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake,
and so great.
Thunders and Lightnings.—
“As God spoke the day and the hour of Jesus’
coming and delivered the everlasting covenant to His
people, He spoke one sentence, and then paused, while
the words were rolling through the earth. The Israel of
God stood with their eyes fixed upward, listening to
the words as they came from the mouth of Jehovah
and rolled through the earth like peals of loudest
thunder. It was awfully solemn. At the end of every
sentence the saints shouted, ‘Glory! Hallelujah!’ Their
countenances were lighted up with the glory of God, and
they shone with glory as did the face of Moses when he
came down from Sinai. The wicked could not look upon
them for the glory. And when the never-ending
blessing was pronounced on those who had honored
God in keeping His Sabbath holy, there was a mighty
shout of victory over the beast and over his image.”
Early Writings, 285.

““When we read Ezekiel’s vision of the throne, it is
significant to notice how he described the movements of
the angelic beings, who are the messengers of Jehovah.
…Ezekiel says:
“ ‘And the fire was bright, and out of the fire went
forth lightning. The living creatures ran and returned
as the appearance of a flash of lightning.’” Ezekiel
1:13,14.
“ ‘And when they went, I heard the noise of their
wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of
the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an
host: when they stood, they let down their wings.’
Ezek. 1:24.
“What a sensational experience!
“ ‘And the sound of the cherubims’ wings was
heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the
Almighty God when he speaketh.’ Ezek. 10:5.
“As these mighty beings take off, like a flash of
lightning from the throne and return, there is a sound
like thunder. We could have a little whisper of this
when we recall the big military air bases and the taking
off of powerful fighter aircraft. But what a contrast to
the throne of God, the center of the universe, a place of
tremendous activity. As the messengers of God at the
behest of the Infinite, flash their way to and from the
throne to the vast universe, ‘there proceed lightnings
and thunderings and voices.’ We suggest this is what
the apostle is describing when he gazes at the activity
and atmosphere of the throne.” Cooke, #7-UR, 11,12.
A Great Earthquake Such As Was Not Since Men Were
Upon the Earth.—
“This great earthquake takes place in connection
with the return of Christ as is described in many other
Scriptures. See Isa. 2:19-21; Jer. 4:24-27; Eze. 38:19,20;
Hag. 2:6,7. It will be the climax of a series of
earthquake shocks of increasing severity that will be
harbingers of the day of God. Jesus declared that ‘great
earthquakes’ in ‘divers places’ would be signs of His
second advent. See Matt. 24:3-7; Luke 21:10,11,25-28.
This quake that shakes the earth from pole to pole as
Christ approaches the earth with His angelic host,
will leave the cities of the earth in ruins and the whole
land desolate.” Bunch, TR, 233.
“That voice shakes the heavens and the earth.
There is a mighty earthquake, ‘such as was not since
men were upon the earth, so mighty an earth-quake,
and so great.’ Verses 17, 18. The firmament appears to
open and shut. The glory from the throne of God seems
flashing through. The mountains shake like a reed in
the wind, and ragged rocks are scattered on every
side. There is a roar as of a coming tempest. The sea is
lashed into fury. There is heard the shriek of a hurricane
like the voice of demons upon a mission of destruction.
The whole earth heaves and swells like the waves of
the sea. Its surface is breaking up. Its very foundations
seem to be giving way. Mountain chains are sinking.
Inhabited islands disappear. The seaports that have

460

REVELATION 16
become like Sodom for wickedness are swallowed up by
the angry waters. Babylon the great has come in
remembrance before God, ‘to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of His wrath.’” Great
Controversy, 636,637.
“The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt,
and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world,
and all that dwell therein.
“Who can stand before his indignation? and who
can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is
poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by
him.
“The LORD is good, a strong hold in the day of
trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.”
Nahum 1:5-7.
“This will be the greatest earthquake of all time and
corresponds to the second earthquake of the sixth
seal of Revelation 6:14: ‘And every mountain and
island were moved out of their places.” Cooke, #25UR, 25.

REVELATION 16:19,20
And the great city was divided into
three parts, and the cities of the nations fell:
and great Babylon came in remembrance
before God, to give unto her the cup of the
wine of the fierceness of his wrath.
And every island fled away, and the
mountains were not found.
The Great City Was Divided Into Three Parts.—
“Though the account of the judgment upon
Babylon in Rev. 18 speaks of Babylon as if she were one
city, yet we learn from Rev. 16:19 that Babylon will be
divided into three parts before she receives her
punishment. This seems to indicate that these three
parts are not alike guilty, and that God makes this
division that he may punish each part according to
the light which it has had, and the crimes which it has
committed. It is therefore not unreasonable to conclude
that Babylon is now composed of three grand sections,
which are culpable in different degrees, and that God
will judge each according to its deserts.” Andrews,
TAM, 71.
“Three unclean spirits like frogs came out of the
mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast,
and out of the mouth of the false prophet.” Rev. 16:13.
“We should notice that these ‘three unclean spirits’
go to the kings of the earth,’ and we also saw that
spiritual Babylon would ‘commit fornication’ with the
‘kings of the earth.’ Since both the ‘three unclean
spirits’ and spiritual Babylon go to the ‘kings of the
earth,’ we must conclude that these two concepts are

synonymous; as a city with ‘three parts,’ spiritual
Babylon would therefore consist of these ‘three unclean
spirits.’ Going a step further, the passage above states
that the ‘three unclean spirits’ consist of the ‘dragon,’ the
‘beast,’ and the ‘false prophet.’” Swearingen, TOOTN,
80.
“The great city, Babylon, is spoken of as
composed of three divisions. So the great religions of
the world may be arranged under three heads. The first,
oldest, and most widespread is paganism, separately
symbolized under the form of a dragon; the second is the
great Romish apostasy, symbolized by the beast; and
the third is the daughters, or descendants from that
church. Under this head comes the two-horned beast,
though that does not embrace it all. War, oppression,
conformity to the world, the worship of mammon, the
creed-power, pursuit of pleasure, and the maintenance of
very many errors of the old Romish Church, identify,
with sad and faithful accuracy, the great body of the
Protestant churches as an important constituent part of
this great Babylon.” Smith, DR (1897), 488.
“Mystical Babylon of the last days is composed of
the papacy, apostate Protestantism, and modern
spiritism. At the voice of God this three-fold union of
apostate religious organizations loses its cohesion, unity,
and power to act.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 847.
(See Rev. 16:13 for more comments on the three
parts of the city of Babylon.)
Cities of the Nations.—
“As city denoted the papal power and religion,
so does cities represent the power and religion of all
other nations. Therefore all the power, and all
national religion, will fall in and under this vial, and the
anti-Christian power will be judged; all their sins, cruel
persecutions, and bloody deeds, will be brought into
judgment into remembrance before God, and he will fill
to her the cup which she has made others drink, and she
in her turn must drink the dregs.” Miller, Evidence, 228.
“John now refers to the political organizations of
earth—represented in vs. 13, 14 as ‘the kings of the
earth’—by a similar figure.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
847.
Cities of the Nations Fell.—
“The political forces of earth also lose the state
of unity of purpose to which they were gathered
under the sixth plague. …There is a terrible awakening
among them as God’s voice delivers His waiting people
from their foes…. Now, the erstwhile components of the
universal religio-political combine of ch. 16:13,14 begin
to fight among themselves, and the ‘the ten kings’ of
ch. 17:12-16 take revenge upon mystical Babylon….
Filled with fury, the hosts of earth turn upon their leaders
and upon one another the weapons with which they had
purposed to slay the saints. There is strife and bloodshed

461

GEMS FROM REVELATION
everywhere; the world is verily deluged with blood.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 847.
“The whole earth heaves and swells like the waves
of the sea. Its surface is breaking up. Its very
foundations seem to be giving way. Mountain chains are
sinking. Inhabited islands disappear. The seaports that
have become like Sodom for wickedness are
swallowed up by the angry waters. Babylon the great
has come in remembrance before God, ‘to give unto her
the cup of the wine of the fierceness of His wrath.’
Great hailstones, every one ‘about the weight of a
talent,’ are doing their work of destruction. Verses 19,
21. The proudest cities of the earth are laid low. The
lordly palaces, upon which the world’s great men
have lavished their wealth in order to glorify
themselves, are crumbling to ruin before their eyes.”
Great Controversy, 636.
“The earth looked like a desolate wilderness. Cities
and villages, shaken down by the earthquake, lay in
heaps.” Early Writings, 290.
Came in Remembrance.—
“This is a common Biblical expression denoting the
arrival of the hour when divine judgment is to be
meted out.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 847.
“Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered
with the LORD; and let not the sin of his mother be
blotted out.” Psalm 109:14.
“Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye
have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that
your transgressions are discovered, so that in all your
doings your sins do appear; because, I say, that ye are
come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the
hand.” Ezekiel 21:24.
The Cup.—
“A common Biblical expression denoting suffering
and judgments meted out.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
847.
“Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the
portion of their cup.” Psalm 11:6.
“For thus saith the LORD God of Israel unto me;
Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause
all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it. And
they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of
the sword that I will send among them. Then took I the
cup at the LORD’s hand, and made all the nations to
drink, unto whom the LORD had sent me. …And it
shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to
drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the
LORD of hosts; Ye shall certainly drink.” Jer. 25:1517,28.
“Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast

drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou
hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and
wrung them out.” Isaiah 51:17.
Great Babylon Came in Remembrance Before God, to
Give Unto Her the Cup of His Wrath.—
“The Armageddon prophecy is located in the unit
of the seven last plagues (Rev. 16), after the description
of the sixth plague (vs.16). The actual battle is not
described in verse 16. It will take place consequently
during the seventh plague. Surprisingly, the final, or
seventh, plague describes the terrifying events in nature
that will accompany the second advent of Christ, with
this clarification: ‘God remembered Babylon the Great
and gave her the cup filled with the wine of the fury of
his wrath.’ (16:19).
“The battle of Armageddon and the destruction
of universal Babylon, therefore, coincide. These
cannot be divorced from each other. Armageddon is
explained within Revelation 16 as the divine judgment
and destruction of Babylon.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 375.
“And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that
with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule
them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the wine-press
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.”
Revelation 19:15.
Every Island Fled Away, Mountains Not Found.—
“The whole earth heaves and swells like the waves
of the sea. Its surface is breaking up. Its very
foundations seem to be giving way. Mountain chains
are sinking. Inhabited islands disappear. The
seaports that have become like Sodom for wickedness
are swallowed up by the angry waters. Babylon the
great has come in remembrance before God, ‘to give
unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of His
wrath.’” Great Controversy, 636,637.
“The earth looked like a desolate wilderness. Cities
and villages, shaken down by the earthquake, lay in
heaps. Mountains had been moved out of their
places, leaving large caverns. Ragged rocks, thrown
out by the sea, or torn out of the earth itself, were
scattered all over its surface. Large trees had been
uprooted and were strewn over the land.” Early
Writings, 290.
“God is our refuge and strength, a very present help
in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth
be removed, and though the mountains be carried into
the midst of the sea; though the waters thereof roar and
be troubled, though the mountains shake with the
swelling thereof.” Psalm 46:1-3.

REVELATION 16:21
And there fell upon men a great hail out

462

REVELATION 16

of heaven, every stone about the weight of a
talent: and men blasphemed God because of
the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof
was exceeding great.
A Great Hail.—
“This is the last instrumentality used in the
infliction of punishment upon the wicked, the bitter
dregs of the seventh vial. God has solemnly addressed
the wicked, saying, ‘Judgment also will I lay to the
line, and righteousness to the plummet; and the hail
shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters
shall overflow the hiding-place.’ Isa.28:17. (See also
Isa.30:30.) And he asks Job if he has seen the treasures
of the hail, which he has ‘reserved against the time of
trouble, against the day of battle and war.’ Job
38:22,23.” Smith, DR, 702.
“At His own will God summons the forces of
nature to overthrow the might of His enemies—‘fire,
and hail; snow, and vapor; stormy wind fulfilling His
word.’ Psalm 148:8. When the heathen Amorites had
set themselves to resist His purposes, God interposed,
casting down ‘great stones from heaven’ upon the
enemies of Israel. [Joshua 10:11.] We are told of a
greater battle to take place in the closing scenes of
earth’s history, when ‘Jehovah hath opened His
armory, and hath brought forth the weapons of His
indignation.’ Jeremiah 50:25.
‘Hast thou,’ he
inquires, ‘entered into the treasures of the snow? or
hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I have
reserved against the time of trouble, against the day
of battle and war?’ Job 38:22, 23.
“The revelator describes the destruction that is to
take place when the ‘great voice out of the temple of
heaven’ announces, ‘It is done.’ He says, ‘There fell
upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a talent.’ Rev. 16:17, 21.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 509.
“Say unto them which daub it with untempered
morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing
shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a
stormy wind shall rend it.” Ezekiel 13:11.
“And I will plead against him with pestilence and
with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his
bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an
overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and
brimstone.” Ezekiel 38:22.
People Stoned for Idolatry, Rebellion.—
“Old Testament law required persons convicted of
notorious idolatry, adultery, blasphemy, or stubborn
rebellion to be stoned to death. The stoning was done by
the entire community, indicating everyone’s abhorrence
of the great crime. See Deuteronomy 13:2-11; 21:18-21;
22:23,24; Leviticus 24:16. Under the seventh plague
the people who have worshiped the beast,
blasphemed God, and refused to repent are hail-

stoned to death while heavenly voices approve.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 432.
Every Stone the Weight of a Talent.—
“Probably about 66 pounds in weight.”
Bible Commentary, 848.

7SDA

“According to various authorities, a talent as a
weight is about fifty-seven pounds avoirdupois. What
could withstand the force of stones of such an enormous
weight falling from heaven? But mankind, at this time,
will have no shelter. The cities have fallen in a mighty
earthquake, the islands have fled away, and the
mountains are not found. Again the wicked give vent to
their woe in blasphemy; for the plague of the hail is
‘exceeding great.’
“Some faint idea of the terrible effect of such a
scene as is here predicted, may be inferred from the
following sketch of a hailstorm on the Bosporus, by
Commodore Porter:
“‘We had got perhaps a mile and a half on our way,
when a cloud rising in the west gave indications of
approaching rain. In a few minutes we discovered
something falling from the heavens with a heavy splash,
and with a whitish appearance. I could not conceive
what it was, but observing some gulls near, I supposed it
to be them darting for fish, but soon after discovered that
they were large balls of ice falling. Immediately we
heard a sound like rumbling thunder, or ten
thousand carriages rolling furiously over the
pavement. The whole Bosporus was in a foam, as
though heaven’s artillery had been charged upon us
and our frail machine. Our fate seemed inevitable; our
umbrellas were raised to protect us, but the lumps of ice
stripped them into ribbons. We fortunately had a
bullock’s hide in the boat, under which we crawled, and
saved ourselves from further injury. One man of the
three oarsmen had his hand literally smashed;
another was much injured in the shoulder; Mr. H.
received a blow in the leg; my right hand was somewhat
disabled, and all were more or less injured….
“ ‘It was the most awful and terrific scene I ever
witnessed, and God forbid that I should ever be exposed
to another! Balls of ice as large as my two fists fell
into the boat, and some of them fell with such
violence as certainly to have broken an arm or leg
had they struck us in those parts. One of them struck
the blade of an oar, and split it. The scene lasted perhaps
five minutes; but it was five minutes of the most awful
feelings I ever experienced. When it passed over, we
found the surrounding hills covered with masses of ice, I
cannot call it hail, the trees stripped of their leaves and
limbs, and everything looking desolate.
“‘The scene was awful beyond all description. I
have witnessed repeated earthquakes; the lightning has
played, as it were, about my head; the wind has roared,
and the waves at one moment have thrown me to the sky,
and the next have sunk me into a deep abyss. I have
been in action, and have seen death and destruction
around me in every shape of horror; but I never before

463

GEMS FROM REVELATION
had the feeling of awe which seized me on this
occasion, and still haunts, and I fear forever will
haunt me. …My porter, the boldest of my family, who
had ventured an instant from the door, had been knocked
down by a hailstone, and had they not dragged him in by
the heels, would have been battered to death. …Two
boatmen were killed in the upper part of the village, and
I have heard of broken bones in abundance. Imagine to
yourself the heavens suddenly frozen over, and as
suddenly broken to pieces in irregular masses of from
half a pound to a pound weight, and precipitated to the
earth.’ Letters from Constantinople and its Environs,
Vol. I, p.44.
“Reader, if such were the desolating effects of a
hailstorm of ice, which discharged stones the size of a
man’s fist, weighing at most a pound or so, who can
depict the consequences of that coming storm in
which ‘EVERY STONE’ shall be of the weight of a
talent? As surely as God’s word is truth, He is thus
soon to punish a guilty world. May it be ours,
according to the promise, to have ‘sure dwellings’
and ‘quiet resting-places’ in that terrific hour.
Isa.32:18, 19.” Smith, DR, 703-704.
“In 1914 two missionaries reported hailstones in
China weighing ten pounds each. Hailstones 17 inches
in circumference or ‘as large as grapefruits’ fell at Potter,
Nebraska, July 6, 1928. They were very destructive. A
hailstorm took place at Theodore, Saskatchewan, in
1930, when stones the size of grapefruits and larger fell
and did great damage. They went through roofs, killed
and wounded many cattle and other animals, and
wounded many persons. One stone fell and buried
itself in the earth. When dug up and weighed, it was
found to weigh 120 pounds. In February, 1936,
hailstones as large as coconuts brought death to 26
natives near Settlers in Transvaal, South Africa. Is it
any wonder that the earth is left in a chaotic state by
this terrific storm and earthquake?” Bunch, TR, 234.
Seventh Plague Similar to Egypt.—
“Accompanying the hail will be an electric storm
similar to that with the plague in Egypt….” Bunch,
TR, 234.
Men Blasphemed God.—
“For the third time those upon whom the
plagues fall curse God, thus revealing their utter
contempt for Him, even in the midst of His most
grievous judgments.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 848.
“It is impossible to describe the horror and
despair of those who have trampled upon God's holy
requirements. The Lord gave them His law; they might
have compared their characters with it and learned their

defects while there was yet opportunity for repentance
and reform; but in order to secure the favor of the world,
they set aside its precepts and taught others to transgress.
They have endeavored to compel God's people to
profane His Sabbath. Now they are condemned by that
law which they have despised. With awful distinctness
they see that they are without excuse. They chose whom
they would serve and worship. ‘Then shall ye return,
and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serveth God and him that serveth
Him not.’ Mal. 3:18.
“The enemies of God’s law, from the ministers
down to the least among them, have a new conception of
truth and duty. Too late they see that the Sabbath of the
fourth commandment is the seal of the living God. Too
late they see the true nature of their spurious sabbath and
the sandy foundation upon which they have been
building. They find that they have been fighting against
God. Religious teachers have led souls to perdition
while professing to guide them to the gates of Paradise.
Not until the day of final accounts will it be known how
great is the responsibility of men in holy office and how
terrible are the results of their unfaithfulness. Only in
eternity can we rightly estimate the loss of a single soul.
Fearful will be the doom of him to whom God shall say:
Depart, thou wicked servant.
“The voice of God is heard from heaven,
declaring the day and hour of Jesus’ coming, and
delivering the everlasting covenant to His people.
Like peals of loudest thunder His words roll through the
earth. The Israel of God stand listening, with their eyes
fixed upward. Their countenances are lighted up with
His glory, and shine as did the face of Moses when he
came down from Sinai. The wicked cannot look upon
them. And when the blessing is pronounced on those
who have honored God by keeping His Sabbath holy,
there is a mighty shout of victory.”
Great
Controversy, 639-640.
The Plague Was Exceeding Great. The Result of the
Battle of Armageddon.—
“My attention was again directed to the earth. The
wicked had been destroyed, and their dead bodies
were lying upon its surface. The wrath of God in the
seven last plagues had been visited upon the inhabitants
of the earth, causing them to gnaw their tongues from
pain and to curse God. The false shepherds had been the
signal objects of Jehovah’s wrath. Their eyes had
consumed away in their holes, and their tongues in
their mouths, while they stood upon their feet. After
the saints had been delivered by the voice of God, the
wicked multitude turned their rage upon one another.
The earth seemed to be deluged with blood, and dead
bodies were from one end of it to the other.” Early
Writings, 289.

464

From Mason, KONAS, 24.

465

REVELATION 17

GEMS FROM REVELATION

CHART OF THE BEAST CONDITIONS

466

REVELATION 17

REVELATION 17:1-18
1 And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven
vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew
unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many
waters:
2 With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication,
and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the
wine of her fornication.
3 So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I
saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.
4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and
decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden
cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
fornication:
5 And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY,
BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints,
and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I
wondered with great admiration.
7 And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marvel? I
will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that
carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns.
8 The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend
out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell
on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the
book of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the
beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
9 And here is the mind which hath wisdom. The seven heads are
seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth.
10 And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the
other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a

short space.
11 And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and
is of the seven, and goeth into perdition.
12 And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which
have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one
hour with the beast.
13 These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength
unto the beast.
14 These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall
overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and
they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.
15 And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where
the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and
tongues.
16 And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these
shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.
17 For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to
agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of
God shall be fulfilled.
18 And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which
reigneth over the kings of the earth.

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 17.—

“Revelation 17-18 are a further elaboration of the
sixth and seventh plagues.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 154.
“Chapter 17 consists of two distinct parts: (1) the
symbolic vision of vs. 3-6, which John saw, and (2)

467

GEMS FROM REVELATION
what he was told (vs.7) in explanation of it as record
in vs.8-18. Part one set forth the crimes of Babylon,
and thus constitutes Heaven’s bill of indict-ment, a
declaration of why the divine sentence is to be
pronounced upon her. Part two sets forth the sentence
itself and the means by which it is to be executed.
Babylon’s criminal career reaches a climax under the
sixth plague, whereas the sentence decreed is executed
under the seventh. Accordingly, part one is concerned
most particularly with events under the sixth plague, and
part two with those under the seventh. Thus ch. 17 is a
delineation of the final crisis, when Satan puts forth
his supreme effort to annihilate God’s people and
when all the powers of earth are arrayed against
them. God permits Satan and the human agencies allied
with him to carry forward to the verge of success their
plot to annihilate the saints. But at the moment the blow
is to be struck God intervenes to deliver His people.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 849.
“An antithetical parallelism exists between the
angelic explanations of the judgment of Babylon, the
harlot (17:1-19:10) and of the descent from heaven of
the Holy City, Jerusalem, the wife of the Lamb (21:922:5). Significantly, each explanatory discourse is
given by one of the bowl angels (of Revelation 16).”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 145.
“Revelation 17, 18, and the first ten verses of
chapter 19 (that is, Revelation 17:1 to 19:10) make up
the division we have called ‘The Fall of Babylon.’
…Our present division (17:1 to 19:10) …stands in
striking relationship with the final division of the book
(21:9 to 22:9), the one about the Lamb’s bride, the holy
city New Jerusalem.
“…The two divisions about the harlot city and
the holy city begin and end alike. In each case, a
plague angel begins the division by inviting John to
come and see something—either Babylon (the great city,
the harlot) or New Jerusalem (the holy city, the Lamb’s
bride). In each case, when the angel has shown John
what he has to show him, John is momentarily
overwhelmed and gratefully attempts to worship the
angel. The angel, of course, reminds John that he is an
angel and that we should worship only God.
“Each angel tells John about the cities
themselves and about their relationships with ‘kings’
and ‘nations.’ There is, however, a noteworthy
contrast. Babylon, says the first angel, has become full
of demons and impurity and sits on waters that represent
the sea of humanity. Kings and nations drink her wine,
commit immorality with her, reign with her, then hate
and make war with her, and finally weep while she
burns.
“On the other hand, nothing impure or unclean
enter New Jerusalem. The river of life flows from her.
Kings and nations drink her living water, eat the fruit of
her tree of life, and bring in through her open gates their
glory and honor.” Maxwell, God Cares, 453.

“It [Rev. 17] was given to reveal vital
information for the Lord’s loyal people, information
concerning their perilous plight when ‘the great whore’
becomes the mistress of the governments of earth, and
when the populace give their assent to this unholy union.
“…It is also written in order to encourage God’s
people with the knowledge that the Lord has taken
full cognizance of the fury of her wrath against His
people and thus find comfort in knowing that the Lord
will deal with her and bring deliverance to His oppressed
people.” Were, WATB, 79,81.
“God makes a distinction between church systems
and the people that are members of these systems. If the
system is corporately in open violation of the ten
commandments, then God is no longer directing that
church system. But God still has many of His people in
those fallen systems who are ignorant of what their
church teaches and does. In His great love He calls them
out of these systems. This is the message of the Second
Angel’s message of Rev. 14:8 and 18:1-4.” PJ.

THE WOMAN AND THE BEAST
REVELATION 17:1,2
And there came one of the seven angels
which had the seven vials, and talked with
me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will
shew unto thee the judgment of the great
whore that sitteth upon many waters:
With whom the kings of the earth have
committed fornication, and the inhabitants
of the earth have been made drunk with the
wine of her fornication.
One of the Seven Angels.—
“The identification of this angel as one of the seven
plague-bearing angels of chs. 15 and 16 implies that the
information about to be imparted to John is related
to the seven last plagues.
This relationship is
confirmed by the fact that the announced topic of this
chapter—‘the judgment of the great whore’—takes
place under the seventh plague.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 849.
“The purpose of this vision is announced by one of
the plague-angels which was doubtless the seventh.
In a special sense the seventh and last plague is a
manifestation of the unmingled wrath of God upon
Babylon the Great.” Bunch, TR, 236.
Come Hither; I Will Shew Thee the Judgment.—
“In Revelation 21:9,10 an angel invited John to
watch the holy city come down from heaven. This
invitation certainly carried John’s mind forward to the

468

REVELATION 17
end of the millennium. Similarly, at the beginning of
Revelation 17 …an angel gave John an invitation to
come and see the ‘judgment’ of the great harlot. This
invitation drew his mind forward to the beginning of
the end time….
“So shouldn’t Revelation 17 be interpreted from
the viewpoint of 1798/1844 and later, the era of the
judgment and the end time? This is the time frame for
the judgment scene in Daniel 7, the opening of the little
scroll in Revelation 10, and the preaching of the first
angel’s message of Revelation 14:6,7, ‘The hour of his
judgment has come.’” Maxwell, God Cares, 473.
“At times I am carried far ahead into the future
and shown what is to take place.” Spiritual Gifts, vol.
2, 292.
Whore.—
“A pure woman represents the church of Christ; a
prostitute represents this church when it turns from
its lawful husband, and commits adultery with the
kings of the earth.” Haskell, SSP, 291.
“According to scripture, there are three ways by
which a church can be guilty of spiritual fornication or
whoredom.
“1. By the practice of idolatry, which is spiritual
unfaithfulness to Christ. ‘Thou hast made to thyself
images of men [idols] and did commit whoredom
[fornication] with them.’ (Ezek. 16:17). By the practice
of idolatry ancient Israel was unfaithful to God. ‘She
committed adultery with sticks and stones.’ (Jer.
3:6,9.)
“2. By the church becoming friendly with the
degenerate world. ‘Ye adulterers and adulteresses,
know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity
with God?’ (James 4:4).
“3. By the union of church and state. Fornication is
illicit union, and when the rulers, or civil powers of the
state unite with the church or support the church, it is an
unlawful union. It is spiritual fornication in the sight of
God. According to scripture, the spiritual husband of
the church is Jesus Christ; therefore if a church
unites with or receives favors of one who is not her
husband, she commits spiritual adultery. The kings
or rulers, who are involved in this practice, are also
guilty of spiritual adultery with the harlot church.”
Cooke, #29-UR, 14.
“There are two kinds of women in the world.
There are two kinds of churches. Rev. 2:9. Satan has a
church—‘a congregation of Satan.’ (TCNT).
“2 Cor. 11:13-15. Satan has ministers, ‘deceitful.’
They profess to be disciples of Jesus.” Burnside, RWU,
196.
The Great Whore.—
“In Revelation 17 Babylon is represented as a
woman—a figure which is used in the Bible as the
symbol of a church, a virtuous woman representing a

pure church, a vile woman an apostate church.
“In the Bible the sacred and enduring character of
the relation that exists between Christ and His church is
represented by the union of marriage. The Lord has
joined His people to Himself by a solemn covenant, He
promising to be their God, and they pledging themselves
to be His and His alone. He declares: ‘I will betroth
thee unto Me forever; yea, I will betroth thee unto
Me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in lovingkindness, and in mercies.’ Hosea 2:19. And, again: ‘I
am married unto you.’ Jeremiah 3:14. And Paul
employs the same figure in the New Testament when he
says: ‘I have espoused you to one husband, that I may
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.’ 2
Corinthians 11:2.
“The unfaithfulness of the church to Christ in
permitting her confidence and affection to be turned
from Him, and allowing the love of worldly things to
occupy the soul, is likened to the violation of the
marriage vow. The sin of Israel in departing from the
Lord is presented under this figure; and the wonderful
love of God which they thus despised is touchingly
portrayed: ‘I sware unto thee, and entered into a
covenant with thee, saith the Lord God, and thou
becamest Mine.’ ‘And thou wast exceeding beautiful
and thou didst prosper into a kingdom. And thy renown
went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was
perfect through My comeliness, which I had put upon
thee.... But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and
playedst the harlot because of thy renown.’ ‘As a
wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so
have ye dealt treacherously with Me, O house of
Israel, saith the Lord;’ ‘as a wife that committeth
adultery, which taketh strangers instead of her
husband!’ Ezekiel 16:8, 13-15, 32; Jeremiah 3:20.
“In the New Testament, language very similar is
addressed to professed Christians who seek the
friendship of the world above the favor of God. Says the
apostle James: ‘Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know
ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with
God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the
world is the enemy of God.’
“The woman (Babylon) of Revelation 17 is
described as ‘arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and
decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having
a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and
filthiness:...and upon her forehead was a name written,
Mystery, Babylon the Great, the mother of harlots.’
Says the prophet: ‘I saw the woman drunk with the
blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of
Jesus.’ Babylon is further declared to be ‘that great city,
which reigneth over the kings of the earth.’ Revelation
17:4-6,18. The power that for so many centuries
maintained despotic sway over the monarchs of
Christendom is Rome. The purple and scarlet color, the
gold and precious stones and pearls, vividly picture the
magnificence and more than kingly pomp affected by
the haughty see of Rome. And no other power could be
so truly declared ‘drunken with the blood of the saints’
as that church which has so cruelly persecuted the

469

GEMS FROM REVELATION
followers of Christ. Babylon is also charged with the sin
of unlawful connection with ‘the kings of the earth.’
It was by departure from the Lord, and alliance with the
heathen, that the Jewish church became a harlot; and
Rome, corrupting herself in like manner by seeking
the support of worldly powers, receives a like
condemnation.” Great Controversy, 381,382.
“That this apostate woman, as presented in this
chapter, is a symbol of the Roman Catholic Church, is
generally believed by Protestants. Between this church
and the kings of the earth there has been illicit
connection. With the wine of her fornication, or her
false doctrines, the inhabitants of the earth have been
made drunk.” Smith, DR, 707.
“The harlot of Babylon, described in Rev. 17, is set
forth in contrast to the bride of Christ, described in Rev.
12.
In Rev. 12:17 this ‘woman’ obeys the
Commandments of God and has the testimony of Jesus
Christ. Thus, by the principle of contrasts, we know
that ‘the great whore’, while professing to be the
bride of Christ, does not keep the Commandments of
God and does not have the testimony of Jesus Christ;
on the contrary, she persecutes those who do obey God
and thus bears evidence that she is led by Satan into
hatred for Christ and His people.” Were, WATB, 53.
The Judgment of the Great Whore.—
“In verse 19 of the preceding chapter, we were
informed that ‘great Babylon came in remembrance
before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of
the fierceness of His wrath.’ The prophet now takes up
more particularly the subject of this great Babylon.”
Smith, DR, 707.
“In a special sense the seventh and last plague is a
manifestation of the unmingled wrath of God upon
Babylon the Great.” Bunch, TR, 236.
Two Reasons For the Judgment.—
“1) She committed fornication with ‘Kings of the
Earth’—union of Church and State. She sits on the
beast—the state—and she is upheld and supported by the
state.
2) She made the nations drink of her
‘maddening wine.’ (Rev. 14:8). Her false teachings that
have deceived and intoxicated the nations.” Burnside,
RWU, 192.
Many Waters.—
“And he saith unto me, The waters which thou
sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues.” Rev. 17:15.
“O thou that dwellest upon many waters,
abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the
measure of thy covetousness.” Jeremiah 51:13.
“Woe to the multitude of many people, which make
a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of

nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of
mighty waters!
“The nations shall rush like the rushing of many
waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee
far off…..” Isaiah 17:12,13.
That Sitteth Upon Many Waters.—
“That is, exercising despotic power over many
‘peoples’ and ‘nations.’
…Modern Babylon is
represented as sitting upon, or oppressing, the peoples
of earth.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 850.
With Whom the Kings of the Earth Have Committed
Fornication.—
“The unfaithfulness of the church to Christ in
permitting her confidence and affection to be turned
from Him, and allowing the love of worldly things to
occupy the soul, is likened to the violation of the
marriage vow.
“…Babylon is also charged with the sin of
unlawful connection with ‘the kings of the earth.’ It
was by departure from the Lord, and alliance with
the heathen, that the Jewish church became a harlot;
and Rome, corrupting herself in like manner by
seeking the support of worldly powers, receives a like
condemnation.” Great Controversy, 381,382.
“This expression is equivalent to ‘gone a whoring’
in the OT (cf. Eze. 23:30; Hosea 4:12).
Used
figuratively, as here, it refers to an illicit alliance of
professed Christians with some master other than Christ,
in this instance to a religio-political compact between
an apostate church and the nations of earth.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 850.
“My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their
staff declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms
hath caused them to err, and they have gone a
whoring from under their God.” Hosea 4:12.
“Fornication is a form of false affection which
prostitutes the body to alien purposes. Likewise the
alienation of the heart’s affections and allegiance from
Christ is a violation of the most sacred ties that bind a
Christian to Him. Since the union between the
Christian and his Master is represented by marriage,
the breaking of that tie through apostasy is
appropriately called spiritual fornication. Idolatry
and false worship have always been designated harlotry.
It includes every form of idolatry or creature worship.
Even friendship with the world is called adultery in
James 4:4.” Bunch, TR, 236.
“The symbolic concept of ‘fornication’ comes
from Ezekiel 16. There Israel, God’s people in Old
Testament times, was likened to a poor woman whom
God made beautiful and then graciously married. But
Israel faithlessly committed ‘immorality’ with her
idolatrous neighbor nations. She eagerly adopted their
paganism, made mutual-aid treaties with them, and,

470

REVELATION 17
like them, oppressed God’s faithful followers.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 458.
“And the kings of the earth, who have committed
fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail
her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of
her burning.” Revelation 18:9.
“The first love was lost, and that made it easy to
commit fornication. The church tolerated those who
held false doctrines, and certain sects of philosophers
who applied the reason of the Greeks to the study of
God’s Word. The simplicity of early days was
changed for worldly habits, teachings, and ways of
living. The inward change may be read in the outward
manifestations in the churches of Per-gamos and
Thyatira. Paganism walked bodily into the church, and
the leader of Paganism claimed the once pure church as
his bride. A false spirit of prophecy, false interpretation
of the Scriptures, the exaltation of reason, the love of
worldly ways, the desire for money and positions in the
government, and finally a demand for the crown
itself—these are what wrought the change from
purity, simplicity, and gentleness, to the condition of
the prostitute.” Haskell, SSP, 292.
“History overwhelmingly demonstrates the
demonic consequences of the corruption of power by
the church. Christ explicitly declared, ‘My kingdom is
not of this world’ John 18:36. Thus, one cannot escape
the conclusion that the alliance of the church with
earthly governments stands indirect opposition to
Christ’s will, and thereby constitutes the essential
characteristic of the antichrist. Christ’s kingdom bears
no relation to political kingdoms.” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 169.
“(Rev. 17:2 quoted). That is, the union of
Church and State—with the Church leading the
State—will be a practicing belief of the governments
of earth. This deception being also imbibed as a
doctrine by the people who are drunk with ‘the wine of
her fornication’—that is, those who believe this to be
the teaching of the Scriptures.” Were, WATB, 78.
The Inhabitants of the Earth Have Been Made Drunk
With the Wine of Her Fornication.—
“It may be noted that here the intoxication of the
inhabitants of the earth is mentioned following reference
to the illicit alliance between Babylon and the kings of
the earth. Apparently Babylon acts through the kings
of the earth to gain control of those inhabitants of
earth who have not already voluntarily submitted to
her. Rulers and subjects are alike deceived.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 850.
“The great sin charged against Babylon is that she
‘made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of
her fornication.’ This cup of intoxication which she
presents to the world represents the false doctrines

that she has accepted as the result of her unlawful
connection with the great ones of the earth.
Friendship with the world corrupts her faith, and in her
turn she exerts a corrupting influence upon the world by
teaching doctrines which are opposed to the plainest
statements of Holy Writ.” Great Controversy, 388.
Wine of Her Fornication.—
“Wine is employed in Scripture as a symbol of
doctrine—see Matt. 9:17; etc.
Fermented wine
represents false doctrines; doctrines that have poison
in them similar to alcohol in fermented wine;
doctrines that becloud the brain and benumb the
moral sensibilities of those who imbibe them. This is
the wine that the Babylonian whore gives to the kings
and people of earth.” Were, WATB, 153.
“Made nations drunk with her ‘maddening wine,’
Jer. 51:7—her false teaching. Here are but a few of
them: 1. The word of man—tradition instead of the
Bible, i.e. ‘My church teaches,’ ‘My minister says,’ ‘I
think,’ ‘My opinion is,’ etc. 2. Infant Baptism. This is
not from the Word of God. This teaching says that God
would shut an innocent baby out of Heaven unless
someone sprinkles it with water. It also puts people into
a false sense of security. They think they have been
baptized but they only have a counterfeit. ‘Teach,’
‘Repent,’ ‘Baptize,’ is Christ’s requirement.
3.
Purgatory. This is not in the Scriptures. It originated in
paganism. It lulls people into the false hope of salvation
after death. 4. Eternal Agony in Hell—a teaching
which attacks the character of our God. 5. Sunday
Sacredness.
‘For which there is no Scriptural
authority.’ A Doctrinal Catechism, p. 174, Keenan.”
Burnside, RWU, 197,198.
“The Mass is only an old baptized pagan
practice. In Egypt they ate the wafer after it had been
consecrated by the priest in their worship in the Isis
temples. There they had the holy water and the great
ceremonies later taken over by the apostate church.
Celibacy, Easter, monasteries are all practices taken
over from pagans of one form or another, even the sign
of the cross and Christmas are baptized forms of
paganism; and finally the day set apart for those
ceremonies, Deis Solis, Sunday, was instituted in
Christian worship in place of the day God set apart to
commemorate His work of creation and redemption.”
Straw, SR,102.
“Babylon has been fostering poisonous doctrines,
the wine of error. This wine of error is made up of false
doctrines, such as the natural immortality of the soul,
the eternal torment of the wicked, the denial of the
pre-existence of Christ prior to His birth in
Bethlehem, and advocating and exalting the first day
of the week above God's holy and sanctified day.
These and kindred errors are presented to the world by
the various churches, and thus the Scriptures are fulfilled
that say, ‘For all nations have drunk of the wine of the

471

GEMS FROM REVELATION
wrath of her fornication.’” Testimonies to Ministers,
61,62.
(See Rev. 14:8 for more comments on the wine of
Babylon.)
Made Drunk (The Harm of Babylon’s Wine).—
“Through this global union of church and state, a
majority of the world will become spiritually ‘drunk’
through the ‘wine’ of the sin and false doctrine
promoted by this ‘great whore.’ We should remember
that both ‘sin’ and intoxicating [spiritual] ‘wine’ deaden
the moral perceptions; thus, as the nations of the world
follow this apostate church by participating in her sins
and advocating her false doctrines [wine], they become
spiritually ‘drunk’ with the ‘wine’ of her ‘fornication,’
and therefore cannot discern truth from error.”
Swearingen, TOOTN, 72.
“That is, completely intoxicated. The normal
powers of reason and judgment have been stupefied
and the spiritual perception benumbed.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 850.
“Were it not that the world is hopelessly
intoxicated with the wine of Babylon, multitudes
would be convicted and converted by the plain,
cutting truths of the word of God. But religious faith
appears so confused and discordant that the people know
not what to believe as truth. The sin of the world's
impenitence lies at the door of the church.” Great
Controversy, 389.
“If we do our very best to present the truth in its
stirring character, crossing the opinions and ideas of
others, it will be misinterpreted, misapplied, and
misstated, to those who are entertaining error, in order to
make it appear in an objectionable light. There are few
to whom you bring the truth, who have not been
drinking of the wine of Babylon. It is hard for them
to comprehend the truth, therefore the necessity of
teaching it as it is in Jesus. Those who claim to be
lovers of truth can afford to be meek and lowly of heart,
as was the Great Teacher.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1,
405.
“True sanctification is found in yielding the will to
the will of God, in rendering obedience to his
commandments, and in making his standard of
righteousness the aim of our life. If men would consent
to follow the Lord fully, if they were not confused with
the wine of Babylon, they would see that to tamper
with the Lord’s standard, to depart from his
commandments, is the worst species of rebellion.
This is well represented as the wine of the wrath of the
abomination of Babylon, the cup which she has
presented to all nations to drink. Were it not for this,
thousands, yes, millions, would be found in the path
cast up for the ransomed of the Lord to walk in.”
Signs, 11/14/1895.

“Men’s theories and suppositions are honoured
before the word of the Lord God of hosts. The truth is
counteracted by error. The word of God is wrested,
divided, and distorted by higher criticism. Jesus is
acknowledged, only to be betrayed by a kiss. Apostasy
exists, and will enclose the world till the last. Its
hideous character and darkening influence will be
seen in the maddening draughts dealt out from
Babylon.” Bible Echo, 2/1/1897.
“In the seventeenth of Revelation is foretold the
destruction of all the churches who corrupt themselves
by idolatrous devotion to the service of the papacy,
those who have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication. [Rev. 17:1-4 quoted.].” (Letter 232, 1899).
7BC, 783.
“Error is never harmless. It never sanctifies,
but always brings confusion and dissension. It is
always dangerous.” 5 Testimonies, 292.
“It [Babylon’s false doctrine] leads to spiritual
fornication or adultery, which exhibits itself in idolatry
and/or friendship with the world, and the union of
church and state.” Cooke, #29-UR, 15.
How the Inhabitants of the Earth Drink the Wine.—
“Rome withheld the Bible from the people and
required all men to accept her teachings in its place.
It was the work of the Reformation to restore to men the
word of God; but is it not too true that in the churches
of our time men are taught to rest their faith upon
their creed and the teachings of their church rather
than on the Scriptures?
Said Charles Beecher,
speaking of the Protestant churches: ‘They shrink from
any rude word against creeds with the same
sensitiveness with which those holy fathers would have
shrunk from a rude word against the rising veneration of
saints and martyrs which they were fostering…. The
Protestant evangelical denominations have so tied up one
another’s hands, and their own, that, between them all, a
man cannot become a preacher at all, anywhere,
without accepting some book besides the Bible....
There is nothing imaginary in the statement that the
creed power is now beginning to prohibit the Bible as
really as Rome did, though in a subtler way.’ Sermon
on ‘The Bible a Sufficient Creed,’ delivered at Fort
Wayne, Indiana, Feb. 22, 1846.” Great Controversy,
388.
“If we turn from the testimony of God’s word,
and accept false doctrines because our fathers taught
them, we fall under the condemnation pronounced upon
Babylon; we are drinking of the wine of her
abomination.” Great Controversy, 536.
The Only Remedy for Spiritual Intoxication.—
“She [Babylon] has made all the world drink
from that cup of poison. Rev. 17:4. Hence as John says,

472

REVELATION 17
‘the inhabitants of the earth are made drunk’—and
the only remedy pointed out by God to heal His people
of this awful malady, and make them sober again, is to
come out of her altogether, for while you stay there
you will be continually drunk with her poison.” Bates,
Waymarks, 17.

REVELATION 17:3
So he carried me away in the spirit into
the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon
a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads and ten
horns.
So He Carried Me Away In the Spirit.—
“The sensation of motion was doubtless designed
to aid John in making the mental transition from his
own time and place to those of the vision.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 850.
“No correct understanding of this chapter was
possible as long as the many explanations here found
were understood as having been given by the angel from
the standpoint of the Roman Empire, instead of having
been viewed by John and explained by the angel in terms
of the last days, the time of the end. Was it not one of
the angels with the seven last plagues who showed
this vision to John? And was not John picked up and
carried ‘away in the spirit’ from his own place and
time, to see conditions as they would be down at the
very close of earth’s history?” Price, Time of the End,
100.
Into the Wilderness.—
“Absence of the definite article before the word
‘wilderness,’ in the Greek, clearly makes the term
qualitative and descriptive. In other words, it specifies a
condition rather than a particular location.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 850.

hindered in her divine right of ruling the world as she
used to do. This is her period of widowhood (Rev.
18:7), which she hopes will soon be over. It is her
‘wilderness’ experience.” Price, Time of the End,
33,34.
“In Rev. 12 ‘the wilderness’ is mentioned twice:
(Rev. 12:6,14 quoted). Thus we have already been
informed concerning ‘the wilderness’ where the church
fled to escape some of the fury of the persecution heaped
upon her by the forces of Babylon. When John beholds
the Babylonian whore out in ‘the wilderness’ (Rev.
17:3) sitting upon the scarlet coloured beast she is
‘drunken with the blood of saints, and with the blood
of the martyrs of Jesus’ (Rev. 17:6). She has done
her dastardly work and is replete with the blood of
the saints. This view therefore represents the woman
after the terrible persecutions of the Dark Ages.”
Were, WATB, 218.
A Beast.—
“In Bible prophecy beasts commonly represent
political powers (Dan. 7:3-7,17; 8:3,5,20,21; cf. Rev.
12:3; 13:1).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 851.
“The beast on which the woman is mounted
symbolizes the devil’s style of civil government during
the same time [from Babylon to the end of time], the
seven successive attempts, more or less successful, to
control the national affairs of the world.” Price, Time of
the End, 109.
I Saw a WOMAN Sit Upon a Beast.—
“We here have the woman, the church, seated
upon a scarlet-colored beast, the civil power, by
which she is upheld, and which she controls and
guides to her own ends, as a rider controls the animal
upon which he is seated.” Smith, DR, 707.

The wilderness is a place without rain, symbolizing
a lack of the Holy Spirit: “And now she is planted in the
wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground.” Ezekiel
19:13.
“Until the spirit be poured upon us from on
high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the
fruitful field be counted for a forest.” Isaiah 32:15.
“The fact that in this vision the woman and the
beast are shown to the prophet in a ‘wilderness’ (verse
3) probably means that it applies at a time when both the
woman and the beast are having a ‘wilderness’
experience, during the time of the deadly wound of the
leopard beast (Rev. 13:3). This of course means modern
times, the two centuries since the power to burn
‘heretics’ was taken away from Rome. How constant
have been her nostalgic complaints that she is being

The Roman Catholic Church System
Sitting Upon 7 Phases of State Power.
“For centuries the medieval church and the
European states were so interrelated and mutually
supportive that they could be characterized by a

473

GEMS FROM REVELATION
single complex symbol, the leopard-bodied beast.
Historians commonly regard the history of the Middle
Ages as virtually church history.
“During most of the 1260 years, kings and princes
occasionally opposed a pope politically, but most of
them loyally enforced the papacy’s theological beliefs.
As we have seen, however, around 1798 a wholly new
concept emerged, church and state separated in a
republican environment. Partly by means of this very
concept, Catholicism received its apparently mortal
wound (Revelation 13:3), and the United States began its
climb to world prominence.” Maxwell, God Cares,
475,476.
“The fact that the drunken woman on the scarlet
beast means a period in history down very close to the
end is indicated in several other ways. It is one of the
angels with the seven last plagues that shows this
vision to John, and the seven last plagues apply just
before the second advent. Also the fact that the
woman and the beast are differentiated would seem
to mean that the time here represented is when the
world in general has learned to think of the church as
distinct from the civil power. This intellectual and
even practical distinction has come about only in
modern times, the time of the end.” Price, Time of the
End, 33.
“The chief difference between the beast of ch. 13
and that of ch. 17 is that in the former, which is
identified with the papacy, no distinction is made
between the religious and the political aspects of papal
power, whereas in the latter the two are distinct—the
beast representing political power and the woman,
religious power.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 851.
“In the last days of the world’s history, there will
be such a close union between the church and the state
that, in order to comprehend the outpouring of the
judgments of God in the plagues, John was given a
view of both the church and the state.” Haskell, SSP,
289,290.
“It has ever been characteristic of apostate
Christianity to attempt a union of church and state,
in order to consolidate religious control over public
policy. Compare the declaration of our Lord that His
‘kingdom’ is not ‘of this world.’” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 851.
A Scarlet Colored Beast.—
“The woman was drunk with the blood of the
saints; this was represented by the scarlet color of the
beast upon which she rode. …All the universal
kingdoms came into power by the shedding of blood.
…The nation was painted red with the blood of
martyrs when the government submitted itself to the
ecclesiastical power, and the church made war with
the saints. During the twelve hundred and sixty years of
tyranny, the church claimed that it never took the life of

a single individual. The church merely decided who
were heretics—so they argue—and the state executed
the judgment. The beast ridden by the woman cannot
do otherwise than carry out her will.” Haskell, SSP,
297,298.
“They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity.” Micah 3:10. “They that did feed
delicately are desolate in the streets: they that were
brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.”
Lamentations 4:5.
“The color of this beast may intimate that it is
the epitome of evil, as the names of blasphemy with
which it is covered indicate that it stands in opposition to
God. Accordingly, the beast itself may be identified as
Satan working through those political agencies, in all
ages, that have submitted to his control.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 851.
“But though the beast and the harlot are shown as
separate entities, they are virtually identical in
character. Morally there is little to choose between
them. Both are colored ‘scarlet.’” Maxwell, God
Cares, 477.
“The scarlet beast of Revelation 17 shows the
world situation as viewed from the time of the end, our
modern times.” Price, Time of the End, 48.
Beasts of Revelation 13 and 17 are Identical.—

REVELATION 13

REVELATION 17

1. 7 Heads and 10 Horns
2. The names (margin)
of blasphemy.
3. Makes war with the
saints. (vs.7)
4. Receives deadly
wound, slain.

7 Heads and 10 Horns
Full of names of
blasphemy.
Drunken with the blood of
the saints. (vs. 6)
“The beast which thou
sawest was, and is not.’
i.e. no longer exists, dead.
5. His deadly wound was
“The beast… shall ascend
healed. (vs.3).
out of the bottomless pit.’
(place of death.)
“The beast that was, and
is not, and…yet is.”
6. All the world
They that dwell on the
wondered.
earth shall wonder.
7. Whose names are not
Whose names were not
written in the book of life written in the book of
from the foundation of the life from the foundation
world.
of the world.
8. Specifications fulfilled Specification fulfilled
only by the Roman
chiefly by the Roman
head of the beast.
head of the beast.
From: Cooke, #16-UR, 21,22.
“The woman and the beast mentioned
separately in Rev. 17 are the same as the beast in
Rev. 13 which is a combination of the papal church

474

REVELATION 17
working through the State. The reason why the two
are shown in almost a separate capacity in Rev. 17 is
because one of the lessons Heaven seeks in that
chapter to teach the remnant church is that
doctrines, the things men believe, determine their
actions, whether good or bad.” Were, WATB, 168.
Full of Names of Blasphemy.—
“Apostasy and opposition to God are complete.
…These names indicate the character of the beast—it
presumes to usurp the prerogatives of Deity. That it
is ‘full’ of blasphemous names indicates that it is
wholly devoted to this objective.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 851.
Seven Heads.—
“The seven heads are seven forms of civil power
which successively bear rule. These seven heads
belong alike to the dragon of Rev. 12, the beast of chap.
13, and that of chap. 17. This shows conclusively that
the dragon and these two beasts are symbols of the
same power under different heads for there are not
three sets of seven heads, but it is evident that the heads
are successive forms of its power, one of them
bearing rule at a time, and then giving place to
another. Rev. 17:9, 10. It appears that the dragon of
chap. 12 and the beast of chap. 13 and that of chap. 17
each represents some one or more of the seven heads
yet as each is seen with the seven heads, they must each
in a certain sense extend over all the period covered by
the three symbols; for there are not twenty-one heads.
The proper period of each seems to be this: the dragon
before the 1260 years, the beast of chap. 13, during that
period, and the beast of chap. 17 since the deadly
wound and captivity at the close of that period.”
Andrews, TAM, 77,78.
Ten Horns.—
“And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten
kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but
receive power as kings one hour with the beast. These
have one mind, and shall give their power and strength
unto the beast.” Rev. 17:12,13
“A significant difference between the leopard beast
of Revelation 13 and the scarlet-colored beast of
Revelation 17 should be emphasized. Each beast has ten
horns, but while the horns on the leopard had ten
crowns, no crowns are mentioned in the description of
the scarlet beast. This last beast, as we have noticed, is
descriptive of a period in history when crowns and
monarchies are, to a large extent, out of fashion.”
Anderson, UR, 178.
“The dragon had crowns on its seven heads and
none on its ten horns; the beast, however, had crowns on
its ten horns and none on its seven heads. Thus the
arrival of the sea beast in Revelation 13 announced a
departure from the era of the Roman Empire and an
entrance into the era of the invading tribes. Whereas

Revelation 12 began with the birth of Jesus, Revelation
13 begins around AD 476.
“...That the crowns do serve as time markers is
confirmed by comparison of the dragon and sea beast
with the red beast in Revelation 17. The red beast has
seven heads and ten horns, like the dragon and the sea
beast, but it has no crowns at all. An angel informed
John that he had entered the time of judgment.
‘Come, I will show you the judgment of the great
harlot’ (17:1). The era since 1798/1844 has been
notable as an era of democratization, especially in
Europe.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 73.
“In Rev. 17 no crowns are upon the heads or the
horns because the emphasis is upon the final
conflict…. To distinguish between the persecution of
the saints during the 1260 days of Papal supremacy
pictured in Rev. 13 and the final conflict over the mark
of the beast specifically brought to view in Rev. 17,
the crowns which appear upon the horns in Rev. 13 are
not brought to view in the vision of Rev. 17.” Were,
WATB, 133.
(See notes under Rev. 12:3; 13:1; and 17:12,13 for
additional comments on the ten horns).

REVELATION 17:4
And the woman was arrayed in purple
and scarlet colour, and decked with gold
and precious stones and pearls, having a
golden cup in her hand full of abominations
and filthiness of her fornication:
Arrayed in Purple and Scarlet Colour.—
“And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they
made cloths of service, to do service in the holy place,
and made the holy garments for Aaron; as the LORD
commanded Moses. 2 And he made the ephod of gold,
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 3
And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it
into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and
in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work.
Exodus 39:1-3.
“These colors and the gold were used in the God’s
sanctuary and in the priest’s clothing. Their use here by
the whore to appear like God’s true church system is a
very clever and beautiful camouflage that deceives the
world. Notice that blue is left out.” PJ
“The ‘great whore’ is described as being arrayed in
‘purple’ and ‘scarlet.’ Now, when ‘purple’ and ‘scarlet’
are used in the Bible, the color ‘blue’ is usually present
also. And, the fact these three colors are used in
triplicate signifies something very important; ‘blue’
actually symbolizes the law of God (Num. 15:38,39),
while ‘scarlet’ symbolizes the cleansing of sin through
the atoning blood of Christ (Is. 1:18). Now, ‘purple’ is

475

GEMS FROM REVELATION
actually a combination of both ‘blue’ and ‘scarlet,’ and
ultimately symbolizes the cooperation of ‘law’ and
‘grace’ in the work of redemption. When the sinner
experiences repentance, the blood of Jesus cleanses the
individual from sin (‘scarlet’); the Holy Spirit then
begins the process of writing God’s law into the heart
and mind (‘blue’), and if the convert ultimately prevails
as an overcomer of sin, the end result will ultimately be
redemption [and reigning with Christ] (‘purple’). Thus,
these three colors are used in conjunction with each
other as an actual object lesson of the redemption
process through Jesus Christ.
“Aside from the fact that two liturgical colors of
the Catholic clergy are ‘purple’ and ‘scarlet,’ it is also
worth our notice that ‘blue’ is not mentioned with the
attire of the ‘woman.’ Since ‘blue’ symbolizes the law
of God, its omission here is a confirmation of Rome’s
desire to ‘think to change times and laws’ of God
(Daniel 7:25).” Swearingen, TOOTN, 76, 77.
“Thus is represented the papal power, which
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, by outside
attraction and gorgeous display, deceives all nations;
promising them, as did Satan our first parents, all good
to those who receive its mark, and all harm to those who
oppose its fallacies. The power which has the deepest
inward corruption will make the greatest display, and
will clothe itself with the most elaborate signs of
power. The Bible plainly declares that this covers a
corrupt and deceiving wickedness.
‘Upon her
forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the
Great, The Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the
Earth.’” (Letter 232, 1899). 7BC, 783.

“The merchants of these things, which were made
rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her
torment, weeping and wailing, And saying, Alas, alas
that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and
purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls!” Rev 18:15,16.
“And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do?
Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though
thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou
rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make
thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek
thy life.” Jer. 4:28-31.
Decked With Gold, Precious Stones and Pearls.—
“Among the myriads of precious stones which
adorn her service, according to an eye-witness, silver is
scarcely known, and gold itself is less noticeable than
are costly gems.” Smith, DR, 708.
“I saw that the outside appearance is an index to
the heart. When the exterior is hung with ribbons,
collars, and needless things, it plainly shows that the
love for all this is in the heart; unless such persons are
cleansed from their corruption, they can never see God,
for only the pure in heart will see Him.” 1 Testimonies,
136.
“The Vatican Bank is one of the wealthiest in the
world. The union of a worldly church with the state is
always very lucrative business.” PJ

“The purple and scarlet color, the gold and precious
stones and pearls, vividly picture the magnificence and
more than kingly pomp affected by the haughty see of
Rome.” Great Controversy, 382.
“Purple was at that time the royal color worn by
kings and queens, and scarlet was until in recent
years the identifying raiment of harlots. Scarlet is the
Biblical symbol of sin and rebellion. See Isaiah 1:18. It
is therefore the color of the symbols of Satan’s kingdom.
See Rev. 12:3; 17:3. It is appropriate that a scarlet
robe be the wedding garment of Satan’s wife or
bride. It indicates her sinful character in contrast
with the white robe of Christ’s righteousness which
clothes the bride of Christ. It is a significant fact that
both purple and scarlet are the most prominent
colors in the official robes and caps of the popes,
cardinals, and other officials of the Roman Catholic
Church.” Bunch, TR, 244,245.
“‘Fine linen, clean and white,’ is the apparel for
the wife of our Lord, but when the character is lost,
earth’s eye is attracted by the purple and scarlet
colors, the gold and precious stones. Purity of life is
what God wants; royal apparel and wealth are what the
world seeks.” Haskell, SSP, 291.

The “Vicar of Christ” wears the three-tiered
crown of gold, silver and diamonds.
Yet Jesus Christ wore a crown of thorns.
Having a Golden Cup in Her Hand.—
“From the golden cup in her hand—symbol of
purity of doctrine and profession, which should have
contained only that which is unadulterated and pure,
or, only that which is in full accordance with truth—
there came forth only abominations, and wine of her

476

REVELATION 17
fornication, fit symbol of her abominable doctrines and
still more abominable practices.
“…‘In 1825, on the occasion of the jubilee, Pope
Leo XII struck a medal, bearing on the one side his own
image, and on the other, that of the Church of Rome
symbolized as a “Woman,” holding in her left hand a
cross and in her right a cup, with the legend around
her, Sedet super universum, “The whole world is her
seat.”’ (Alexander Hislop, The Two Babylons, p.6.)”
Smith, DR, 708.

1825 Pope Leo XII medal,
showing a woman holding a cup.
“This cup in her hand had been supped by all the
nations of the world. And the Word says, ‘by thy
sorceries were all nations deceived.’ Rev. 18:23.”
Straw, SR, 100.
“The gold of the cup deceives men with respect
to the nature of the contents.”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 851.
(See Rev. 14:8 and 17:2 for more comments on the
wine of Babylon.)
Full of Abominations and Filthiness of Her
Fornication.—
“They provoked him to jealousy with strange
gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger.”
Deuteronomy 32:16.
“Cast ye away every man the abominations of his
eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt: I
am the Lord your God.” Ezekiel 20:17.
“Lying lips are abomination to the LORD: but
they that deal truly are his delight.” Prov. 12:22.
“I saw great iniquity and vileness in the
churches; yet their members profess to be Christians.
Their profession, their prayers, and their
exhortations are an abomination in the sight of God.
Said the angel, ‘God will not smell in their assemblies.
Selfishness, fraud, and deceit are practiced by them
without the reprovings of conscience. And over all these
evil traits they throw the cloak of religion.’” Early
Writings, 274.

REVELATION 17:5
And upon her forehead was a name
written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE
GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS
AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
Upon Her Forehead Was A Name Written.—
“This is doubtless a parody of the inscription,
‘HOLINESS TO THE LORD’ worn on the mitre of
the High Priest (Ex. 28:36). The false priesthood of
Babylon imitates the true priesthood of Jerusalem.
Name is synonymous with character which is always
stamped upon the mind so that it controls the whole
being. The name or character of God is written in the
foreheads of those who get the victory over Babylon and
false worship. See Rev. 14:1; 22:4. In the forehead of
false worshipers is also written the name that signifies
apostasy and rebellion. See Jer. 3:3; Eze. 3:7,8.” Bunch,
TR, 238.
“Observe how Babylon’s title is written in large
capital letters: (Verse 5 quoted). Why is her title thus
written? Because she is the counterfeiter of the things
of Christ Whose title also is written in the same large
capital letters: ‘KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS’ (Rev. 19:16).” Were, WATB, 51.
“Therefore the showers have been withholden, and
there hath been no latter rain; and thou hadst a
whore’s forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed.” Jer.
3:3.
Mystery.—
“This is the mystery of iniquity, which Paul said
was at work in the days when he wrote to the
Thessalonians.” Haskell, SSP, 292.
“The essence of ‘the mystery of iniquity’ is
deception: to make wrong look right; to make error
appear truth; to make rebellion counterfeit
obedience.” Were, WATB, 48.
“As ‘the mystery of Godliness’ is ‘God manifest
in the flesh’, whether of Jesus the incarnate Son of God,
or of each believer, who is born of the Holy Spirit and
feeds that Divine life within through prayer and the
study of the Word of God (see 1 Pet. 1:23; 2: 2; Matt.
4:40), so ‘the mystery of iniquity’ thus designates those
who, like Satan, permit the continuance of his rebellion
in their flesh. This rebellion, however, is made to
appear holy.” Were, WATB, 53,54.
Babylon.—
“Why is the church of Rome called Babylon?
Because in truth her religion is the same as old
Babylon’s. As Dr. Alexander Hislop declared: ‘It has
been known all along that Popery was baptized
paganism, but God is now making it manifest, that the
paganism which Rome has baptized is, in all its

477

GEMS FROM REVELATION
essential features, the very paganism which prevailed
in the ancient Babylon…. The essential character of
her system, the grand objects of her worship, her
festivals, her doctrine and discipline, her rites and
ceremonies, her priesthood and their orders, have all
been derived from ancient Babylon.’ The Two
Babylons, pp. 2,3.” Cooke, #29-UR, 6,7.
“The existing confusion of conflicting creeds and
sects is fitly represented by the term ‘Babylon,’ which
prophecy (Revelation 14:8; 18:2) applies to the worldloving churches of the last days.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 124.
“(Rev. 18:1-8 quoted). The whole chapter shows
that Babylon that has fallen is the churches who will
not receive the messages of warning the Lord has
given in the first, second, and third angels’ messages.
They refused the truth and accepted a lie. They refused
the messages of truth. See 2 Thessalonians 2:1-12.”
Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 67,68.
(See comments under Revelation 14:8).
Babylon the Great.—
“The king spake, and said, Is not this great
Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom
by the might of my power, and for the honour of my
majesty?” Daniel 4:30.
“In the Old Testament, on which the book of
Revelation is based, ancient Babylon was called ‘great’
when she had conquered the then known world. See
Daniel 4:30. Likewise spiritual Babylon becomes
‘great’ when she gains world support, when she is
restored to power, when she ‘sits upon many waters’
(vs.1), when she is supported by the peoples of the
world, when she rides or controls the beast (i.e. uses the
beast to do her bidding, vs. 3), when she says, ‘I sit a
queen and am no widow’ (18:7).” Cooke, #29-UR,
11,12.
“‘Babylon the great’ in the book of Revelation
designates, in a special sense, the united apostate
religions at the close of time. …[It] is the name by
which Inspiration refers to the great threefold religious
union of the papacy, apostate Protestantism, and
spiritism.
The term ‘Babylon’ refers to the
organizations themselves and to their leaders, not so
much to the members as such. The latter are referred
to as ‘many waters’ (Rev. 17:1,15) and as the
‘inhabitants of the earth’ (vs. 2; cf. v.8).” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 851,852.
“Babylon the Great is represented by two symbols.
The first is that of a harlot queen, who, through her
fornication controls and reigns over ‘the kings of the
earth’ and through her false doctrines intoxicates ‘the
inhabitants of the earth.’ The second symbol is that
of a city. ‘And the woman which thou sawest is that

great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.’
Rev. 17:18. See also Rev. 14:8; 16:19.” Bunch, TR,
235.
“It cannot be literal Babylon. 1. The city of
Babylon was not built on seven hills. 2. It was not
Queen of the earth in John’s day. 3. Literal Babylon
does not continue, but the Babylon of this prophecy
continues to the plagues and to the end of time.
“It was not Pagan Rome. 1. Pagan Rome did not
commit fornication with the kings of earth—she
crushed them. 2. This power is to continue to the end of
time and through the plagues, but imperial Rome has
long since gone. 3. This power is pictured as a
woman—a church. Pagan Rome was not.” Burnside,
RWU, 194.
“The drunken woman, named Babylon the Great,
means more than the Catholic Church. She represents
the devil’s style of false religion of all time, from
Nimrod’s first blending of civil government and religion
down to the revived, or reestablished, Roman power
during the very last days of human history.” Price, Time
of the End, 34.
(See Rev. 14:8 for more comments.)
The Mother (Roman Catholicism).—
“This woman is explicitly called Babylon. Is
Rome, then, Babylon, to the exclusion of all other
religious bodies?—No, she cannot be, from the fact that
she is called the mother of harlots, as already noticed,
which shows that there are other independent
religious organizations that constitute the apostate
daughters, and belong to the same great family.” Smith,
DR, 709.
“The church of Rome is the great counterfeit
mother church. She has officially titled herself as the
Mother Church. In the 16th century, the Roman
Catholic Council of Trent decreed, ‘I acknowledge the
holy catholic apostolic Roman church the mother and
mistress of all churches.’” Cooke, #29-UR, 8.
“The Catholic Church has long styled herself the
Mother Church. In a sense, she has been right in doing
this, for she has given birth to many daughter
churches. Sad to say, when viewed from their very
worst aspects, the daughter churches have also shown
a tendency to become ‘harlots.’
“Daughters are not born harlots. They become
such by choosing to. Unmarried, they are known by
their mother’s name. The harlot daughters we’re talking
about are called ‘Babylon,’ like their mother.” Maxwell,
God Cares, 460.
“John A. O’Brien, in his work entitled The Faith of
Millions, confirmed this principle [that the mother
church must have daughters] by identifying the ‘mother
church’ as the Church of Rome:

478

REVELATION 17
“ ‘They [Protestants] have continued the custom
[Sunday observance], even though it rests upon the
authority of the Catholic Church and not upon an explicit
text in the Bible. That observance remains as a reminder
of the Mother Church from which non-Catholic sects
broke away—like a boy running away from home but
still carrying in his pocket a picture of his mother or a
lock of her hair.’” Swearingen, TOOTN, 79.
“One of Pope John Paul II's closest aides has
written to bishops worldwide declaring that
the Catholic church is the ‘mother’ of other Christian
churches, a move which could hurt Vatican efforts
toward unity with other believers. …In the document,
Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger told the bishops that it
was incorrect to refer to Christian churches, ranging
from Orthodox to Protestant, as ‘sister’ churches of the
Catholic church. …It must be always clear that the one,
holy, catholic and apostolic universal church is not the
sister, but the mother of all churches.” VATICAN CITY
(Associated Press), Sept. 3, 2000.
The Mother of Harlots (Apostate Protestant
Churches).—
“Babylon is said to be ‘the mother of harlots.’ By
her daughters must be symbolized churches that
cling to her doctrines and traditions, and follow her
example of sacrifice the truth and the approval of
God, in order to form an unlawful alliance with the
world. The message of Revelation 14, announcing the
fall of Babylon must apply to religious bodies that were
once pure and have become corrupt. Since this message
follows the warning of the judgment, it must be given in
the last days; therefore it cannot refer to the Roman
Church alone, for that church has been in a fallen
condition for many centuries. Furthermore, in the
eighteenth chapter of the Revelation the people of God
are called upon to come out of Babylon. According to
this scripture, many of God’s people must still be in
Babylon. And in what religious bodies are the greater
part of the followers of Christ now to be found?
Without doubt, in the various churches professing
the Protestant faith. At the time of their rise these
churches took a noble stand for God and the truth, and
His blessing was with them. Even the unbelieving world
was constrained to acknowledge the beneficent results
that followed an acceptance of the principles of the
gospel. In the words of the prophet to Israel: ‘Thy
renown went forth among the heathen for thy
beauty: for it was perfect through My comeliness,
which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord God.’ But
they fell by the same desire which was the curse and ruin
of Israel—the desire of imitating the practices and
courting the friendship of the ungodly. ‘Thou didst
trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot
because of thy renown.’ Ezekiel 16:14, 15.
“Many of the Protestant churches are following
Rome's example of iniquitous connection with ‘the
kings of the earth’—the state churches, by their relation
to secular governments; and other denominations, by

seeking the favor of the world.
And the term
‘Babylon’—confusion—may be appropriately applied to
these bodies, all professing to derive their doctrines from
the Bible, yet divided into almost innumerable sects,
with widely conflicting creeds and theories.” Great
Controversy, 382,383.
“The modern family of Babylon must include the
various branches of apostate Protestantism, or
corrupt, backslidden Christianity in all its forms.”
Bunch, TR, 240.
“Then I saw the Mother of Harlots; that the mother
was not the daughters, but separate and distinct from
them. She has had her day, and it is past, and her
daughters, the Protestant sects, were the next to come
on the stage and act out the same mind that the
mother had when she persecuted the saints. I saw that
as the mother has been declining in power, the daughters
had been growing, and soon they will exercise the power
once exercised by the mother.” Spalding & Magan, 1.
“The Protestant daughters did not exist till the
1500’s, and their fall did not occur till 1844. Thus, the
term ‘the mother of harlots’ would indicate that the
vision of Rev. 17 relates to events after 1844.” PJ
And Abominations.—
“That which is highly esteemed among men is
abomination in the sight of God.” Luke 16:15.
“He that turneth away his ear from hearing the
law, even his prayer shall be abomination.” Proverbs
28:9.
“Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery,
and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and
walk after other gods whom ye know not; And come
and stand before me in this house, which is called by my
name, and say, We are delivered to do all these
abominations?” Jer. 7:9,10.

REVELATION 17:6
And I saw the woman drunken with the
blood of the saints, and with the blood of the
martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I
wondered with great admiration.
The Woman.—
“That is, the Roman Catholic church system.
See comments on vss. 2-5.” PJ.
Drunken With the Blood of Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus.—
“Most men drank freely [of the wine of her false
doctrines], and partook of her sins without restraint’ but
when man, or nation refused, he paid the penalty with
his lifeblood. ‘The woman (was) drunken with the
blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs
of Jesus.’” Haskell, SSP, 294.1

479

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“In the thirteenth century was established that most
terrible of all the engines of the papacy—the
Inquisition. The prince of darkness wrought with the
leaders of the papal hierarchy. In their secret councils
Satan and his angels controlled the minds of evil men,
while unseen in the midst stood an angel of God, taking
the fearful record of their iniquitous decrees and writing
the history of deeds too horrible to appear to human
eyes. ‘Babylon the great’ was ‘drunken with the
blood of the saints’ The mangled forms of millions of
martyrs cried to God for vengeance upon that
apostate power.” Great Controversy, 59,60.
“They [the Waldenses] declared the Church of
Rome to be the apostate Babylon of the Apocalypse, and
at the peril of their lives they stood up to resist her
corruptions.” Great Controversy, 65.
“It appears that the Revelator views the woman
after the time of persecution or the Middle Ages because
she is ‘drunken [past tense] with the blood of the
saints.’” Cooke, #29-UR, 11.
“In Rev. 18:24 we are told that Babylon has been
responsible for the persecution and martyrdom ‘of
prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain
upon the earth.’” Bunch, TR, 235.
“In a general sense Babylon may be said to be
‘drunken’ with the blood of the martyrs of all ages (cf.
ch. 18:24), but in a more immediate sense with that of
martyrs and prospective martyrs in the closing scenes of
earth’s history. God holds Babylon accountable for
the blood of those whose death she has decreed but
whom she is prevented from slaying (see Great
Controversy, 628).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 852.
“The saints are thus introduced into this vision as
the victims of this blood-thirsty whore; the objects of
fiery persecution as she employs the power of kings
and governors to execute her cruel designs upon the
true servants of the Lord.” Were, WATB, 79.
Papacy Claims Right to Drink Blood.—
“During the time of Papal supremacy millions of
people, unwilling to submit their consciences to the
dictates of Roman religion, lost their lives. Considered
as ‘heretics’ by the Catholic Church, the execution of
these honest people was justified by the Papacy.
Even in the twentieth century, The Catholic
Encyclopedia has defended persecution and even
execution of those who oppose its teaching as a sacred
right of the church:
“ ‘If, therefore, the Catholic Church also claims the
right of dogmatic intolerance with regard to her teaching,
it is unjust to reproach her for exercising this right….
She regards dogmatic intolerance not alone as her
incontestable right, but also as a sacred duty….
“ ‘However repulsive, when judged from the more

refined standpoint of modern civilization, the barbarous
cruelty of medieval penal ordinances may be,… we may
not for this reason condemn the whole penal system of
that age as judicial murder; for the legal punishments,
while indeed inhuman, were not unjust…. According to
Rom., xiii, 11 sqq., the secular authorities have the right
to punish, especially grave crimes, with death;
consequently,
“heretics
may
be
not
only
excommunicated, but also justly put to death.”’[The
Catholic Encyclopedia, 1911 ed., Vol. 14, pp. 766,768.]
“Incredible! It’s not surprising that after the fall
of Communism the Polish people are already realizing
the papal Rome ‘is now an institution concerned with
power.’ And many of the Polish people already
‘consider the church’s influence in public life
“excessive.”’ [Los Angeles Times, October 22, 1990.
Time, June 17, 1991.]
“…If she [the Roman Catholic church] ‘cannot err
in faith’ and claims ‘dogmatic intolerance,’ even the
‘sacred duty’ to ‘put to death’ those who disagree with
her, it becomes obvious that her reinstatement into
power today would bring the same religious bloodbath
put to an end only two centuries ago. That is why God
warns us that those who refuse to worship the ‘image’ of
this power and receive the mark of its authority will be
‘killed.’ (See Rev. 13:15.)
“This is a serious situation.
The Western
Watchman, a Catholic publication has stated, ‘…
‘Protestants were persecuted in France and Spain
with the full approval of the church authorities. We
have always defended the persecution of the
Huguenots, and the Spanish Inquisition. Wherever
and whenever there is honest Catholicity, there will be a
clear distinction drawn between truth and error, and
Catholicity and all forms of heresy. When she thinks it
good to use physical force, she will use it…. But will
the Catholic church give bond that she will not persecute
at all? Will she guarantee absolute freedom and equality
of all churches and all faiths? The Catholic Church
gives no bonds of her good behavior.’
“A solemn thought indeed.” Rafferty, PI, 80,81,82.
Other OT Women Drunken With Blood of Saints.—
“In Revelation 17-19 Babylon is pictured as the
end-time ‘queen’ Jezebel, drunk with the blood of
Christian saints (17:4,6; 18:7; cf. 18:24; 19:2). Earlier
the risen Christ had identified Jezebel with the deceptive
teachings and the false worship that arose within the
church of Thyatira (Rev. 2:20). Thus, Christ points His
finger at an unfaithful church rather than at the Roman
Empire.
“If the OT story of Queen Jezebel and her cruel
religious rule over Northern Israel receives typological
significance in the book of Revelation (2:20-23; 17:3-6;
19:2), then the parallel story of Queen Athaliah, who had
usurped the throne in Jerusalem and murdered all
legitimate heirs from the house of David, may be
considered to possess no less typological importance.
Like Jezebel, Athaliah—the daughter of Jezebel and
wife of Jehoram, king of Jerusalem—had introduced

480

REVELATION 17
Baalism, including its counterfeit temple worship and
priesthood, to Jerusalem (2 Ki. 11:1-20; 2 Chr. 22:1023:21).
“Only one heir of the house of David had escaped
the massacre, the infant Joash, who was hidden safely in
the priests’ quarters of the temple of the Lord. After six
years the faithful high priest, with the help of the temple
guards, restored the Davidic kingship by executing
Athaliah (2 Chr. 23:11-15). The people of the land then
renewed their covenant with Yahweh and destroyed the
temple of Baal, its priests and idols (2 Chr. 23:16,17).
“Here we can observe how God allowed religious
apostasy to rule within His old-covenant people, on
such a wide scale and with such a political
enforcement that apostate religion seemed to have
triumphed completely in Israel. Nevertheless, God
had kept alive a faithful remnant within apostate Israel.
In God’s providence, His truth and kingdom emerged
victoriously in this most critical epoch of Israel’s history.
“…The prophetic drama in Revelation 12 and 17,
in which the ‘harlot’ (Babylon) persecutes and murders
the children of the pure woman (the Israel of God, Rev
12:17; 17:6), suggests a basic repetition of the history
of Jezebel and her daughter Athaliah for the newcovenant people of God, the church.
Because
Revelation 17 pictures the new Babylon as the
persecuting arch-prostitute, a feature not found in
Jeremiah’s portrayal, indicates all the more John’s
intention to design an exact antithesis between two
basically religious bodies in Revelation 12 and 17.’”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 160-162.
Martyrs.—
“Gr. martures, literally, ‘witnesses’.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 852.
“As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to
fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.”
Jeremiah 51:49.
I Wondered With Great Admiration.—
“Why should John ‘wonder with great wonder,’ as
it reads in the original, when he saw the woman drunken
with the blood of saints? …The secret of his wonder
was just this: all the persecution he had witnessed had
been from pagan Rome, the open enemy of Christ. It
was not strange that pagans should persecute Christ’s
followers. But when he looked forward, and saw a
church professedly Christian persecuting the
followers of the Lamb, and drunk with their blood,
he could but wonder with great amazement.” Smith,
DR, 708,709.
“Well might any person who see the activities of
human society in the light shining from the throne,
wonder that kings and governors who have known of the
terrible state of affairs that operated in the Dark Ages
when the woman controlled the governments of Europe,
should be so utterly foolish as to permit this woman
to mount again on to the back of the State—this time

in a worldwide way—to be guided by her principles.”
Were, WATB, 64,65.
“It is both lofty and degraded; simple, yet worldly
wise; humble, yet scornful and proud; washing beggars’
feet, yet imposing commands on the potentates of earth;
benignant, yet severe on all who rebel; here clothed in
rags, and there reveling in palaces; supported by charity,
yet feasting the princes of the earth; assuming the title of
‘servant of the servants of God,’ yet arrogating the
highest seat among worldly dignitaries. Was there ever
such a contradiction?—type of the misery and
greatness of man? Was there every such a mystery, so
occult are its arts, so subtle its policy, so plausible its
pretensions, so certain its shafts? How imposing the
words of paternal benediction! How grand the liturgy
brought down from ages of faith!
“And yet what crimes and abominations have
not been committed in the name of the Church? If
we go back and accept the history of the dark ages, what
wars has not this Church encouraged, what discords has
she not incited, what superstitions has she not endorsed,
what pride has she not arrogated, what cruelties has she
not inflicted, what countries has she not robbed, what
hardships has she not perverted, what goodness has she
not mocked and persecuted?” Bunch, TR, 240.

REVELATION 17:7
And the angel said unto me, Wherefore
didst thou marvel? I will tell thee the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that
carrieth her, which hath the seven heads
and ten horns.
Wherefore Didst Thou Marvel?—
“The Roman Church now presents a fair front to
the world, covering with apologies her record of horrible
cruelties. She has clothed herself in Christ-like
garments; but she is unchanged. Every principle of
the papacy that existed in past ages exists today. The
doctrines devised in the darkest ages are still held.
Let none deceive themselves. The papa-cy that
Protestants are now so ready to honor is the same that
ruled the world in the days of the Reformation, when
men of God stood up, at the peril of their lives, to expose
her iniquity. She possesses the same pride and arrogant
assumption that lorded it over kings and princes, and
claimed the prerogatives of God. Her spirit is no less
cruel and despotic now than when she crushed out
human liberty and slew the saints of the Most High.”
Great Controversy, 571.
“The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into
perdition: and they that dwell on the earth shall
wonder, whose names were not written in the book of
life from the foundation of the world, when they behold

481

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.” Rev. 17:8.
I Will Tell Thee.—
“The remainder of the chapter is the angel’s
interpretation of the ‘mystery,’ or the symbolism of the
vision of vs. 3-6. The ‘beast’ is explained in vs. 8-17,
the ‘woman’ in vs. 18.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 853.
The Mystery of the Woman and of the Beast.—
“In the introduction to the vision (vs.1,2) and in the
vision itself (vs. 3-6) John’s attention was directed
almost exclusively to the woman, and the beast is
mentioned almost incidentally. In the Greek of vs. 1-6,
according to Nestle’s text, 102 words are devoted to the
woman and only 12 to the beast.
But in the
explanation (vs. 7-18) the angel dwells almost
altogether on the beast, together with its heads and
horns. In the Greek of vs. 7-18 only 36 words are
devoted to the woman and 243 to the beast. This
noteworthy difference between the vision and its
explanation may suggest that although the announced
topic of the vision is the divine sentence pronounced
upon mystical Babylon, and although she proves to be
the leading character in events depicted by the vision,
her brief triumph and sudden fall can be understood
only by a careful study of the contribution made by
the beast, both to her momentary success and also to
her eventual defeat.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 853.

REVELATION 17:8
The beast that thou sawest was, and is
not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit, and go into perdition: and they that
dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose
names were not written in the book of life
from the foundation of the world, when they
behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet
is.
The Beast Was, And Is Not.—
“…The angel gave this vision to John during the ‘is
not’ period of the beast, and especially toward the close
of that ‘is not’ period, for the angel told John that the
beast was ‘about to come up out of the abyss.’” Were,
WATB, 130.
Bottomless Pit.—
“The term ‘bottomless pit’ or ‘abyss’ is used as a
rhetorical figure to represent the place of the demons.
This beast comes directly from the head-quarters of the
evil spirits and fully represents the cause of Satan.
Thus it is wholly evil, the very quintessence of rebellion
against God and all that the government of God stands
for.” Price, Time of the End, 154.
“The bottomless pit, or ‘the abyss’ (R.V.) is the
place from whence come both the beasts of Rev. 11 and

17; this does not indicate that in both places the same
power is referred to, but that both are of ‘Satanic origin
and character’ (Great Controversy, 268,269).
“…As Satan is said to possess ‘the power of
death’ and that is said to be ‘beneath,’ therefore any
power of ‘Satanic origin and character’ would
naturally be symbolized as coming ‘up out of the
abyss,’ as in Rev. 11:7, and also in Rev. 17:8.
“…Both the false religious beliefs and system of
Papalism and atheistic Communism are of Satanic
origin—they both rise out of the bottomless pit.
…These two beasts represent forces that are today
striving for world supremacy.” Were, WATB, 139,136.
And Shall Ascend Out of the Bottomless Pit.—
“In Romans 10:7 the same Greek word is translated
‘deep’ and is used to describe the grave or the place of
death. …The beast of Rev. 17:8 ascends out of the
bottomless pit. This means that it emerges from the
place of death. It is experiencing a resurrection, it is
returning to power, it is a restoration.” Cooke, #29UR, 16,17.
“The wound is mentioned in chapter 13 in a symbol
where the church and the state are not differentiated, the
two being combined under the one symbol of the leopard
beast; but in chapter 17, where a clear distinction is
shown between the drunken woman and the beast upon
which she rides, the woman is not said to be wounded
or out of action. The beast only is affected, and it is
completely paralyzed—it ‘is not.’ (Verse 8). In chapter
18, meaning a later period, the woman congratulates
herself that she is no longer a widow; but it is plain that
no part of the prophecy ever represents the Catholic
Church as having been wounded or even hurt at all.
Her paramour is the one who suffers the wound, and he
is completely out of action.
“This is exactly the situation. The woman is
alive, obviously healthy and strong; but the beast
which she formerly drove as she wished, now refuses
to obey her dictates. Nevertheless the prophecy tells
plainly that a change is coming; the deadly wound is
going to be healed. The beast is going to ‘ascend out of
the bottomless pit.’ (Revelation 17:8). On every side
we see ominous signs of just such a resurgence of the
beastly intolerance of past ages.” Price, Time of the
End, 75,76.
“This beast that is to come out of the abyss as Jesus
came out of the tomb; but, in contrast to Jesus Who is
‘alive forevermore’ and Who ‘dieth no more’, this
beast rises from the dead ‘to go into perdition’; a fact
which is stated in both verses 8 and 11 of Rev. 17. Thus,
as the resurrection of Jesus to life evermore is repeated
in the Apocalypse (Rev. 1:18; 2:8), so the resurrection of
this beast to go into perdition is repeated. What a theme
for serious thought! A religion that is like Christ’s in
many superficial ways, but lacking the vital power of the
Omnipotent Lord. It has some vitality, some power, but
it is Satanic and goes into perdition; while believers in

482

REVELATION 17
the faith of Jesus, though subjected to the first death,
rise to die no more.” Were, WATB, 56.
“It is the boast of Rome that she never changes.
The principles of Gregory VII and Innocent III are still
the principles of the Roman Catholic Church. And had
she but the power, she would put them in practice with
as much vigor now as in past centuries. Protestants little
know what they are doing when they propose to accept
the aid of Rome in the work of Sunday exaltation.
While they are bent upon the accomplishment of their
purpose, Rome is aiming to reestablish her power, to
recover her lost supremacy. Let the principle once be
established in the United States that the church may
employ or control the power of the state; that
religious observances may be enforced by secular
laws; in short, that the authority of church and state
is to dominate the conscience, and the triumph of
Rome in this country is assured.” Great Controversy,
581.
“The beast [the Papacy] will ascend only as fast as
American Protestantism falls.” PJ
Perdition.—
“Gr. apoleia, ‘utter destruction,’ ‘annihilation.’
This indicates the utter end of the beast (cf. Rev.
17:11).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 854.
“Let no man deceive you by any means: for that
day shall not come, except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition.” 2Thess. 2:3.
They That Dwell on the Earth Shall Wonder.—
“The astonishment of the people of the entire
world at the unexpected recovery of the beast.”
Price, Time of the End, 64.
“And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to
death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the
world wondered after the beast. And they worshipped
the dragon which gave power unto the beast: and they
worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast?
who is able to make war with him?” Rev. 13:3.
“They first ‘wonder’ and then worship, that is,
yield their willing support to the beast in the pursuit of
its blasphemous schemes.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
854.
Names …Written in the Book of Life From the
Foundation of the World.—
“ Rev. 13:8 refers to names being ‘written in the
Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world’, while Rev. 17:8 refers to those ‘whose
names’ were ‘written in the Book of Life from the
foundation of the world’. In Rev. 13:8 the emphasis is
upon ‘the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world’; in Rev. 17:8 the emphasis is upon the people

‘whose names’ ‘were written in the Book of Life from
the foundation of the world.’ …The Lord foresaw
those who would avail them-selves of the provisions of
the plan of salvation. From the very beginning the Lord
has known who would be saved—this grand fact was
given for the encouragement of His children, and was
certainly not given to engender human assumption and
pride.” Were, WATB, 41.
“The viewpoint that names are recorded from the
foundation of the world is found in ch. 17:8: [‘They that
dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were
not written in the book of life from the foundation of
the world.’], and amplified in statements such as,
‘Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world’ (Mt. 25:34), and, ‘He hath
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world.’
(Eph. 1:4).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 819.
“Those whose names are written in the book of
Life, as shown by a comparison of Rev. 21:27 with Rev.
22:14, are those who keep the Commandments of
God: that is, the remnant church mentioned in Rev.
12:17 as those ‘who keep the Commandments of God
and have the faith of Jesus.’ Thus proving in yet
another way that Rev. 17 is a portrayal of the mighty
conflict, involving the Sabbath-keeping remnant people
of God, which will result from the ascending of the beast
from its state of death back on to the stage of action
again, when it will go forth with even greater fury
against the people of God—a fury sustained by all the
mighty power of Satan as he would imitate the
resurrection of the Lord and reveal a mightier power
than ever before manifested by him.” Were, WATB, 64.
“All who are willing to be saved by Christ are
the elect of God. It is the obedient who are
predestinated from the foundation of the world.”
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 21, 51.
The Beast That Was, and Is Not, and Yet Is.—
“This time viewpoint gives us the key to unlock the
paradox, the apparent flat contradiction, between verses
8 and 10. In one verse the angel explains that the beast
‘was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit’ (verse 8), while in the other John was
told concerning the seven heads or kings, ‘Five are
fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come’
(verse 10). In other words, No. 6 of the seven heads is
reigning contemporary with the time that the beast
‘is not’—is out of action. The proof that the time
viewpoint must be the same in both verses is seen in the
fact that the two explanations are given by the same
angel in the same explanation of the very same
symbols. Also both verses use all three tenses—past,
present, and future. But as we shall see later, this
paradox is easily resolved when we get the correct
point of history from which the vision is present to
the apostle.” Price, Time of the End, 34,35.

483

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“She [the papacy] received a ‘deadly wound’ in
the Napoleonic Wars, and the pope himself was taken
prisoner. This occurred in the year 1798. Some Bible
interpreters see in this event a particular fulfillment of
this rather difficult portion of the prophecy. The power
that ‘was,’ they say, ceased to control, and another
period of her existence unfolded, comparatively
described as the ‘is not’ period. She had gone into
captivity (Rev. 13:10), and many writers of this time
fully believed that the papacy could never rise again. A
number of books were published by secular historians
emphasizing that belief. But John was shown that she
would ascend again and become a world power.”
Anderson, UR, 174.
“The ‘is not’ period of Revelation 17:8
corresponds perfectly with our present day, for the
power to persecute God’s people (the ‘beast’ power)
is today nonexistent, though many signs indicate that it
may soon be revived on a global scale.” Price, Time of
the End, 104.
“The deadly wound and its healing make clear that
the system of anti-Christianity represented by the
leopard beast was to exercise its despotic, persecuting
power during two distinct periods of time. The first
[fifth head] would be long—1260 years. The second
[seventh and eighth head] will be short—‘when he
cometh, he must continue a short space.’ (Rev,
17:10.) These two periods of beastly dominance
(persecution) are separated by a period of inaction
[sixth head], called ‘captivity’ in Revelation 13:10—
the period of the deadly wound. As already stated, this
period parallels what is called in the Book of Daniel ‘the
time of the end’ ...during which time the beast of
persecution ‘is not.’
“The important feature of this period of the deadly
wound, the time of the end, is its religious liberty, i.e.,
its absence of persecution. So far as precise dates go, it
began with the close of the 1260 years in 1798, which is
also the date when the pope was taken prisoner by the
French armies.” Price, Time of the End, 64,65.

REVELATION 17:9,10
And here is the mind which hath
wisdom.
The seven heads are seven
mountains, on which the woman sitteth.
And there are seven kings: five are
fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet
come; and when he cometh, he must
continue a short space.
Here is the Mind Which Hath Wisdom.—
“And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the
LORD, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is
understanding.” Job 28:28.

“The fear of the LORD is the beginning of
wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy is
understanding.” Proverbs 9:10.
The Seven Heads.—
“The seven heads are explained to be, first, seven
mountains, and then seven kings [or forms of
government.] The expression in verse 10, ‘and there are
seven kings,’ reads in the original, ‘and these are seven
kings.’ This makes the sentence read: ‘The seven
heads are seven mountains …and are seven kings,’
thus identifying heads, mountains, and kings.” Smith,
DR, 711.
“As the seven heads are said to be successive in
Revelation 17:9,10, they evidently represent all the
various successive nations through which Satan has tried
more or less successfully to control national affairs to
oppose or hinder the work of God.” Price, Time of the
End, 37.
Seven Mountains = Seven Heads.—
“‘The seven heads are seven mountains,’
mountains being a familiar symbol of governments
used by Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Zechariah.” Haskell, SSP,
296.
“And I will render unto Babylon and to all the
inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done
in Zion in your sight, saith the Lord. Behold, I am
against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the Lord,
which destroyest all the earth.” Jer. 51:24,25.
“(1) We are informed in chapter 13 that one of the
seven heads was wounded to death. This head therefore
cannot be a literal mountain; for it would be folly to
speak of wounding a mountain to death.
“(2) Each of the seven heads has a crown upon it.
But who ever saw a literal mountain with a crown
upon it?
“(3) The seven heads are evidently successive in
order of time; for we read, ‘Five are fallen, and one is,
and the other is not yet come.’ Revelation 17. But the
seven hills on which Rome is built are not successive,
and it would be absurd to apply such language to them.”
Smith, DR (1897), 486-487.
Seven Kings = Seven Mountains = Seven Heads.—
“These seven mountains are plainly interpreted
to mean ‘seven kings’ or kingdoms. ‘These are seven
kings.’ (R.V.). A king is often used to represent the
kingdom over which he rules. …To Nebuchadnezzar the
prophet Daniel said, ‘Thou are this head of gold,’ and
the head of gold in the image represented the kingdom of
Babylon as a whole under all its kings.” Bunch, TR, 243.
“Here we have a double symbolism; mountains
and heads. There is another double symbolism in verse
18—the woman and the city. Both the woman and the
city are symbols of a religious organization. The seven

484

REVELATION 17
mountains and seven heads represent seven political
kingdoms or empires. A mountain is a symbol of a
kingdom.” Cooke, #29-UR, 18.
“The heads of the beast must, according to Dan.
7:6 compared with Dan. 8:22, be explained as
kingdoms or governments. Mountains, according to
Dan. 2:35, 44 and Jer. 51:25, denote kingdoms. But the
version of Prof. Whiting, which is a literal translation of
the text, removes all obscurity from Rev. 17:9, 10: “The
seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman
sitteth, and they are seven kings.” Thus it will be seen
that the angel represents the heads as mountains, and
then explains the mountains to be seven successive
kings. Thus we see that the angel transferred the
meaning from one symbol to another, and then gave the
explanation of the second symbol.” Andrews, TAM, 41.
Time Viewpoint of Vision.—
“When he said, ‘Five are fallen , one is, and the
other is not yet come,’ was he speaking from the
standpoint of where he was actually. Or was he
speaking from the standpoint of where he appeared to be
in vision, as in Dan. 8:27. Here he [Daniel] said he was
actually in Shushan the palace, but in vision he was by
the river Ulai. His entire vision was given from the
standpoint of where he appeared to be in vision and
not from where he was actually.” Straw, SR, 103.
“The period since then [1798], ‘the time of the
end,’ which has already lasted a century and a half and
may last we know not how much longer, is obviously the
point regarded as the present in this prophecy, the point
from which the interpretation is given by the angel.”
Price, Time of the End, 41.
“The point of time from which the beast and its
rider are seen by the apostle is our own day, the time of
the end, not the time of the Roman emperors.” Price,
Time of the End, 34.
Rev. 13:1-3,
A Key to Understanding the
Heads.—
“And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a
beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten
horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his
heads the name of blasphemy.
“And the beast which I saw was like unto a
leopard [Greece], and his feet were as the feet of a bear
[Medo-Persia], and his mouth as the mouth of a lion
[Babylon]: and the dragon [Pagan Rome] gave him his
power, and his seat, and great authority.
And I saw one of his heads [Papal Rome] as it
were wounded to death..” Rev. 13:1-3.
“Revelation 13:1,2 provides a list of the first five
heads of the seven-headed beast. The first head begins
with Babylon, the second is Medo-Persia, the third is
Greece, the fourth is Pagan Rome, the fifth head that
receives a deadly wound is Papal Rome.” PJ

“The crown removed from Israel passed
successively to the kingdoms of Babylon, MedoPersia, Greece, and Rome.” Education, 179.
“There is need of a much closer study of the word
of God; especially should Daniel and the Revelation
have attention as never before in the history of our work.
…Read the book of Daniel. Call up, point by point, the
history of the kingdoms there represented.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 112.
“The prophecies of Daniel are our key to the
interpretation of Revelation. Daniel gives us Babylon,
Persia, Greece, Roman Empire, and the Roman
Church, but says nothing about Egypt and Assyria.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 474.
“Babylon was the first kingdom of universal
empire. It was founded by Nimrod, the great-grandson
of Noah. See Gen. 10:8-10. It lasted nearly seventeen
hundred years, though under different names; sometimes
called Babylon, sometimes Assyria, and sometimes
Chaldea. It continued from the time of Nimrod, to
that of Belshazzar, who was its last king.” White,
James, Bible Adventism, 78.
Five Are Fallen.—
“The powers represented by the seven heads must
be seven specific nations already referred to in the
various prophecies of Daniel and the Revelation. They
identify the first four heads with the four great world
empires of Daniel 2 and 7, the fifth with the little horn of
chs. 7 and 8 and the leopardlike beast of Rev. 13, the
sixth with the power represented in ch. 11:7, and the
seventh with the two-horned beast of ch. 13:11.
According to this pattern of interpretation the powers
represented by the first five heads would be Babylon,
Persia, Greece, the Roman Empire, and the papacy.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 855.
“At the time that great scene opened in heaven
(1844), the papacy was at a low ebb. Only a few years
earlier she had received her deadly wound. At the time
this prophecy of Revelation 17 has its special
application, five of these great powers were fallen.
These were, Babylon, Persia, Greece, pagan Rome,
and papal Rome—the deadly wound having been
inflicted upon the papacy in 1798.” Anderson, UR,
177.
Fifth Head.—
“Since the seven heads are successive, and we have
already learned that the fifth of the series is the one here
mentioned [that received the deadly wound], this head
was all of the beast then existing; therefore when this
head received its deadly wound, it was the beast itself
that was put out of action. In other words, the head
and the beast are here synonymous.” Price, Time of the
End, 63.

485

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“It was not the woman that received the wound, but
the beast. Obviously the wound means the taking
away of the beastly power to dominate the world and
deal with ‘heretics.’ This deadly wound will not be
healed until the old power of persecution is restored.
“How is it that so many people point to the present
popularity and prosperity of the Catholic Church as
proof that the deadly wound is already healed? Why do
they not see that they are confusing the symbols of
woman and beast, and crediting the still defunct beast
with the church’s health and prosperity, which are never
once threatened in prophecy until its final, inglorious end
by fire in Revelation 18?
“…Not until Rome has the power to make her
will and doctrines effective through cooperating
legislative enactments and judicial decrees will the
wound be healed. But such a day is coming on apace.
“…The beast only is affected, and it is completely
paralyzed—it ‘is not.’ (Verse 8.)” Price, Time of the
End, 74,75.

One Is, and the Other Is Not Yet Come.—
“This statement reveals that the seven kingdoms
are successive: one follows the other.” Cooke, #29UR, 19.
Heads Six Through Eight.—
“The angel says further, ‘five [kings] are fallen,’ or
passed away. Again he says ‘one [king] is’—the sixth
was then reigning. The other [the seventh] was not yet
come, and when he cometh he must continue for a short
space.’ Last of all, ‘the beast that was and is not, even
he is the eighth, and is of the seven.’” Smith, DR, 711.
The Sixth Head is Not the United States.—
“At this period, says the angel, the satanic beast of
intolerance ‘was, and is not’ (verse 8), meaning the
same as the period of the deadly wound; yet the angel
immediately goes on to state that one of the heads ‘is’
(verse 10), or ‘is reigning’ (Good-speed). This must
be No. 6 of the series. In other words, No. 6 must be
in existence or be reigning during our day, from 1798
onward. This much seems to be certain. Accordingly,

we need to look around in our modern world in order to
identify, if possible, the world power meant by this
profoundly important prophecy.
“Two candidates have been suggested. The twohorned beast, or false prophet, in all probability must
have a place somewhere in this series of world powers.
In the thirteenth chapter it follows next in succession
after the infliction of the deadly wound upon the leopard
beast. But it was very youthful and lamblike in 1798.
At that time it could not possibly be looked upon as a
dominant power. In several other prophecies mention is
made beforehand of a power in anticipation of what it
would later become; such seems to be the case here. It
can well be argued that this two-horned beast does
not qualify as one of the heads in this series until it
begins to speak like a dragon, for all the heads are
pictured as antagonistic to God and His truth; but in its
lamblike early stage it is kindly and harmless.” Price,
Time of the End, 42.
“Because of this intrinsic difference between
America in her rise and early career and the other
nations represented by the preceding symbols, it follows
that in her early days America cannot possibly qualify
as one of the series of the seven heads, for these seven
heads represent nations under the control of Satan in
his work of trying to run the world. Only in its second
phase, after it abandons these two guiding principles
[civil and religious liberty] and begins to speak ‘as a
dragon,’ does it [America] become like the others, and
thus one of the series of the seven heads.
“But though there are plenty of signs of apostasy
all around us, the official change from the lamblike
horns to the dragon voice has not yet occurred. It is still
future. Similarly, the mystery of iniquity was already
working in Paul’s day; plenty of signs of apostasy were
visible by the time of the Council of Nicea; still more
were apparent when the capital was moved to
Constantinople and the dragon thus gave the bishops his
seat and great authority; but the prophecy does not begin
to date the career of the leopard beast, No. 5 of the seven
heads, until AD 538. Neither does the two-horned
begin to qualify as one of the seven heads until it
begins to act like the others in making open war
against God and the people of God.” Price, Time of
the End, 81.
Another Key to Understanding the 7 Heads.—
“Every one familiar with the prophecies of Daniel
and the Revelation know that, in any extended series,
the next one following is always pictured as the cause
of the downfall of its predecessor. Ac-accordingly, in
the case before us, we need to consider what it was that
caused the deadly wound in 1798, and perhaps also
still keeps this deadly wound from healing.” Price, Time
of the End, 42,43.
The Sixth head.—
“The head that ‘is’ was the power that rose in
mighty opposition to the true faith of Christ and

486

REVELATION 17
effectively replaced the little horn (first beast of
Revelation 13) as the dominant force opposing pure
Christianity. It was the sixth head that ‘is.’
“This sixth head power is also represented by a
beast. For some reason this beast receives much less
attention than the others, yet it is no less significant.
It comes to our notice in Rev. 11:7: [“And when they
shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war
against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.”].
“…A massive effort to destroy these two witnesses
[the Old and New Testaments] would signal the rise of
the sixth head—the head that ‘is’ at the time of the
setting of the prophecy of Revelation 17. The beast
which represents this power graphically described in
Revelation chapter 11. (Rev. 11:7-9 quoted.)
“Notice, this beast arises when the two wit-nesses
complete the period of their testimony during the rule of
the little horn—that is the year 1798.
“…The beast of Rev. 11:7 was not just a
philosophy or a ‘religion’ of atheism. It was a political
entity as indicated by its representation as a symbolic
beast. The political arm of atheism emerged and
grew, as men such as Karl Marx in the nineteenth
century, and later Lenin studied the French
Revolution. By 1917, Communism, political atheism,
the spirit which had been troubling Europe
throughout the nineteenth century, seized power; in
Russia. It spread rapidly to Eastern Europe, Asia,
South America, the Caribbean, Central A-America
and Africa.
Communism became a mighty
worldwide force against the true church of God.
“But the sixth head was not to be the last. Its
power was to cease, for there was to be one final head,
the seventh.” Standish, Russell & Colin, TB14P, 52-54.
“It was not the historic monarchy of France, the
eldest son of the Church, which brought about the
downfall of the Papacy in 1798. It was what The Great
Controversy, page 269, calls ‘a new manifestation of
satanic power,’ what Revelation calls the beast from
the bottomless pit, or the abyss. The Directory is the
name given to the group of five men who ruled from
1795 to 1799; it was they who sent Berthier to take
the pope prisoner and bring him to France. And it
was the fanatical, organized atheism which they
represented that brought about the overthrow of
every Catholic government throughout the world at
that time or soon after-ward. In our day it is this same
beast from the bottomless pit, outwardly toned down and
more polite and showing less outward fanaticism, that
still keeps the deadly wound from being healed.
“Please do not misunderstand me. The complete
separation of church and state is a wise, good policy.
Civil and religious liberty are both good. But the
French Revolutionists stole these heavenly ideas from
the Americans of a previous generation, and used
them to camouflage their propaganda of anti-God
and anti-Bible which spread so universally at that
time. And the Biblical higher criticism, or the liberalism

of our day, the evolution philosophy, or the modern antiGenesis apostasy now so universal throughout the
Occidental world, are just the same manifestation of
satanic power, though in a style of the twentieth century.
It was new in 1798, but today we have grown so
accustomed to it that we take it for granted.
“And this …is what is meant by No. 6 of the
seven heads. Without doubt this is what brought about
the deadly wound in 1798. At that time it could
correctly be described as a new manifestation of satanic
power, for nothing like it had been known before in the
history of the nations. But from that day to this, under
various changes and disguises, it has become the
dominant intellectual power throughout the
Occidental world. It is this anti-Genesis apostasy
which still keeps the deadly wound from being
healed, which indicates that it is the prophetic successor
of No. 5 of the series of the seven heads, and hence must
qualify as No. 6.” Price, Time of the End, 42-44.
“When God’s work became international in
extent, Satan’s organized opposition also became
more universal. Hence the symbolic beasts which
represent Satan’s work during our day, the time of the
end, must necessarily represent more universal or
ideological influences, rather than mere national or
political groups.” Price, Time of the End, 46.
“The beast from the bottomless pit which made
deadly war upon the Bible at the time of the French
Revolution …has reappeared several times since. We
have named it organized atheism, infidelity on a
national scale. It reappeared briefly in most of
Europe in 1848; then it gained Russia in 1917. In a
slightly camouflaged disguise it showed itself in
Germany in 1933, where it held out for about a dozen
years. More recently it has taken over the rule of
China, from which it is reaching out to overrun more
of the Orient. Many do not realize that the scientific
philosophy of evolution is merely a more polite and
disguised form of the same power, which we have
named the modern anti-Genesis apostasy and have listed
it as No. 6 of the series of the seven heads. It has not yet
taken over the government of America and the other
Occidental countries, and perhaps will be stymied from
doing this in a formal way by some upsurge of the power
of Babylon the Great.” Price, Time of the End, 55,56.
“The beast from the abyss is not a nation; it is an
ideology, international in extent. Even the modern
Catholic Church, though exemplified by the Vatican in
Rome, is not limited by any national boundaries; it is an
ideology that pervades the entire world. The work of
God is global, and the opposition to it is also worldwide.
Thus the change which came over the world a
century and a half ago was fundamental change of
ideas. France was the concrete agent which initiated
the change; but it was the ideology then dominating
the Directory, the ruling power in Paris, which was
behind the change. …Since they did not like the

487

GEMS FROM REVELATION
lenient way that their general, young Bonaparte, was
dealing with the pope and the Church of Rome, they sent
Berthier down to Italy with specific orders of what to do.
This was why the sick, aged pontiff was seized with
studied disrespect and brought as a prisoner to France.
“One of the cardinal ideas of the Revolution which
these leaders of France were determined to spread by
force to the rest of the world was the complete
separation of church and state. They were constantly
prating about civil and religious liberty, the same two
lamblike ideas which had been incorporated into the
American Constitution a quarter of a century previously.
“…These ideas, without possible contradiction, are
the real cause of the deadly wound, and the continuing
cause of its still remaining unhealed.” Price, Time of the
End, 67,68,70.
“Nearly two centuries have elapsed [since 1798].
Inasmuch as the series of heads must follow one another
with no interregnum, No. 6 must have been reigning
since 1798, the time of the end, the period of the deadly
wound. And this No. 6, as we have seen, must be the
beast from the abyss, which gave the death stroke to
No. 5 and is presently ruling half the world, with its
doctrines and ideology infiltrating and perverting all
the rest.
“In the early days of the world the Bible dwelt
much on the replacement of one nation by another. But
in the sight of Heaven the spread of ideas is much more
important than the shift of national boundary lines. And
since the work of God and its opposition have both
become global in extent, the prophecies of the last days
ignore national distinctions and deal with the spread of
doctrines or ideologies. Hence we should train ourselves
to think of the entire world of our day as divided into
just three groups: The dragon, the leopard beast, and the
false prophet. This threefold classification of the
world during the time of the end must ignore
nationalities and deal with doctrines and ideas.
“On this basis, the dragon (here used as
synonymous with the beast from the abyss) would be
larger and more inclusive than Marxian communism….”
Price, Time of the End, 81,82.

“Our modern time may be described as
characterized by the two freedoms, civil and religious, as
already explained. These have culminated in the antiGenesis apostasy here in America, while via the French
they have culminated in the communism now
dominant throughout so much of the rest of the
world. …It is the present-day spirit of toleration by the
reigning ‘head’ which keeps the deadly wound of the
‘beast’ from healing.” Price, Time of the End, 102,103.
“The Jacobins, with a background worse than
paganism, set the world an example of what human
beings are capable of when they throw off all restraint
and come under the complete control of demons from
the bottomless pit.
“In its sporadic, unorganized form atheism or
infidelity has always existed. But in 1793 it was
organized and gained control of one of the leading
nations of Europe, and with fanatical zeal it set out to
subdue or at least propagandize all the rest of the
world. In that particular form and manner its day was
brief. In 1848, in the form of Marxian communism, it
seemed on the point of gaining power again. Then in
1917 it captured Russia, and a little later China; and
from these centers it has spread out over more than half
of the world’s population.
“This is its organized, or national, form. But we
must not forget that every college and university
throughout Europe and America, every newspaper,
and every other source of publicity or entertainment
has for more than two generations been engaged in a
far more subtle but no less effective campaign against
the Bible doctrine of creation, and thus against every
other truth of revealed religion, of which creation is
the logical and indispensable foundation. This is the
beast’s infiltration method, his fifth column.
Throughout all of the so-called ‘free’ peoples of the
Western World, the philosophy of development or
evolution during a thousand million years is almost
universally taught and believed, with its corollary that
man has grown up from some lower animal ancestors
instead of having been created sinless and with no bias
toward evil. Logically following the evolution theory is
the conclusion that it is not man’s fault but his
misfortune that he is a sinner and subject to disease and
death; hence if any being is responsible for the evil and
misery in the world, it must be God Himself, who made
the human race by this strange process of development
from animal ancestors by the survival of the strongest
and most ruthless.” Price, Time of the End, 150.
“In many of the nations of Europe the powers that
ruled in church and state had for centuries been
controlled by Satan through the medium of the papacy
[#5]. But here is brought to view a new manifestation
of satanic power [#6].
“It had been Rome’s policy, under a profession of
reverence for the Bible, to keep it locked up in an
unknown tongue and hidden away from the people.
Under her rule the witnesses prophesied ‘clothed in

488

REVELATION 17
sackcloth.’ But another power—[#6] the beast from
the bottomless pit—was to arise to make open,
avowed war upon the word of God.”
Great
Controversy, 268,269.
“‘The beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless
pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them.’ The atheistical power that
ruled in France during the Revolution and the Reign
of Terror, did wage such a war against God and His holy
word as the world had never witnessed.” Great
Controversy, 273.
“While a student at school, Gaussen had
encountered that spirit of rationalism which pervaded
all Europe during the latter part of the eighteenth
and the opening of the nineteenth century; and when
he entered the ministry he was not only ignorant of true
faith, but inclined to skepticism.” Great Controversy,
364.
“And at the time of the end shall the king of the
south [Egypt = atheism =#6] push at him [king of the
north= the Papacy =#5].” Daniel 11:40.
“Millions in Catholic countries turn in
disappointment from the deceptions of Rome and
become Communists.
The high percentage of
Communists in such Catholic countries as Italy,
Spain, Cuba and all of Latin America bears this out.
Thus Catholicism produces millions of Communists.
These two giants, both subjects of Divine prediction, are
preparing the world for its final Armageddon.”
Burnside, RWU, 195.
“One of the principles of understanding the seven
heads of Rev. 17 is that the present head always
conquers the previous head. (This is true in every case
even when Pagan Rome gave Papal Rome its power—a
spiritual conquest.)
“Who conquered the Papacy in 1798? Dan. 11:40
says that at “the time of the end” (around 1798) the
"King of the South" (Egypt, which is symbolic of
organized Atheism in the NT period, see Rev. 11:7) gave
“the King of the North” (the Papacy) a “push”—a
DEADLY wound. This was fulfilled in the French
Revolution of 1793-98. Here, organized Atheism (the
King of the South) is called a ‘kingdom’.
“Organized Atheism is also described in Rev.
11:7 as the beast arising out of the bottomless pit in the
French Revolution just before 1798 to make war against
the two witnesses (and those that live by these two
witnesses.) This beast power is again, the power of
organized atheism, communism, evolutionism, etc.
“Thus, Organized Atheism gave the deadly
wound to the papacy AT THE SAME TIME that the
symbol of the U.S. is introduced in Rev. 13—1798. It is
introduced in prophecy AT THE SAME TIME AS THE
USA is introduced, but in 1798 America was a power
that was providing religious liberty for all its citizens,

even the Catholics in the colony of Maryland. The
United States from 1798 till the present, has been a
haven for religious liberty.
“In contrast the 6th head must be Atheism
because it is the power since 1798 that has been a
persecutor of God's people. Its philosophies have
overrun the world, even America. One of Atheism’s
chief doctrines, Evolutionism, completely conquered the
U.S. and the world’s educational systems. Even the
Papacy has accepted Evolution. The 6th head’s ‘God is
Dead’ movement also swept through US theological
circles in the 60’s.
“Revelation chapter 13 plainly shows that the
LAST TWO POWERS ON EARTH AT THE END OF
TIME that persecute God’s church are apostate
Protestantism (USA) and the Papacy. Thus, they
must be the 7th (USA) HEAD and the 8th (Revived
Papacy) HEAD. Yes, the 8th head comes up only as
fast as the 7th head falls into the depths of apostasy—
FROM BEING A PROTECTOR OF GOD’S CHURCH
TO A PERSECUTOR.
“Who conquers Atheism? It is the USA-Papal
Alliance, the 7th and 8th heads. They continue to wage
war against the global forces of Atheism which are still
existent. The battle of Creationism vs. Evolutionism in
the U.S. is part of that war in which the 7th head is
battling and conquering the 6th.
“The United States (Apostate Protestantism) cannot
be the 6th head because it has not persecuted God’s
church, and won’t till the 6th head is conquered. Then it
becomes the 7th head and a persecutor of God's
church.” PJ
The Sixth Head is Still Dominant Today.—
“In 1903 seventeen persons came together and
structured the coming [Russian] revolution. They had
neither guns nor planes, ships nor tanks. They had no
arsenal of military weapons. But they had an arsenal of
ideas. These ideas they exploded in the minds of
peasants and villagers.
“In the next fourteen years, from 1903 to 1917, that
17 became 40,000. And with 40,000 they took over
Russia! During the next twenty years, from 1917 to
1937, that 40,000 extended their control until they
numbered 167 million. Then in the next twenty years,
from 1937 to 1957, the 167 million became 963
million. With that in mind, Dr. Fred Schwarz challenges
us as Christians by claiming that this philosophy has
conquered more people in twenty years than
Christians have ever told about Christ and His
salvation during nearly 2,000 years!
“What is the inspiration behind such growth? Mao
Tse-Tung declares in his Red Book, the bible of
850,000,000 people, ‘Our weapons are not machineguns, but the ideas of Marxism-Leninism.’ Yes, these
ideas are the background of the ideological war
between atheism and theism. Battle after battle is
being fought and won, not so much for geographical
territory as for the minds and souls of men. Arnold
Toynbee expressed it well in Religion in Life when he

489

GEMS FROM REVELATION
said, ‘The fundamental conflict is not political but
religious.’—Cited in God Still Speaks in the Space Age,
p.60.
“…It is both sobering and challenging to realize
that for every person who reads the Bible as the Word of
God there are five studying the ideas of Marx and Lenin.
Many more millions of mothers are telling their children
that God does not exist than those who tell them He does
exist., and that Jesus Christ is the Saviour of mankind.”
Anderson, UDP, 169. [Written 1975.]
Seventh Head.—
“Only in its second phase, after it abandons these
two guiding principles [civil and religious liberty] and
begins to speak ‘as a dragon,’ does it [America]
become like the others, and thus one of the series of
the seven heads [the 7th].” Price, Time of the End, 81.
“When the time comes that America speaks as a
dragon she will be instrumental in causing the whole
world to worship the first beast. In causing the first
beast to live, America will bring back the beast of
intolerance or persecution. So the dragon phase of
the two-horned beast would then become the seventh
head. She would then be in opposition to God and His
people and would lead out in causing the whole world to
follow in her footsteps.” Metcalf, GPDR, 151.

Time Magazine: Feb. 24, 1992.
The 7th and 8th heads battle the 6th.
“At the time when the Papacy, robbed of its
strength, was forced to desist from persecution, John
beheld a new power coming up to echo the dragon’s
voice, and carry forward the same cruel and
blasphemous work. This power, the last that is to

wage war against the church and the law of God, is
represented by a beast with lamblike horns. The
beasts preceding it had risen from the sea; but this came
up out of the earth, representing the peaceful rise of the
nation which it symbolized—the United States.” Signs,
2/8/1910.
“What about the two-horned beast, or false
prophet, which we Adventists for a hundred years have
been teaching means the United States, making it No. 7
of the series? The prophecy describes it as having ‘two
horns like a lamb,’ which The Great Controversy says
‘fitly’ represents the character of this country in its early
days, ‘when presented to the prophet as ‘coming up’ in
1798.’ (P.441.) Certainly this character of gentleness
and harmlessness is still a truthful characterization of
America in the matter of civil and religious liberty. This
would seem to indicate that at this stage of its career
America cannot qualify as one of the seven heads, for
they are the opponents of God and the people of God.
“Yet after this first statement about having two
horns like a lamb, every single statement about this twohorned beast is bad, terribly bad. It is pictured as a
clever but tricky deceiver, the most accomplished and
dangerous deceiver of all human history. At the climax
of its evil career it will speak ‘as a dragon’; but the
detailed charge against it gives a list of some of the
spectacular deceptions with which it induces the people
into making an image to the leopard beast (No. 5 of the
series), and then gets everybody to pay homage to this
first beast, in this way bringing it back to life again—
healing its deadly wound. This, of course, is in effect
bringing the beast of intolerance, or religious
persecution, back from the bottomless pit, the state of
death, as foretold in Rev. 17:8.
“When God deals with the situation, this twohorned beast is ‘cast alive’ into the first lake of fire at
the second coming of Christ.
“This astonishing transformation in character and
conduct from the lamblike horns to the dragon voice will
be considered later. Here we are merely concerned with
correctly understanding and identifying the series of the
seven heads.
“A recent translation of Revelation 17:11 clears up
some features of the problem. ‘The beast which was and
is no more is an eighth by count, though actually one of
the seven previous to him—he it is that goes away to
destruction.’—John Wick Bowman, The Drama of the
Revelation, p. 114.
“This makes it clear that the rejuvenated Papacy
would be No. 8 of the series, and strongly suggests
that the image of the beast (the dragon phase of the
two-horned beast) must be No. 7, with the anti-Genesis
apostasy of our time as No. 6.” Price, Time of the End,
44-46.
“The late Jesuit scholar Malachi Martin, …in his
popular book, The Keys of This Blood [page 15],
observed that ‘we are all involved in an all-out, noholds-barred, three-way global competition’ between

490

REVELATION 17
Roman
Catholicism [the
papacy],
Marxist
Communism [the Soviet Union], and Western
Capitalism [the United States] to ‘establish the first
one-world system of government that has ever existed in
the society of nations.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 73.
Shall Continue a Short Space.—
“The agencies of evil are combining their forces
and consolidating. They are strengthening for the last
great crisis. Great changes are soon to take place in our
world, and the final movements will be rapid ones.”
9Testimonies, 11.
“And now for a little space grace hath been
shewed from the LORD our God, to leave us a remnant
to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our
God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in
our bondage.” Ezra 9:8.

here in Rev. 17:11 as the 8th head, which is of the 7
(the fifth).” PJ
“When the beast exists again as ‘the eighth,’ ‘they
that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names
were not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world, when they behold the beast.’
A remarkably similar statement is made in ch. 13:3,8 (cf.
v. 4), of the world’s attitude toward the beast of that
chapter when its deadly wound is healed: ‘All the
world wondered after the beast…. And all that dwell
upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world.’”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 851.
“A recent translation of Revelation 17:11 clears up
some features of the problem [of identifying the series of
the seven heads]. ‘The beast which was and is no more
is an eighth by count, though actually one of the seven
previous to him—he it is that goes away to
destruction.’—John Wick Bowman, The Drama of the
Book of Revelation, p. 114. This makes it clear that
the rejuvenated Papacy would be No. 8 of the
series….” Price, Time of the End, 45.

REVELATION 17:11
And the beast that was, and is not, even
he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and
goeth into perdition.
Eight, the Number of Resurrection
“The first day of the week is mentioned 8 times in
the New Testament; reminding us of the resurrection of
Christ (see Matt. 28:1; Mark 16:2,9; Luke 24:1; John
20:1,19; Acts 20:7; 1 Cor. 16:2.” Anonymous Tract
The Eighth Head.—
This is the beast [the Roman Catholic church
system] in its revived state, in the ‘yet is’ period
following its ascent out of the ‘bottomless pit.’” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 856.
“How do we know that this 8th head was the fifth
head? Because of Rev. 13:3—the beast (Papal Romethe fifth head) receives a deadly wound that is later
HEALED! In Revelation 13:1,3, there are seven heads
on the beast, one head [the 5th] receives a deadly wound.
This death-wound is healed, and thus it is ‘resurrected’

Since 1929, the neighborhood Catholic church
represents, not only a church, but a foreign country
opposed to the U.S. constitution. Since 1984, the U.S.,
renouncing her Protestant heritage, has sent an
ambassador to this church/state.
“Since we have already shown that papal Rome
grew out of and succeeded pagan Rome, we must
conclude that the eighth head, which was of the seven
and ultimately exercised their power, represents the
papacy, with all its mixture of so-called Christian
doctrines with pagan superstitions and observances.”
Smith, DR, 711.
The 7th and 8th Heads Clearly Predicted.—
“The last half of Revelation 13 plainly shows the
last two powers that control planet Earth. The 7th head,
the U.S.A. (apostate Protestantism) causes all the
world to worship (obey) the 8th head, the revived
papacy. (See Rev. 13:12 for more comments.)” PJ
Goeth Into Perdition.—

491

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Gr. apoleia, ‘utter destruction,’ ‘annihilation.’
This indicates the utter end of the beast (cf. Rev.
17:11).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 854.
“Let no man deceive you by any means: for that
day shall not come, except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition.” 2 Th. 2:3.
“I beheld then because of the voice of the great
words which the horn spake: I beheld even till the beast
was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame.” Daniel 7:11.

REVELATION 17:12
And the ten horns which thou sawest
are ten kings, which have received no
kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings
one hour with the beast.
Time Period.—
“Although the 17th chapter of Revelation seems to
be covering the same ground as the 13th, the indications
are that many points are dealing more with modern
Babylon than with ancient. The 12th verse rather
indicates that the ten horns are the re-instituted ten
kingdoms in modern times; it says that they will receive
power as kings one hour with the beast, and this is just
before they finally give their power and strength to
the beast, preceding the time when the beast will be
destroyed.” Straw, SR, 109.
Ten Horns Which Have Received No Kingdom.—
“The Powers of Western Europe today are as
definitely pointed out by the prophecy as they could be
without specifically naming them.
“…Some are very powerful, such as Britain,
France, and Germany; while others are weak, such as
Switzerland, Spain, and Portugal; while Italy stands, as it
were, between strong and weak. So these seven of the
original ten stand just where Daniel, from the dream that
was given to Nebuchadnezzar, said they would stand.
Dan. 2:40-43. They stand there in precisely the
condition in which that prophecy said they would
stand—‘partly strong, and partly broken,’ or weak.
Britain, France, and Germany have spread their power
over the whole world; and have so intertwined
themselves in the affairs of the whole world that what
touches the world touches them, and what touches
them touches the world.
“Thus the first effect of the first four of the Seven
Trumpets was the blotting out of the Western Empire of
Rome; and the second effect was the planting of the
modern nations of Western Europe, and among them the
great nations of today. Dan. 7:7, 24. They are referred to
later, in the book of Revelation, in the description of the
dragon, and also of the Beast having ‘seven heads and
ten horns.’” Jones, GNOT, 32,33.

“It is interesting to note that the Council of
Europe has chosen as its symbol of representation a
picture of the tower of Babel with the motto,
‘Europe—Many Tongues, One Voice.’ The Papacy,
too, desires such a unity. ‘What we need to seek today is
a common tongue,’ said the Pope, ‘and a fresh
understanding, destroying all the walls which separate
people and nations and mobilizing all the spiritual and
moral forces for life in the third millennium.’
“This EC emblem, and this ‘common tongue,’ is
nothing new to the Bible. The builders of the literal
tower of Babel sought to unite together as one-world
power and build a city that reached to heaven. (See
Genesis 11:1-6.) The Bible says that these people had
one tongue and one purpose, and they sought to make a
‘name’ for themselves. It also states that the Lord
scattered them and confounded their language.
“Looking forward to the present day, God used the
symbol of Babylon in His prophetic word to identify
those today who are seeking to build and end time
‘new world order.’ He revealed in His Word that world
leaders would seek to make a name for themselves and
disregard His commandments.
“…Daniel, chapters two and three, describe the
characteristics of ancient Babylon as: (1) pagan in its
worship, though it professed to believe in God, (2) it
ultimately exalted itself above God, and (3) sought to
force others to worship its own interpretation of
God’s Word (4) on pain of death. (See Daniel 2:47;
3:1-20.) [Editor’s note: (5) Babylon focused on building
an earthly kingdom.]
“…Any religious power or church that seeks to
compel the conscience by force, actually works for the
eternal loss of souls. That is why the warning given by
God in Revelation 14 is spoken against an end-time
religious–political power called Babylon, which
makes, ‘causes’ or ‘compels,’ men to ‘worship’
according to the dictates of men. (See Revelation 14:8;
13:16). That is also why the great city of Babylon, used
in Bible prophecy as a symbol of a last-day power upon
this earth, is fallen—‘Because she made all nations
drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication [Editor:
fornication = union of church and state].’ Revelation
14:8.” Rafferty, PI, 90,91,112.
“The ten kings are said in verse 12 to have ‘not yet
received royal power.’ But in verses 1 and 2 they have
already as kings gone to bed with the harlot. ‘I will
show you …the great harlot,’ says the angel, ‘with
whom the kings of the earth have committed
fornication.’ So they once did have royal power. In
chapter 13 we saw them wearing their crowns during the
1260 years. In a little while from now they’re going to
get ‘authority as kings’ again (no doubt as
totalitarian states) and rule with the beast for an
‘hour’ (verse 12), during which they will ‘make war
on the Lamb’ (verse 14) and turn against the harlot
(verse 16).
“…The ‘ten horns,’ which once represented the

492

REVELATION 17
intolerant kingdoms of Europe and which are now moreor-less tolerant democracies, will momentarily become
harshly intolerant totalitarian entities.
“When we first met the ten horns in Daniel 7 they
stood for the nations of Europe. … But in Rev-elation
17:12 they appear in the end time to represent the ‘the
kings of the whole world,’ as in Revelation 16:14.
Once [the papacy], too, was confined to Europe. In our
day it has been spread very widely.
“Before the 1798 era—before the industrial
revolution, before the American and French revolutions,
before the worldwide distribution of Western ideas, and
so on—the appropriate prophecies of Daniel and
Revelation applied largely to Europe and the Middle
East. But now the appropriate prophecies are
universal in their application.
“…Bible prophecy tends to select for mention
those religious and political entities which exist where
God’s people live, because prophecy frequently concerns
itself with the persecution of God’s people and because
God’s people possess Scripture and can benefit from the
inspired instruction. In the end time the gospel goes to
all the world, God’s people are found in every nation,
and Bible prophecy speaks of all the world’s nations.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 474,475,477,478.
“For they are the spirits of devils, working
miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and
of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that
great day of God Almighty.” Rev. 16:14.

Time Magazine, December 9, 1991. Picture of
Woman Riding a Beast—the European Union.
(Notice how 12 stars surround the woman’s head
as if it is the woman in Rev. 12:1.)
(See Rev. 12:3, 13:1, and 17:3 for more comments
on the ten horns.)

“Since the dragon, the leopard beast, and the scarlet
beast all have the same seven heads and ten horns, it
seems feasible that they must be closely related in
meaning, if not is some ways identical. … The ten
horns of the scarlet beast of chapter 17 have no
crowns upon them suggesting that this vision applies
at a later period. After the ten horns have ceased to do
the bidding of the Papacy, a fact further suggested by the
statement that these ten kings ‘have not yet received
royal power,’ or the power to oppress or lord it over
the minds and lives of men; ‘but they are to receive
authority as kings for one hour, together with the
beast.’ (Rev. 17:12, RSV). In other words, at the time
here spoken of intolerance and persecution had ceased
for the time being, but would again be revived, along
with the power of the beast from the abyss, the
bottomless pit. And how accurately this describes our
own times, when the power to persecute has been
quiescent for nearly two centuries, but when the
ominous signs of the revival of intolerance are visible
to all!” Price, Time of the End, 32,33.
“The dragon or serpent power in Rev. 12 continues
down through the Christian era to the last days.
Therefore the dragon involves more than pagan
Rome. In prophecy, a beast represents a political power
(Dan. 7:17), therefore the dragon (which is a beast)
must represent political powers that are used by
Satan to oppose the cause of God. What political
powers were used by Satan to oppose His people after
the fall of pagan Rome? Rome’s territory was
occupied by the Gothic barbarians who formed
themselves into the ten kingdoms of Western Europe.
Most of these powers of Europe at various times were
effective agents of Satan in opposing God’s people. In
Rev. 12:3, the dragon is described as having ‘ten horns.’
These represent the ten divisions of Western Rome (Dan.
7:24). Whenever one reads of the ten horns in Daniel or
revelation, they always represent, at least, or initially,
the ten kingdoms of Western Europe. Thus the
original kingdoms of Western Europe are clearly a part
of the dragon power. The same author quoted above
[Ellen G. White] lays down a principle as to what
constitutes the dragon power:
“Kings, rulers and governors have placed upon
themselves the brand of antichrist and are
represented as the dragon who goes to make war with
the saints—with those who keep the commandments of
God and who have the faith of Jesus.” Testimonies to
Ministers, 39.
“If the dragon of Rev. 12:3-4 was pagan Rome and
in Rev. 12:4-16 was the ten kingdoms of Western
Europe, who then comprises the dragon in verse 17 in
the end time? The answer is ‘kings, rulers and
governors (who) have placed themselves under the
brand of antichrist.’ The earthly antichrist is the
Papacy. The dragon [and the ten horns], therefore, of
[Rev. 12] verse 17 represents the political powers who
in the last days, place themselves under the brand of
the Papacy and make war on God’s people.” Cooke,

493

GEMS FROM REVELATION
#26-UR, 7,8.
Ten Horns (Church/State Systems) Receive Power As
Kings.—
“Many of the Protestant churches are following
Rome’s example of iniquitous connection with ‘the
kings of the earth’—the state churches, by their
relation to secular governments; and other
denominations, by seeking the favor of the world.”
Great Controversy, 383.
“…The ‘ten horns,’ which once represented the
intolerant kingdoms of Europe and which are now moreor-less tolerant democracies, will momentarily become
harshly intolerant totalitarian entities.” Maxwell,
God Cares, 475.
One Hour.—
“Some interpret the expression ‘one hour’ as an
actual measurement of time, an hour being 1/24 part of a
day; and 1/24 of a prophetic day or a literal year would
be fifteen days.” Anderson, UR, 179.
“This word, one hour comes from the Greek hora
which primarily is equivalent to one hour. But it cannot
be translated in that literal sense in every instance;
rather, the following places where it is used show that it
means a short or brief period of time. See Rev. 18:10,
14:6,7; John 5:35; 1 Thess. 2:17; Phil. 15; 2 Cor. 7:8.”
Straw, SR, 109.
“When I was daily with you in the temple, ye
stretched forth no hands against me: but this is your
hour, and the power of darkness.” Luke 22:53.
“The brief ‘hour’ of ch. 17:12 witnesses the climax
of satanic planning for the unification of the world
through a compact between the apostate religious
organizations of earth, as represented by the woman,
and the political powers of earth, as represented by
the beast.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 857.
Ten Horns as Kings With the Beast.—
“During the Dark Ages, these ‘ten kings’ were
contemporaneous with the papacy and gave her their
political strength and military power so that she could
exercise control over European affairs. These ‘ten’
future ‘kings’ will also follow in a similar pattern by
once again lending their political and military power to
the ‘beast’ in a global alliance to enforce Sunday
worship. Yet, even though this alliance will ‘make war
with the Lamb,’ the ‘Lamb shall overcome them’ as the
‘King of kings’ and ‘Lord of lords.’” Swearingen,
TOOTN, 86.

REVELATION 17:13,14
These have one mind, and shall give
their power and strength unto the beast.
These shall make war with the Lamb,

and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is
Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they
that are with him are called, and chosen,
and faithful.
These Have One Mind.—
“The so-called Christian world is to be the theater
of great and decisive actions. Men in authority will
enact laws controlling the conscience, after the example
of the papacy. Babylon will make all nations drink of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Every nation
will be involved…. ‘These have one mind, and shall
give their power and strength unto the beast.’
“There will be a universal bond of union, one
great harmony, a confederacy of Satan’s forces.”
(Manuscript 24, 1891). Selected Messages, Vol. 3, 392.
“John in the Revelation writes of the unity of those
living on the earth to make void the law of God: ‘These
have one mind, and shall give their power and
strength unto the beast. These shall make war with
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he
is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they that are
with Him are called, and chosen, and faithful’ (Rev.
17:13, 14). ‘And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs
come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the
mouth of the beast, and out of the false prophet.’
(Rev. 16:13).
“All who will exalt and worship the idol Sabbath, a
day that God has not blessed, help the devil and his
angels with all the power of their God-given ability,
which they have perverted to a wrong use.” Manuscript
Releases, Vol. 8, 344.
“Isaiah 8:9-15 is an Old Testament prophecy
foretelling this same worldwide combination of the
nations in the last of the last days. The ‘confederacy’
here spoken of is exactly equivalent to the statement
about the ten kings having ‘one mind.’ And both are
parallel to the passage in chapter 16 about the three
unclean spirits gathering the kings of the entire world
‘to the battle [war] of that great day of God
Almighty.’ (Revelation 16:13,14.)” Price, Time of the
End, 108.
“Micah 4:1-5 is a prophecy of the last-day
ecumenical movement. Micah 4: 1 says that ‘In the last
days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the
house of the LORD [church] shall be established in the
top of the mountains [governments], and it shall be
exalted above the hills; and people [Euphrates River]
shall flow unto it.
Notice who gives the message of verses 2-4: ‘And
many nations [the U.N., not God] shall come, and say,
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD,
and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law
shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the LORD from
Jerusalem.’ In verse 3 and 4, a false earthly peace is
described.

494

REVELATION 17
Finally, vs. 5 describes the effect of this
ecumenical movement: ‘For all people will walk
every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in
the name of the LORD our God for ever and ever.’”
PJ.
“In three separate passages The Great Controversy
makes it plain that the end of human probation will
come, not amid the excitement and confusion of another
world war, but ‘when religious leaders are magnifying
the world’s progress and enlightenment, and the
people are lulled in a false security’ (p. 38), ‘when the
marriage bells are chiming, and all are looking forward
to many years of worldly prosperity’ (p. 338; see also p.
491).” Price, Time of the End, 161.
“And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come
out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For
they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go
forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of
God Almighty.” Rev. 16:13,14.
Shall Give Their Power and Strength to the Beast.—
“[Rev. 17:13 quoted.] Thus is manifested the
same arbitrary, oppressive power against religious
liberty, freedom to worship God according to the
dictates of conscience, as was manifested by the papacy,
when in the past it persecuted those who dared to re-fuse
to conform with the religious rites and ceremonies of
Romanists.” Selected Messages, Vol. 3, 392.
“They surrender their power to the beast, an
evidence of the confidence in this restored kingdom.”
Anderson, UR, 179.
“In the seventeenth of Revelation is foretold the
destruction of all the churches who corrupt
themselves by idolatrous devotion to the service of
the papacy, those who have drunk of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication. [Rev. 17:1-4 quoted.]
“Thus is represented the papal power, which with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness, by outside
attraction and gorgeous display, deceives all nations;
promising them, as did Satan our first parents, all good
to those who receive its mark, and all harm to those who
oppose its fallacies. The power which has the deepest
inward corruption will make the greatest display, and
will clothe itself with the most elaborate signs of power.
The Bible plainly declares that this covers a corrupt and
deceiving wickedness. ‘Upon her forehead was a
name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, The
Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth.’
“What is it that gives its kingdom to this power?
Protestantism, a power which, while professing to have
the temper and spirit of a lamb and to be allied to
Heaven, speaks with the voice of a dragon. It is moved
by a power from beneath.” (Letter 232, 1899). 7BC,
983.

“The prophecy of Rev. 17 focuses the spotlight
upon the time when the beast is rising to power, and the
growth of its power is such that it awes earth’s
multitudes, stupefies democratic forces, and
eventually, through deception, receives their support
in the supposedly beneficial plan of Sunday
enforcement for the salvation of the world from the
forces of materialism.” Were, WATB, 63.
These Shall Make War With The Lamb.—
“That is, join battle. With the world united under
the leadership of the ‘beast’ of vs. 3,8,11, the final
stage of the agelong warfare against Christ and His
people now begins. This stage of the conflict, termed
‘the battle of that great day of God Almighty’ (ch.
16:14), is described more fully in ch. 19:11-21. Under
the sixth plague preparations are made for the battle,
which is fought under the seventh.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 857.
“(Rev. 17:14 quoted.) No one can fail to notice the
identical language here that is used in Revelation 19,
and both are equivalent to the Armageddon passage.
All three mean the same last conflict between good
and evil, when the Son of God goes forth to make a full
end of all human and satanic opposition, the war of the
‘great day of God Almighty.’” Price, Time of the End,
165.
“[Rev. 17:14 quoted.] ‘These have one mind.’
There will be a universal bond of union, one great
harmony, a confederacy of Satan’s forces. ‘And shall
give their power and strength unto the beast.’ Thus is
manifested the same arbitrary, oppressive power against
religious liberty, freedom to worship God according to
the dictates of conscience, as was manifested by the
papacy, when in the past it persecuted those who dared
to refuse to conform with the religious rites and
ceremonies of Romanism.
“In the warfare to be waged in the last days
there will be united, in opposition to God’s people, all
the corrupt powers that have apostatized from
allegiance to the law of Jehovah. In this warfare the
Sabbath of the fourth commandment will be the
great point at issue, for in the Sabbath commandment
the great Lawgiver identifies Himself as the Creator of
the heavens and the earth.” (Manuscript 24, 1891).
Selected Messages, Vol. 3, 392,393.
“Observe the relationship between ‘the kings of
the earth and of the whole world’ united to make war
against God in that ‘battle of that great day of God
Almighty’, described in Rev. 16:12-16, and the
enlargement of that conflict which is described in Rev.
17:12-17. In Rev. 16 ‘the kings of the earth and of the
whole world’ make war against God; in Rev. 17:12-14
the ‘kings’ ‘shall make war with the Lamb’. In Rev.
16:14,16 the ‘kings’ meet their doom at
‘Armageddon’—that word in the Hebrew, to which our

495

GEMS FROM REVELATION
attention is directed (Rev. 16:16), means ‘the mountain
of slaughter’—and in Rev. 17:14 we read that ‘the
Lamb shall overcome them: for He is Lord of lords
and King of kings.’
This glorious title here
mentioned in connection with the Lamb overcoming
these ‘kings’ is also brought to view in the Lamb
overcoming these ‘kings’ is also brought to view in
Rev. 19:11-21 where occurs a further enlargement upon
this picture of the destruction of the ‘kings’ in
connection with the ‘war’ ‘the King of kings’ makes
upon the armies of earth.
“…Thus we perceive that the ‘war’ or ‘battle’ is
the same in Rev. 16:12-16 and also in Rev. 17:14 and
again in Rev. 19:11-21.” Were, WATB, 88,89.
“Every form of evil is to spring into intense
activity. Evil angels unite their powers with evil men,
and as they have been in constant conflict and attained
an experience in the best modes of deception and battle,
and have been strengthening for centuries, they will not
yield the last great final contest without a desperate
struggle. All the world will be on one side or the other
of the question. The battle of Armageddon will be
fought, and that day must find none of us sleeping.
Wide awake we must be, as wise virgins having oil in
our vessels with our lamps. . . .
“The power of the Holy Ghost must be upon us,
and the Captain of the Lord’s host will stand at the
head of the angels of heaven to direct the battle.”
(Letter 112, 1890). 7BC, 982.

“This is the battle between two universal empires—
The revived Papal Rome (with assistance from the
U.S.A.) and Christ’s 5th kingdom (seen visibly in the
remnant church, but with heavenly assistance). PJ
“Two great opposing powers are revealed in the
last great battle. On one side stands the Creator of
heaven and earth. All on His side bear His signet.
They are obedient to His commands. On the other
side stands the prince of darkness, with those who have
chosen apostasy and rebellion.” (Review & Herald,
5/7/1901). 7BC, 982,983.
“The present is a solemn, fearful time for the
church. The angels are already girded, awaiting the
mandate of God to pour their vials of wrath upon the
world. Destroying angels are taking up the work of
vengeance; for the Spirit of God is gradually
withdrawing from the world. Satan is also mustering his
forces of evil, going forth ‘unto the kings of the earth
and of the whole world,’ to gather them under his
banner, to be trained for ‘the battle of that great day of
God Almighty.’ Satan is to make most powerful
efforts for the mastery in the last great conflict.
Fundamental principles will be brought out, and
decisions made in regard to them. Skepticism is
prevailing everywhere. Ungodliness abounds. The
faith of individual members of the church will be
tested as though there were not another person in the
world.” (Manuscript 1a, 1890). 7BC, 983.

“And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and
went to make war with the remnant of her seed,
which keep the commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.” Rev. 12:17.

“As we approach the last crisis, it is of vital
moment that harmony and unity exist among the
Lord’s instrumentalities. The world is filled with
storm and war and variance. Yet under one head—the
papal power—the people will unite to oppose God in
the person of His witnesses. This union is cemented by
the great apostate. While he seeks to unite his agents in
warring against the truth he will work to divide and
scatter its advocates. Jealousy, evil surmising, evil
speaking, are instigated by him to produce discord
and dissension.” 7 Testimonies, 182.

“The trying experiences that came to God’s people
in the days of Esther, were not peculiar to that age alone.
The Revelator, looking down the ages to the close of
time, declared by inspiration, ‘The dragon was wroth
with the woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments
of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.’ In
the near future we shall see these words fulfilled, as the
Protestant churches unite with the world and with
the papal power against commandment-keepers. The
same spirit that actuated those who persecuted the true
church in ages past, will lead Protestants to pursue a
similar course toward those who will maintain their
loyalty to God. Church and state are now making
preparations for the last great conflict.” Review &
Herald, 1/23/1908.

The Army of Christ on Earth.—
“The army of the Lord must include all who engage
in the warfare with Babylon and the dragon and the beast
and the false prophet, just as ‘the host of heaven’
include ‘the saints of the most High’ in Dan. 7:25;
8:10-12. In Eph. 6:10-17 all Christians are pictured
as soldiers clothed in ‘the armour of God’ fighting
against ‘wicked spirits in high places.’ The army of
Christ must include all of ‘the called, and chosen, and
faithful’ who share in His conflicts and triumph. See.
Rev. 17:14. …The robe of Christ’s righteousness is not
only the wedding garment of the church; it is also the
armour and uniform of the soldiers of the cross. ‘Clad
in the armour of Christ’s righteousness, the church is
to enter upon her final conflict’ (Prophets & Kings,
p.725).” Bunch, TR, 267.

The Battle Against Lamb Is Against the Church.—
“And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice
saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the
Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.” Acts
9:4,5. [Saul was persecuting God’s people.]

496

REVELATION 17
The Lamb Shall Overcome Them.—
“God’s faithful people, who have suffered so long
at the hands of their enemies, are delivered when He
who is ‘Lord of lords, and King of kings’ lays bare
His mighty arm and comes forth to champion their
cause. Christ intervenes at the moment the forces of evil
launch their attack on the saints, at the opening of the
seventh plague.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 857.
“(Rev. 17:14; 19:11,14-16,19 quoted).
This
progressive revelation not only intends to prevent the
church from giving way to confusion and fear, but also
to reassure her that Christ is in supreme control and
will lead His people to certain victory.” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 378.
“And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great
prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and
there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a nation even to that same time: and at that
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall
be found written in the book.” Daniel 12:1.
“ ‘The Lord cometh out of His place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth
also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her
slain.’ Isaiah 26:21. ‘And this shall be the plague
wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have
fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume
away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes
shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall
consume away in their mouth. And it shall come to pass
in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord shall be
among them; and they shall lay hold everyone on the
hand of his neighbor, and his hand shall rise up against
the hand of his neighbor.’ Zechariah 14:12, 13. In the
mad strife of their own fierce passions, and by the awful
outpouring of God’s unmingled wrath, fall the wicked
inhabitants of the earth—priests, rulers, and people, rich
and poor, high and low. ‘And the slain of the Lord
shall be at that day from one end of the earth even
unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be
lamented, neither gathered, nor buried.’ Jeremiah
25:33.” Great Controversy, 656.
“I will greatly praise the LORD with my mouth;
yea, I will praise him among the multitude. For he
shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him
from those that condemn his soul.” Psalm 109:30,31.
Lord of lords.—
“The title ‘Lord of lords, and King of kings’ is
used in Scripture of Christ as He returns to earth to
vanquish the hosts of evil and to deliver His loyal
people.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 857,858.
“Which in his times he shall shew, who is the
blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord
of lords.” 1 Timothy 6:15.

“And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a
name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS.” Rev. 19:16.
With Him Are the Called, Chosen, and Faithful.—
“The heart of the true minister is filled with an
intense longing to save souls. Time and strength are
spent, toilsome effort is not shunned; for others must
hear the truths that brought to his own soul such
gladness and peace and joy. The Spirit of Christ rests
upon him. He watches for souls as one that must give an
account. With his eyes fixed on the cross of Calvary,
beholding the uplifted Saviour, relying on His grace,
believing that He will be with him until the end, as his
shield, his strength, his efficiency, he works for God.
With invitations and pleadings, mingled with the
assurances of God’s love, he seeks to win souls to
Jesus, and in heaven he is numbered among those
who are ‘called, and chosen, and faithful.’ Rev.
17:14.” Acts of the Apostles, 371.
“Communion with Christ—how unspeakably
precious! Such communion it is our privilege to
enjoy if we will seek it, if we will make any sacrifice
to secure it. When the early disciples heard the words
of Christ, they felt their need of Him. They sought, they
found, they followed Him. They were with Him in the
house, at the table, in the closet, in the field. They were
with Him as pupils with a teacher, daily receiving from
His lips lessons of holy truth. They looked to Him as
servants to their master, to learn their duty. They served
Him cheerfully, gladly. They followed Him, as soldiers
follow their commander, fighting the good fight of faith.
‘And they that are with Him are called, and chosen,
and faithful.’ 5 Testimonies, 223.
Chosen.—
“The sealing is a pledge from God of perfect
security to His chosen ones (Ex. 31:13-17). Sealing
indicates you are God’s chosen. He has appropriated
you to Himself. As the sealed of God we are Christ’s
purchased possession, and no one shall pluck us out of
His hands. The seal given in the forehead is God, New
Jerusalem. ‘I will write upon him the name of My
God, and the name of the city of My God.’ (Rev.
3:12).” Manuscript Releases, Vol.15, 225.
“And he said, The God of our fathers hath
chosen thee, that thou shouldest know his will, and
see that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of his
mouth.” Acts 22:14.
“But God hath chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the
weak things of the world to confound the things which
are mighty.” 1Corinthians 1:27.
“Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God
chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of
the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love

497

GEMS FROM REVELATION
him?” James 2:5.

measure of thy covetousness.” Jeremiah 51:13.

“Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and
causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
courts.” Psalm 65:4.
“The guests at the marriage feast were inspected by
the king. Only those were accepted who had obeyed
his requirements and put on the wedding garment.
So it is with the guests at the gospel feast. All must pass
the scrutiny of the great King, and only those are
received who have put on the robe of Christ’s
righteousness.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 312.
Faithful.—
“The season of distress and anguish before us
will require a faith that can endure weariness, delay,
and hunger—a faith that will not faint though
severely tried. The period of probation is granted to all
to prepare for that time. Jacob prevailed because he was
persevering and determined. His victory is an evidence
of the power of importunate prayer. All who will lay
hold of God’s promises, as he did, and be as earnest
and persevering as he was, will succeed as he
succeeded. Those who are unwilling to deny self, to
agonize before God, to pray long and earnestly for His
blessing, will not obtain it. Wrestling with God—how
few know what it is! How few have ever had their souls
drawn out after God with intensity of desire until every
power is on the stretch. When waves of despair which
no language can express sweep over the suppliant, how
few cling with unyielding faith to the promises of God.
“Those who exercise but little faith now, are in
the greatest danger of falling under the power of
satanic delusions and the decree to compel the
conscience. And even if they endure the test they will
be plunged into deeper distress and anguish in the time
of trouble, because they have never made it a habit to
trust in God. The lessons of faith which they have
neglected they will be forced to learn under a terrible
pressure of discouragement.”
Great Controversy,
621,622.

REVELATION 17:15
And he saith unto me, The waters which
thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are
peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and
tongues.
Where the Whore Sitteth.—
“That is, exercising despotic power over many
‘peoples’ and ‘nations.’
…Modern Babylon is
represented as sitting upon, or oppressing, the peoples
of earth.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 850.
Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues.—
“O thou that dwellest upon many waters,
abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the

REVELATION 17:16
And the ten horns which thou sawest
upon the beast, these shall hate the whore,
and shall make her desolate and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.
The Ten Horns Upon the Beast.—
“The ten horns which thou sawest AND the beast.’
[The KJV reads ‘upon the beast’. In the Greek, it is
‘AND the beast.’]
“The most devoted and staunchest supporters of the
woman will be the ones who will finally turn on her and
destroy her. In their fierce rage at being duped and
thereby losing eternal life, they are symbolized as taking
four actions against the woman.
Four denotes
universality—embracing the whole world. It will
involve not just the Vatican, but the religious leaders,
world-wide.” Cooke, #29-UR, 36.
These Shall Hate the Whore and Make Her Desolate
and Naked.—
“And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the
great river Euphrates; and the water [people] thereof
was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might
be prepared.” Revelation 16:12.
“The drying up of the Euphrates could only mean
that when God pours out His vial of judgment in the 6th
plague those people who had previously been obedient
to the wishes and designs of the Babylonian whore
now refuse any longer to execute her nefarious
designs; but, instead, turn upon her to destroy her. This
is not merely a matter of logic, for the angel, after
explaining the meaning of the waters of the river
Euphrates to refer to the nations and people doing the
bidding of the Babylonian whore, immediately proceeds
to state what the drying up of the waters of the
Euphrates refers to. He says: ‘And the ten horns
which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.’ Were,
WATB, 88.
“A revulsion sets in. Revelation 17:16 says that
the horns (the nations of the whole world) will turn
against the harlot (the great city Babylon); ‘they will
make her desolate and naked, and devour her flesh and
burn her up with fire.’ Now notice verse 17, ‘For God
has put it into their hearts (the hearts of the nations)
to carry out his purpose.’ We are at once reminded
that the drying up of the river Euphrates in the sixth
plague proceeds from God. And angel of God dries up
the Euphrates. At the moment when millions and
millions of people around the world suddenly see
through the hypocrisy of their spiritual leaders and
loath the clergy in whom they have reposed their

498

REVELATION 17
confidence, God claims to have had a part in bringing
about their new insight. [Rev. 17:17.] His angel pours
out the new enlightenment. The resulting sense of
disillusionment is an overwhelming ‘plague’ indeed.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 442.
“Revelation 17:16 predicts a repeat of the French
Revolution. However, instead of one horn involved, it
will involve all ten horns.
“Notice the following quotation from Education, p.
228:
“Multitudes are led to believe that desire is the
highest law, that license is liberty, and that man is
accountable only to himself.
“With such teaching given at the very outset of life,
when impulse is strongest, and the demand for selfrestraint and purity is most urgent, where are the
safeguards of virtue? what is to prevent the world
from becoming a second Sodom?
“At the same time anarchy is seeking to sweep
away all law, not only divine, but human. The
centralizing of wealth and power; the vast
combinations for the enriching of the few at the expense
of the many; the combinations of the poorer classes for
the defense of their interests and claims; the spirit of
unrest, of riot and bloodshed; the world-wide
dissemination of the same teachings that led to the
French Revolution—all are tending to involve the
whole world in a struggle similar to that which
convulsed France.’” PJ.
“Not only will God’s judgments fall [upon] and
destroy [the] Papal Power, Western Europe will turn
on her similar to [the] French Revolution when
French masses turned on [the] Vatican regime.”
Michaelson, Write the Vision, Vol. 1, 345.
“The people see that they have been deluded.
They accuse one another of having led them to
destruction; but all unite in heaping their bitterest
condemnation upon the ministers. Unfaithful pastors
have prophesied smooth things; they have led their
hearers to make void the law of God and to persecute
those who would keep it holy. Now, in their despair,
these teachers confess before the world their work of
deception. The multitudes are filled with fury. ‘We
are lost!’ they cry, ‘and you are the cause of our
ruin;’ and they turn upon the false shepherds. The
very ones that once admired them most will pronounce
the most dreadful curses upon them. The very hands that
once crowned them with laurels will be raised for their
destruction. The swords which were to slay God's
people are now employed to destroy their enemies.
Everywhere there is strife and bloodshed.” Great
Controversy, 655,656.
Desolate.—
“‘Desolate’ is from the same word as ‘wilder-ness’
of verse 3. It means to be made an outcast. The
religious leaders become outcasts. They are universally

scorned and damned.” Cooke, #29-UR, 36
Make Her Desolate.—
“The ‘ten horns’ and the ‘beast’ are authorized
by God to execute the divine ‘judgment,’ or
‘sentence,’ passed upon ‘Babylon’ for her crimes.
Accordingly, Rev. 17:16,17 constitutes the climax of the
chapter, presenting, as it does, ‘the judgment of [or,
‘sentence upon’] the great whore,’ the topic announced
by the angel in v. 1. All else is preparatory to, and
explanatory of, this account of the fate of ‘Babylon the
great.’ Verse 2-6 provide a catalogue of her crimes, and
thus an explanation of why the sentence has been
pronounced upon her, whereas vs. 8-18 set forth the
means by which, or how, the sentence will be executed.
This sentence will be meted out to Babylon under the
seventh plague.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 858.
“For a more complete description of the harlot’s
desolate state see ch. 18:22,23: ‘And the voice of
harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters,
shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman,
of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in
thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no
more at all in thee;
“And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all
in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride
shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants
were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were
all nations deceived.’” Rev. 18:22,23.
Naked.—
“This means to strip her of her gaudy and splendid
apparel, to tear away her cloak of pretended piety and
religious fraud. Her real character is made public.
She is seen as the arch-hypocrite, the great satanic
counterfeit, the source of all woe upon mankind.”
Cooke, #29-UR, 36.
“That is, deprived of her gorgeous attire (vs. 3,4),
and thus left in embarrassment and shame.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 858.
“And when Moses saw that the people were
naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto their
shame among their enemies).” Exodus 32:25.
Eat Her Flesh.—
“This denotes the consuming of her spoil. The
Greek suggests ‘eating masses of flesh’. The imagery is
borrowed from the Old Testament description of the
fate of Jezebel, of whom ‘the whore’ is the great antitype. When Jehu went to bury Jezebel he found no more
of her than her skull, her feet and the palms of her
hands—in fulfillment of the prediction of Elijah: ‘the
dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezebel.’ 2 Kings 9:35,36.
The figure in Rev. 17:16 means to despoil, to be
violently and pitilessly destroyed.” Cooke, #29-UR, 36.
Burn Her With Fire.—

499

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The daughter of any priest, if she profane
herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father:
she shall be burnt with fire.” Leviticus 21:9.
“Therefore shall her plagues come in one day,
death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be
utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God
who judgeth her.” Rev. 18:8.
“And to you who are troubled rest with us, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His
mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ.” 2 Thess. 1:7,8.

REVELATION 17:17
For God hath put in their hearts to
fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their
kingdom unto the beast, until the words of
God shall be fulfilled.
God Hath Put In Their Hearts.—
“Upon first glance, it would appear that this
passage is inferring that God will manipulate the nations
in order to ‘predestine’ certain events and select certain
people for eternal damnation. While it is true that God
has ordained that certain events are to transpire within
the context of redemptive history, these events do not
override the free will of human beings to choose their
eternal destiny.
Redemptive history is a delicate
combination of free human will exercised within the
larger context of God’s sovereign purposes. Therefore,
‘predestination’ is essentially God’s divine
foreknowledge of every person’s choice in advance
and the resulting consequences of those specific
choices (Romans 8:29). God will use all the events of
human history that come as a result of man’s free choice
(whether good or evil) to further a larger, eternal purpose
that will ultimately accomplish His sovereign will in the
cosmic plan of redemption.” Swearingen, TOOTN, 87.

The Woman is That Great City.—
“There was only one city that ruled when
Revelation was being written. That city was Rome.
“A ‘Woman’ in symbolic prophecy is a Church.
(See Rev. 12:1). There is only one church that is
called after a city—the Church of Rome—the Roman
Catholic Church.” Burnside, RWU, 193,194.
“Babylon is pictured under two symbols. In
Revelation 17, she is portrayed as an immoral woman,
and in Revelation 18, as a dominating city. These
symbols are combined in Rev. 17:18 to show that they
represent one and the same power. What is the
purpose of these two symbols? The harlot depicts
Babylon’s corruption and her ripeness for destruction.
The city depicts Babylon’s oppressive power, and how
she will be totally and eternally destroyed. Both
symbols represent a powerful religious organization.”
Cooke, #29-UR, 1.
“Literal Babylon was the ‘great city’ of ancient
times. From the days of Babel the city of Babylon has
been representative of organized opposition to the
purposes of God on earth. A city is a highly organized
and integrated association of human beings. Hence,
how appropriate is ‘Babylon the great’ as a prophetic
symbol for the organized, universal, apostate religious
organization.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 859.
The Woman Reigns Over the Kings of the Earth.—
“‘Babylon the great’ in the book of Revelation
designates, in a special sense, the united apostate
religions at the close of time. …[It] is the name by
which Inspiration refers to the great threefold religious
union of the papacy, apostate Protestantism, and
spiritism.
The term ‘Babylon’ refers to the
organizations themselves and to their leaders, not so
much to the members as such. The latter are referred
to as ‘many waters’ (Rev. 17:1,15) and as the
‘inhabitants of the earth’ (vs. 2; cf. v.8).” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 851,852.

Give Their Kingdom Unto the Beast.—
“Both kings (civil powers) and church systems
will surrender their kingdoms to the beast.” PJ.
“What is it that gives its kingdom to this
power?
Protestantism, a power which, while
professing to have the temper and spirit of a lamb and to
be allied to Heaven, speaks with the voice of a dragon.
It is moved by a power from beneath.” (Letter 232,
1899). 7BC, 983.

REVELATION 17:18
And the woman which thou sawest is
that great city, which reigneth over the
kings of the earth.
500

President George W. Bush Bowing to the Pope

REVELATION 17
“In all pagan nations the religion is under the
government, and the gods are worshiped because the
government so ordains. This was true in all the
heathen kingdoms, Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome,
until after the birth of Christ. …When at the crucifixion
of Christ, Satan was cast from the council of the
representatives of worlds, knowing that his time was
short, he revolutionized his former methods, and
made governments subject to the religious
organization. This revolution was a slow process.”
Haskell, SSP, 294,295.

until he had continued three days fasting and making
confession, did the pontiff condescend to grant him
pardon. Even then it was only upon condition that the
emperor should await the sanction of the pope before
resuming the insignia or exercising the power of royalty.
And Gregory, elated with his triumph, boasted that it
was his duty to pull down the pride of kings.” Great
Controversy, 57,58.
“Popery had become the world’s despot. Kings
and emperors bowed to the decrees of the Roman
pontiff. The destinies of men, both for time and for
eternity, seemed under his control.” Great Controversy,
60.
“The power that for so many centuries
maintained despotic sway over the monarchs of
Christendom is Rome.” Great Controversy, 382.

King Albert II of Belgium Bows to Pope
An Example From History.—
“A striking illustration of the tyrannical
character of this advocate of infallibility was given in
his treatment of the German emperor, Henry IV. For
presuming to disregard the pope’s authority, this
monarch was declared to be excommunicated and
dethroned. Terrified by the desertion and threats of his
own princes, who were encouraged in rebellion against
him by the papal mandate, Henry felt the necessity of
making his peace with Rome. In company with his wife
and a faithful servant he crossed the Alps in midwinter,
that he might humble himself before the pope. Upon
reaching the castle whither Gregory had withdrawn, he
was conducted, without his guards, into an outer court,
and there, in the severe cold of winter, with uncovered
head and naked feet, and in a miserable dress, he awaited
the pope’s per-mission to come into his presence. Not

501

German Emperor, Henry IV, Submits to Pope.

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 18
REVELATION 18: 1-24
1 And after these things I saw another angel come down from
heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his
glory.
2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and
the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird.
3 For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication
with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through
the abundance of her delicacies.
4 And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.
5 For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath
remembered her iniquities.
6 Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her
double according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill
to her double.
7 How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so
much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit
a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.
8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and
mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire:
for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.
9 And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication
and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her,
when they shall see the smoke of her burning,
10 Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas,
alas that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy
judgment come.
11 And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over
her; for no man buyeth their merchandise any more:
12 The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and
of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all
thyine wood, and all manner vessels of Ivory, and all manner
vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,
13
And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and
frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and
beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of
men.
14 And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from
thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed
from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.
15 The merchants of these things, which were made rich by her,
shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and
wailing,
16 And saying, Alas, alas that great city, that was clothed in fine
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious
stones, and pearls!
17 For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every
shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many
as trade by sea, stood afar off,
18 And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying,
What city is like unto this great city!
19 And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and
wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great city, wherein were made rich
all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one
hour is she made desolate.
20 Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and
prophets; for God hath avenged you on her.
21 And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone,
and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great
city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.
22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no
craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in
thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in

thee;
23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee;
and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no
more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the
earth; for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.
24 And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints,
and of all that were slain upon the earth.

INTRODUCTION TO CHAPTER 18.—

“The whole of the eighteenth chapter of Revelation is a
warning of what is coming on the earth.” Life Sketches, 412.
“Revelation 18 is an enlargement of Revelation 17
especially verse 16 where it says: ‘The ten horns and [Greek]
the beast, these shall hate the whore and shall make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire.’” Cooke, #30-UR, 3.
“The destruction of Babylon, as described in Rev.
18, takes place under the seventh vial; for it is under
that vial that she comes in remembrance before God, to
give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his
wrath, Rev. 16:17-21. The people of God are called out
of her just before the seven last plagues are poured out.”
Andrews, TAM, 62.

“The heaven-sent message that calls God’s people
out of Babylon is a parenthetical prophecy to show
that none of the righteous will be engulfed in the
doom of Babylon.” Bunch, TR, 250.

THE FOURTH ANGEL
REVELATION 18:1
And after these things I saw another
angel come down from heaven, having great
power; and the earth was lightened with his
glory.
After These Things.—
“This expression denotes that it is a new vision.
The term ‘after’ does not mean after the events of
chapter 17, but after that vision. Revelation 18 is a
second vision concerning the fall of Babylon. Once
more we have the principle that is prevalent throughout
scripture of repetition and enlargement.” Cooke, #30UR, 2.
Come Down From Heaven.—
“The message described here is of divine origin. It
is a message from the God of heaven.” Bunch, TR, 250.
Angel.— Gr. Aggelo = messenger.

502

REVELATION 18
I Saw Another Angel.—
“The previous angel was one of the plague-angels,
(ch. 17:1). This angel is distinctly superior in authority
and in his message. Three features reveal this.
“1. Having great power or authority. He
commands attention and respect.
“2. The earth was lightened with his glory
indicating that his message is worldwide.
“3. He cried mightily with a strong voice. It has a
powerful effect. There is no escape from it. When we
compare this message with the message of Revelation 10
there are similarities:
REVELATION 10
REVELATION 18
1. ‘Another mighty
‘Another angel…having
great power.’
angel’
2. ‘His face as the sun’
‘The earth was lightened
with his glory.’
‘Cried mightily with
3. ‘Cried with a loud
voice as when
a strong voice.’
a lion roars.’
“The similarities suggest a similar type of
message. The message of Revelation 10 was the First
Angel’s message of Revelation 14:6,7. It was fulfilled in
the Great Second Advent Movement of 1833-1844. A
second angel’s message followed the first angel’s
message of Revelation 14 proclaiming the fall of
Babylon. The similarities between the second angel’s
message of Revelation 14:8 and the message of
Revelation 18:1,2 indicate that Revelation 18:1,2 is a
repetition of the Second Angel’s message of
Revelation 14:8, which also commenced in 1844.
REVELATION 14:8
REVELATION 18:1-3
‘Babylon the Great is
1. ‘Babylon is fallen,
fallen, is fallen.’ Vs. 2.
is fallen
‘the Great’ Vs.2
2. ‘That great city’
3. ‘All nations drink of
‘All nations have drunk
the wine of the wrath
of the wine of her
of her fornication.’
fornication.’ Vs.3
From: Cooke, #30-UR, 3,4.
“The message of the Revelation 18:1-4 also is
similar to the Third Angel’s message of Revelation 14:912. The third angel warns the world that those who
worship the beast and his image, and receive the mark of
the beast ‘shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture.’ Rev. 14:9,10.
The identical message is given in the call of Rev. 18:4
for God’s people to come out of Babylon so that they
‘receive not of her plagues.’
“Thus, the angel of Revelation 18 gives a mighty
repeat of the Three Angel’s messages of Revelation
14:6-12.” PJ
“The angel who unites in the proclamation of the
third angel’s message is to lighten the whole earth
with his glory. A work of world-wide extent and
unwonted power is here foretold. The advent movement
of 1840-44 was a glorious manifestation of the power of

God; the first angel’s message was carried to every
missionary station in the world, and in some countries
there was the greatest religious interest which has been
witnessed in any land since the Reformation of the
sixteenth century; but these are to be exceeded by the
mighty movement under the last warning of the third
angel.” Great Controversy, 611.
“As the time comes for it [the Third Angel’s
Message] to be given with greatest power, the Lord
will work through humble instruments, leading the
minds of those who consecrate themselves to His
service. The laborers will be qualified rather by the
unction of His Spirit than by the training of literary
institutions. Men of faith and prayer will be constrained to go forth with holy zeal, declaring the words
which God gives them.” Great Controversy, 606.
“It is to the thirsting soul that the fountain of living
waters is open. God declares: ‘I will pour water upon
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground.’
To souls that are earnestly seeking for light and that
accept with gladness every ray of divine illumination
from His holy word, to such alone light will be given. It
is through these souls that God will reveal that light
and power which will lighten the whole earth with
His glory.” 5 Testimonies, 729.
Having Great Power.—
“The message of verses 1 and 2 of this chapter is
to be given in connection with the now current
threefold message [Rev. 14:6-12].
An idea of its
extent and power may be gathered from the description
of the angel there given. The first angel’s message is
said to go with a ‘loud voice.’ The same is also said of
the third message, but this angel, instead of simply flying
‘in the midst of heaven’ like the others, is said to ‘come
down from heaven.’ He comes with a message more
pointed and direct. He has ‘great power,’ and the
earth is ‘lightened with his glory.’ No such description
of a message from heaven to man is elsewhere to be
found in all the Bible. This is the last; and as is meet, it
comes with surpassing glory and unwonted power. It is
an awful hour when a world’s destiny is to be
decided—a most solemn crisis when an entire
contemporaneous generation of the human family is
to pass the bounds of probation, as the last note of
mercy is sounded.” Smith, DR, 724.
“ ‘Great power’ is the power of the gospel. ‘For I
am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that
believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith.’
Romans 1:16,17. The fourth angel’s message will be a
most powerful proclamation of the everlasting gospel—
a repeat of the first angel’s message that has the
‘everlasting gospel.’ This will be the final call to
repent.” PJ

503

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“‘Great power, or ‘great authority,’ R.S.V..
Jesus spoke ‘with authority.’ Our authority is the Word
of God.” Burnside, RWU, 206.
“The life of Christ that gives life to the world is in
His word. It was by His word that Jesus healed disease
and cast out demons; by His word He stilled the sea, and
raised the dead; and the people bore witness that His
word was with power. He spoke the word of God, as
He had spoken through all the prophets and teachers of
the Old Testament. The whole Bible is a manifestation
of Christ, and the Saviour desired to fix the faith of His
followers on the word. When His visible presence
should be withdrawn, the word must be their source
of power. Like their Master, they were to live ‘by every
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.’ Matt.
4:4.” Desire of Ages, 390.
Lightened.—
“The time of test is just upon us, for the loud cry of
the third angel has already begun in the revelation of
the righteousness of Christ, the sin-pardoning
Redeemer. This is the beginning of the light of the
angel whose glory shall fill the whole earth.” (Review
& Herald, 11/22/1892). 7BC, 984.
“Despite satanic efforts to shroud the earth in
darkness, God now sets it ablaze with the glorious light
of saving truth.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 860.
“In him was life; and the life was the light of
men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the
darkness comprehended it not. That was the true Light,
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.”
John 1:4,5,9
“The entrance of Thy words giveth light; it giveth
understanding unto the simple.” Ps. 119:130.
Glory.—
“The ‘glory’ may be thought of as representing
the character of God (cf. Ex. 33:18,19; 34:6,7), here
particularly as revealed in the plan of salvation.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 860.
The Earth.—
“The gospel invitation is to be given to all the
world. ...It is to reach all classes of men, rich and poor,
high and low. ‘Go out into the highways and hedges,’
Christ says, ‘and compel them to come in, that My
house may be filled.’ Christ’s Object Lessons, 228.
Was Lightened With His Glory.—
“Today God is still using His church to make
known His purpose in the earth. Today the heralds of
the cross are going from city to city, and from land to
land, preparing the way for the second advent of Christ.
The standard of God’s law is being exalted. The
Spirit of the Almighty is moving upon men’s hearts, and

those who respond to its influence become witnesses for
God and His truth. In many places consecrated men
and women may be seen communicating to others the
light that has made plain to them the way of salvation
through Christ. And as they continue to let their light
shine, as did those who were baptized with the Spirit on
the Day of Pentecost, they receive more and still more of
the Spirit’s power. Thus the earth is to be lightened
with the glory of God.” Acts of the Apostles, 53.
“Then the glory of the LORD went up from the
cherub, and stood over the threshold of the house; and
the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was
full of the brightness of the LORD'S glory.” Ezekiel
10:4. [The court of the heavenly sanctuary is planet
earth.]
“And behold, the glory of the God of Israel came
from the way of the east: His voice was like the noise
of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory.”
Ezekiel 43:2.
“The great outpouring of the Spirit of God, which
lightens the whole earth with His glory, will not come
until we have an enlightened people that know by
experience what it means to be laborers together with
God. When we have entire, wholehearted consecration
to the service of Christ, God will recognize the fact by an
outpouring of His Spirit without measure; but this will
not be while the largest portion of the church are not
laborers together with God.” Last Day Events, 193.
Pentecost Will Be Repeated.—
“It is with an earnest longing that I look forward to
the time when the events of the day of Pentecost shall
be repeated with even greater power than on that
occasion. John says, ‘I saw another angel come down
from heaven, having great power; and the earth was
lightened with his glory.’ Then, as at the Pentecostal
season, the people will hear the truth spoken to them,
every man in his own tongue.
“God can breathe new life into every soul that
sincerely desires to serve Him, and can touch the lips
with a live coal from off the altar, and cause them to
become eloquent with His praise. Thousands of voices
will be imbued with the power to speak forth the
wonderful truths of God’s Word. The stammering
tongue will be unloosed, and the timid will be made
strong to bear courageous testimony to the truth. May
the Lord help His people to cleanse the soul temple
from every defilement, and to maintain such a close
connection with Him that they may be partakers of
the latter rain when it shall be poured out.” (Review
& Herald, 7/20/1886). 6BC 1055.
“The angel who unites in the proclamation of the
third angel’s message is to lighten the whole earth
with his glory. A work of worldwide extent and
unwonted power is here foretold. The advent movement of 1840-44 was a glorious manifestation of the

504

REVELATION 18
power of God; the first angel’s message was carried to
every missionary station in the world, and in some
countries there was the greatest religious interest
which has been witnessed in any land since the
Reformation of the sixteenth century; but these are to
be exceeded by the mighty movement under the last
warning of the third angel.
“The work will be similar to that of the Day of
Pentecost. As the ‘former rain’ was given, in the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit at the opening of the
gospel, to cause the upspringing of the precious seed, so
the ‘latter rain’ will be given at its close for the ripening
of the harvest. ‘Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord: His going forth is prepared as the
morning; and He shall come unto us as the rain, as the
latter and former rain unto the earth.’ Hosea 6:3. ‘Be
glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord
your God: for He hath given you the former rain
moderately, and He will cause to come down for you
the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain.’ Joel
2:23. ‘In the last days, saith God, I will pour out of
My Spirit upon all flesh.’ ‘And it shall come to pass,
that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall
be saved.’ Acts 2:17, 21.
“The great work of the gospel is not to close with
less manifestation of the power of God than marked its
opening. The prophecies which were fulfilled in the
outpouring of the former rain at the opening of the
gospel are again to be fulfilled in the latter rain at its
close. Here are ‘the times of refreshing’ to which the
apostle Peter looked forward when he said: ‘Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord; and He shall send
Jesus.’ Acts 3:19, 20.” The Great Controversy, 611,612
Despise Not the Day of Small Things.—
“The third angel was seen flying in the midst of
heaven, heralding the commandments of God and the
faith of Jesus. The message loses none of its power in its
onward flight. John saw the work increasing until the
whole earth was filled with the glory of God. With
intensified zeal and energy we are to carry forward the
work of the Lord till the close of time.” Counsels to
Parents, Teachers, and Students, 548.
“The great outpouring of the Spirit of God,
which lightens the whole earth with His glory, will
not come until we have an enlightened people, that
know by experience what it means to be laborers
together with God. When we have entire, wholehearted
consecration to the service of Christ, God will recognize
the fact by an outpouring of His Spirit without measure;
but this will not be while the largest portion of the
church are not laborers together with God. God cannot
pour out His Spirit when selfishness and selfindulgence are so manifest; when a spirit prevails that,
if put into words, would express that answer of Cain,
‘Am I my brother's keeper?’”
Counsels on
Stewardship, 52.

“During the loud cry, the church, aided by the
providential interpositions of her exalted Lord, will
diffuse the knowledge of salvation so abundantly that
light will be communicated to every city and town. The
earth will be filled with the knowledge of salvation.
So abundantly will the renewing Spirit of God have
crowned with success the intensely active agencies, that
the light of present truth will be seen flashing
everywhere.”
(Review & Herald, 10/13/1904).
Evangelism, 694.
“The Lord God of heaven will not send upon the
world His judgments for disobedience and trans-gression
until He has sent His watchmen to give the warning. He
will not close up the period of probation until the
message shall be more distinctly proclaimed. The law
of God is to be magnified; its claims must be presented
in their true, sacred character that the people may be
brought to decide for or against the truth. Yet the work
will be cut short in righteousness. The message of
Christ’s righteousness is to sound from one end of the
earth to the other to prepare the way of the Lord.
This is the glory of God, which closes the work of the
third angel.” 6 Testimonies, 19.
“Thus will the truth be brought into practical life,
and thus will be answered the prayer of Christ, uttered
just before His humiliation and death: ‘That they all
may be one; as Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in
Thee, that they also may be one in Us: that the world
may believe that Thou hast sent Me.’ John 17:21.
The love of Christ, the love of our brethren, will testify
to the world that we have been with Jesus and learned of
Him. Then will the message of the third angel swell to
a loud cry, and the whole earth will be lightened with
the glory of the Lord.” 6 Testimonies, 401.
“And in a large degree through our publishing
houses is to be accomplished the work of that other
angel who comes down from heaven with great power
and who lightens the earth with his glory.” 7
Testimonies, 140.
“In the future the earth is to be lightened with the
glory of God. A holy influence is to go forth to the
world from those who are sanctified through the
truth.
The earth is to be encircled with an
atmosphere of grace. The Holy Spirit is to work on
human hearts, taking the things of God and showing
them to men.” 9 Testimonies, 40.
“Not only is the growth of Christ’s kingdom
illustrated by the parable of the mustard seed, but in
every stage of its growth the experience represented
in the parable is repeated. For His church in every
generation God has a special truth and a special work.
The truth that is hid from the worldly wise and prudent is
revealed to the childlike and humble. It calls for selfsacrifice. It has battles to fight and victories to win.

505

GEMS FROM REVELATION
At the outset its advocates are few. By the great men
of the world and by a world-conforming church, they are
opposed and despised. See John the Baptist, the
forerunner of Christ, standing alone to rebuke the pride
and formalism of the Jewish nation. See the first bearers
of the gospel into Europe. How obscure, how hopeless
seemed the mission of Paul and Silas, the two
tentmakers, as they with their companions took ship
at Troas for Philippi. See ‘Paul the aged,’ in chains,
preaching Christ in the stronghold of the Caesars. See
the little communities of slaves and peasants in conflict
with the heathenism of imperial Rome. See Martin
Luther withstanding that mighty church which is the
master-piece of the world’s wisdom. See him holding
fast God’s word against emperor and pope,
declaring, ‘Here I take my stand; I can not do
otherwise. God be my help.’ See John Wesley
preaching Christ and His righteousness in the midst of
formalism, sensualism, and infidelity. See one burdened
with the woes of the heathen world, pleading for the
privilege of carrying to them Christ’s message of love.
Hear the response of ecclesiasticism: ‘Sit down, young
man. When God wants to convert the heathen, He will
do it without your help or mine.’
“The great leaders of religious thought in this
generation sound the praises and build the
monuments of those who planted the seed of truth
centuries ago. Do not many turn from this work to
trample down the growth springing from the same seed
today? The old cry is repeated, ‘We know that God
spake unto Moses; as for this fellow [Christ in the
messenger He sends], we know not from whence he
is.’ John 9:29. As in earlier ages, the special truths for
this time are found, not with the ecclesiastical
authorities, but with men and women who are not too
learned or too wise to believe the word of God.
“‘For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not
many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, are called; but God hath chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and
God hath chosen the weak things of the world to
confound the things which are mighty. And base things
of the world, and things which are despised, hath God
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught
things that are’ (1 Cor. 1:26-28); ‘that your faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
power of God’ (1 Cor. 2:5).
“And in this last generation the parable of the
mustard seed is to reach a signal and triumphant
fulfillment. The little seed will become a tree. The last
message of warning and mercy is to go to ‘every nation
and kindred and tongue’ (Rev. 14:6-14), ‘to take out
of them a people for His name’ (Acts 15:14; Rev.
18:1). And the earth shall be lightened with His
glory.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 78,79.
Court Trials Lighten Thousands.—
“As the movement for Sunday enforcement
becomes more bold and decided, the law will be
invoked against commandment keepers. They will be

threatened with fines and imprisonment, and some will
be offered positions of influence, and other rewards and
advantages, as inducements to renounce their faith. But
their steadfast answer is: ‘Show us from the word of God
our error’—the same plea that was made by Luther
under similar circumstances. Those who are arraigned
before the courts make a strong vindication of the
truth, and some who hear them are led to take their
stand to keep all the commandments of God. Thus light
will be brought before thousands who otherwise
would know nothing of these truths.”
Great
Controversy, 607.
The Earth Lightened—Two Visions.—
“I was in vision taken to heaven, and the angel said
to me, ‘Look!’ I looked to the world as it was in dense
darkness.
The agony that came over me was
indescribable as I saw this darkness.
“Again the word came, ‘Look ye.’ And again I
looked intensely over the world, and I began to see jets
of light like stars dotted all through this darkness;
and then I saw another and another added light, and
so all through this moral darkness the starlike lights
were increasing. And the angel said, ‘These are they
that believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and are obeying
the words of Christ. These are the light of the world;
and if it were not for these lights, the judgments of God
would immediately fall upon the transgressors of God’s
law.’ I saw then these little jets of light growing
brighter, shining forth from the east and the west,
from the north and the south, and lighting the whole
world.
“Occasionally one of these lights would begin to
grow dim, and others would go out, and every time this
occurred there was sadness and weeping in heaven. And
some of the lights would grow brighter and brighter,
and their brightness was far-reaching, and many
more lights were added to it. Then there was rejoicing
in heaven. I saw that the rays of light came directly
from Jesus, to form these precious jets of light in the
world.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 76.
“(Rev. 18:1 quoted.)
…The messengers of
Heaven are to be seen running to and fro, seeking in
every possible way to warn the people of the coming
judgments and presenting the glad tidings of
salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
The
standard of righteousness is to be exalted. The Spirit of
God is moving upon men’s hearts, and those who
respond to its influence will become lights in the world.
Everywhere they are seen going forth to communicate to
others the light they have received as they did after the
descent of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost. And
as they let their light shine, they receive more and
more of the Spirit’s power. The earth is lighted with
the glory of God.
“This message will close with power and strength
far exceeding the midnight cry. Servants of God,
endowed with power from on high, with their faces
lighted up, and shining with holy consecration, went

506

REVELATION 18
forth to proclaim the message from heaven.
“Many were praising God. The sick were
healed, and other miracles were wrought. A spirit of
intercession was seen, even as was manifested before
the great Day of Pentecost. Hundreds and thousands
were seen visiting families and opening before them
the Word of God. Hearts were convicted by the power
of the Holy Spirit, and a spirit of genuine conversion was
manifest. On every side doors were thrown open to the
proclamation of the truth. The world seemed to be
lightened with the heavenly influence.” My Life
Today, 63.
The Light From Heaven Resisted.—
“What is the message to be given at this time? It is
the third angel’s message. But that light which is to fill
the whole earth with its glory has been despised by some
who claim to believe the present truth. Be careful how
you treat it. Take off the shoes off your feet; for you
are on holy ground. Beware how you indulge the
attributes of Satan, and pour contempt upon the
manifestation of the Holy Spirit. I know not but some
have even now gone too far to return and to repent.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 89.
“An unwillingness to yield up preconceived
opinions, and to accept this truth, lay at the foundation of
a large share of the opposition manifested at Minneapolis
[1888] against the Lord’s message through Brethren
(E.J.) Waggoner and (A.T.) Jones. By exciting that
opposition Satan succeeded in shutting away from our
people, in a great measure, the special power of the Holy
Spirit that God longed to impart to them. The enemy
prevented them from obtaining that efficiency which
might have been theirs in carrying the truth to the world,
as the apostles proclaimed it after the day of Pentecost.
The light that is to lighten the whole earth with its
glory was resisted, and by the action of our own
brethren has been in a great degree kept away from
the world.” Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 234,235.
Contrary To Any Human Planning.—
“We should make efforts to show our people the
wants of the cause of God, and to open before them the
need of using means that God has entrusted to them to
advance the work of the Master both at home and
abroad. Unless those who can help in ____ are aroused
to a sense of their duty, they will not recognize the work
of God when the loud cry of the third angel shall be
heard. When light goes forth to lighten the earth, instead
of coming up to the help of the Lord, they will want to
bind about His work to meet their narrow ideas. Let me
tell you that the Lord will work in this last work in a
manner very much out of the common order of
things, and in a way that will be contrary to any
human planning. There will be those among us who
will always want to control the work of God, to dictate
even what movements shall be made when the work
goes forward under the direction of the angel who joins
the third angel in the message to be given to the world.

God will use ways and means by which it will be seen
that He is taking the reins in His own hands. The
workers will be surprised by the simple means that He
will use to bring about and perfect His work of
righteousness.” Testimonies to Ministers, 300.

REVELATION 18:2
And he cried mightily with a strong
voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is
fallen, and is become the habitation of
devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and
a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.
He Cried Mightily With a Strong Voice.—
“This phase of God’s last message to the world is
called ‘the loud cry.’ The appeal is so strong that all
must hear and decide for or against it. No longer can
men and women continue to ‘halt between two
opinions’ or ‘go limping between two sides’ (1 Kings
18:21, R.V.). Because it is proclaimed in a time of
overwhelming apostasy similar to that of the days of
Elijah, this last phase of the last message is called ‘the
Elijah message.’ It is given ‘in the spirit and power of
Elijah.’ See Mal. 4:5,6; Luke 1:13-17.” Bunch, TR,
250.
“Many reformers, in entering upon their work,
determined to exercise great prudence in attacking the
sins of the church and the nation. They hoped, by the
example of a pure Christian life, to lead the people back
to the doctrines of the Bible. But the Spirit of God
came upon them as it came upon Elijah, moving him
to rebuke the sins of a wicked king and an apostate
people; they could not refrain from preaching the plain
utterances of the Bible—doctrines which they had been
reluctant to present. They were impelled to zealously
declare the truth and the danger which threatened
souls. The words which the Lord gave them they
uttered, fearless of consequences, and the people were
compelled to hear the warning. Thus the message of
the third angel will be proclaimed.”
Great
Controversy, 606.
Babylon the Great.—
“Babylon is a term which embraces not only
paganism and the Roman Catholic Church, but religious
bodies which have withdrawn from that church, but
bringing many of her errors and traditions with them.”
Smith, DR, 715.
“ ‘Babylon the great’ includes both the mother
and the family of daughters. The entire Babylonian
system of false and apostate religion becomes corrupt
and the corrupter of kings and nations, and the source of
wealth for the merchant princes of the earth.” Bunch,
TR, 251.

507

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The existing confusion of conflicting creeds and
sects is fitly represented by the term ‘Babylon,’ which
prophecy (Revelation 14:8; 18:2) applies to the worldloving churches of the last days.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 124.
“No church has a right to consider itself apostolic
while it violates the commandments of God. So long
as a church does this, the stain of apostasy is upon her,
and in this respect she is Babylonian rather than
apostolic.” Testimonies to Ministers, 71.
Babylon the Great Is Fallen, Is Fallen.—
“The churches, represented by Babylon, are
represented as having fallen from their spiritual state
to become a persecuting power against those who
keep the commandments of God and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.” Testimonies to Ministers,
117.
“The whole chapter shows that Babylon that has
fallen is the churches who will not receive the
messages of warning the Lord has given in the first,
second, and third angels’ messages. They refused the
truth and accepted a lie. They refused the messages of
truth.” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 68.
“This scripture (Rev. 18:1,2,4) points forward to a
time when the announcement of the fall of Babylon, as
made by the second angel of Revelation 14 (verse 8), is
to be repeated, with the additional mention of the
corruptions which have been entering the various
organizations that constitute Babylon, since that message
was first given, in the summer of 1844. A terrible
condition of the religious world is here described.
With every rejection of truth the minds of the people
will become darker, their hearts more stubborn, until
they are entrenched in an infidel hardihood. In
defiance of the warnings which God has given, they will
continue to trample upon one of the precepts of the
Decalogue, until they are led to persecute those who hold
it sacred. Christ is set at nought in the contempt
placed upon His word and His people.” Great
Controversy, 603.
“I saw that since the second angel proclaimed the
fall of the churches, they have been growing more
and more corrupt. They bear the name of being
Christ’s followers; yet it is impossible to distinguish
them from the world. Ministers take their texts from
the Word of God, but preach smooth things.” Early
Writings, 273.
“Babylon need not have fallen, but might have been
healed (Jer.51:9) by receiving the truth, but she rejected
it. In not accepting the truth of the second coming of
Christ and in rejecting the first angel’s message, the
churches failed to walk in the advanced light shining
on their pathway from the throne of God. As a result,
confusion and dissensions still reign within her borders.

Worldliness and pride are fast choking out every plant of
heavenly growth.” Smith, DR, 716,717.
“The second verse indicates that this fall is a
moral fall. This is in harmony with Jer. 5:27, and
because of this God calls His people out of her midst so
that they will not partake of her sins and hence be saved
from her plagues. This we understand is the loud cry of
the 3rd Angel’s Message.” Straw, SR, 111.
“The heaven-sent announcement that ‘Babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen,’ indicates that mother
Babylon and her harlot daughters were at one time
on a higher spiritual plain, and that they have
experienced a moral and spiritual devolution.” Bunch,
TR, 254.
Time of This Fall.—
“The second angel’s message of Revelation 14
was first preached in the summer of 1844, and it then
had a more direct application to the churches of the
United States, where the warning of the judgment had
been most widely proclaimed and most generally
rejected, and where the declension in the churches had
been most rapid. But the message of the second angel
did not reach its complete fulfill-ment in 1844. The
churches then experienced a moral fall, in
consequence of their refusal of the light of the advent
message; but that fall was not complete. As they have
continued to reject the special truths for this time they
have fallen lower and lower. Not yet, however, can it be
said that ‘Babylon is fallen, ...because she made all
nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication.’ She has not yet made all nations do this.
The spirit of world conforming and indifference to the
testing truths for our time exists and has been gaining
ground in churches of the Protestant faith in all the
countries of Christendom; and these churches are
included in the solemn and terrible denunciation of the
second angel. But the work of apostasy has not yet
reached its culmination.
“The Bible declares that before the coming of the
Lord, Satan will work ‘with all power and signs and
lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness;’ and they that ‘received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved,’ will be left to
receive ‘strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie.’ 2 Thess. 2:9-11. Not until this condition shall be
reached, and the union of the church with the world shall
be fully accomplished throughout Christendom, will the
fall of Babylon be complete. The change is a
progressive one, and the perfect fulfillment of Revelation
14:8 is yet future.” Great Controversy, 389,390.
“The fall of Babylon described in verse 2 is a moral
fall. The fall is a progressive one. It began in 1844,
and is completed when the image of the beast is made
and a national Sunday law is enacted in Protestant
America. This law will enforce a human tradition above
the word of God. Those who obey the law receive the

508

REVELATION 18
mark of the beast. Babylon’s destruction is soon
afterward, described in Rev. 18: 8,21.” PJ.
Fall of Babylon Does Not Mean Her Destruction..—
“The fall of Babylon here spoken of cannot be
literal destruction, for there are events to take place in
Babylon after her fall which utterly forbid this idea. For
instance, the people of God are there after her fall,
and are called out in order that they may not receive
of her plagues, which include her literal destruction.
The fall is therefore a spiritual one, for the result of it is
that Babylon becomes the habitation of devils, and the
hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean
and hateful bird. These are terrible descriptions of
apostasy, showing that, as a consequence of her fall, she
piles up an accumulation of sins even to the heavens, and
becomes subject to the judgments of God, which can no
longer be delayed.” Smith, DR, 715.
“Babylon is to be thrown down with violence, as a
millstone is cast into the great deep, and she is to be
utterly burned with fire. If this utter destruction were her
‘fall’, there would be no need of the second angel’s
proclamation to announce the fact; for her destruction is
to be witnessed by the kings and merchants, and by
every shipmaster, and by all the company in ships, and
by sailors, and by as many as trade by sea. This is
conclusive proof that the fall and destruction of
Babylon are not the same, and that Babylon itself is
not a literal city; for its destruction causes results that
the destruction of no city on the globe could cause.”
Andrews, TAM, 63.
Habitation of Devils.—
“Habitation means dwelling place or residence.
This word is used only twice in the New Testament.
Paul declared of believers, ‘In whom [Christ] you also
are builded together, for an habitation of God
through the Spirit.” Eph. 2:22. The Christian church
is to be the habitation of God, the dwelling place of God
the Holy Spirit, but if the church disobeys or
apostatizes and grieves away the Holy Spirit, His
place is taken by another spirit, ‘the spirits of devils.’
This will be the situation with the churches of Babylon.
What a warning to all churches and individual
Christians.
Christian bodies that were once the
habitation of God are now fast becoming the habitation
of devils. What is true of a church, may also be true of
an individual.” Cooke, #30, 6.
“Is this house, which is called by my name,
become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I
have seen it, saith the LORD.” Jeremiah 7:11.
“And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written,
My house shall be called of all nations the house of
prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves.” Mark
11:17.
The Hold of Every Foul Spirit.—
“As the teachings of spiritualism are accepted by

the churches, the restraint imposed upon the carnal heart
is removed, and the profession of religion will become
a cloak to conceal the basest iniquity. A belief in
spiritual manifestations opens the door to seducing
spirits and doctrines of devils, and thus the influence of
evil angels will be felt in the churches.” Great
Controversy, 603.
“The latter phase of the work brought to view in
verse 2 is in process of accomplishment, and will soon
be completed, by the work of spiritism. What are called
in Revelation 16:14 ‘spirits of devils, working
miracles,’ are secretly but rapidly working their way
into the religious denominations above referred to. Their
creeds have been formulated under the influence of the
wine (errors) of Babylon, one of which is that the
spirits of our dead friends, conscious, intelligent, and
active, are all about us.
“A significant feature in the work of spiritism, just
now, is the religious garb it is assuming. Keeping in the
background its grosser principles, which it has heretofore
carried so largely in the front, it now assumes to appear
as respectably religious in some quarters as any other
denomination in the land. It talks of sin, repentance, the
atonement, salvation through Christ, in almost as
orthodox language as do genuine Christians. Under the
guise of this profession, what is to hinder it from
entrenching itself in almost every denomination in
Christendom? We have shown that the basis of
spiritism, the immortality of the soul, is a
fundamental dogma in the creeds of almost all the
churches. What, then, can save Christendom from its
seductive influence?
“Herein is seen another sad result of rejecting the
truths offered to the world by the messages of Revelation
14. Had the churches received these messages, they
would have been shielded against this delusion; for
among the great truths developed by the religious
movement in the time of the great advent awakening, is
the important doctrine that the soul of man is not
naturally immortal; that eternal life is a gift of Jesus
Christ, and can be obtained only through Him; that the
dead are unconscious; and that the rewards and
punishments of the future world lie beyond the
resurrection and the day of judgment.
“These truths strike a deathblow to the first and
vital claim of spiritism. What foothold can that
doctrine secure in any mind fortified by such truth? The
spirit comes, and claims to be the disembodied soul, or
spirit, of a dead man. It is met with the fact that that is
not the kind of soul, or spirit, which man possesses; that
the ‘dead know not anything;’ that this, its first
pretension, is a lie, and that the credentials it offers,
show it to belong to the synagogue of Satan. Thus it is at
once rejected, and the evil it would do is effectually
prevented. But the great mass of religionists stand
opposed to the truth which would thus shield them,
and thereby expose themselves to this last
manifestation of Satanic cunning.”
Smith, DR,
718,719.

509

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“We understand that the fall of Babylon is her
rejection by God, that the Holy Spirit leaves her in
consequence of her alienation from God and her union
with the world, and that thus she is left to the spirits of
devils.” Testimonies to Ministers, 50,51.
“The nominal churches are filled with fornication
and adultery, crime and murder, the result of base,
lustful passion; but these things are kept covered.
Ministers in high places are guilty; yet a cloak of
godliness covers their dark deeds, and they pass on from
year to year in their course of hypocrisy. The sins of the
nominal churches have reached unto heaven, and the
honest in heart will be brought to the light and come
out of them.” 2 Testimonies, 449.
“The world must not be introduced into the church,
and married to the church, forming a bond of unity.
Through this means the church will become indeed
corrupt, and as stated in Revelation, ‘a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird.’” Testimonies to Ministers,
265.
Cage of Every Unclean and Hateful Bird.—
“The sins of the popular churches are white-washed
over. Many of the members indulge in the grossest vices
and are steeped in iniquity. Babylon is fallen and has
become the cage of every foul and hateful bird! The
most revolting sins of the age find shelter beneath the
cloak of Christianity. Many proclaim the law of God
abolished, and surely their lives are in keeping with their
faith.
If there is no law, then there is no
transgression, and therefore no sin; for sin is the
transgression of the law.” 4 Testimonies, 13.
“Sensual indulgence weakens the mind and
debases the soul. The moral and intellectual powers are
benumbed and paralyzed by the gratification of the
animal propensities; and it is impossible for the slave of
passion to realize the sacred obligation of the law of
God, to appreciate the atonement, or to place a right
value upon the soul. Goodness, purity, and truth,
reverence for God, and love for sacred things—all those
holy affections and noble desires that link men with the
heavenly world—are consumed in the fires of lust. The
soul becomes a blackened and desolate waste, the
habitation of the evil spirits, and the ‘cage of every
unclean and hateful bird.’ Beings formed in the image
of God are dragged down to a level with the brutes.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 458.

REVELATION 18:3
For all nations have drunk of the wine
of the wrath of her fornication, and the
kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her, and the merchants of

the earth are waxed rich through the
abundance of her delicacies.
All Nations Have Drunk Wine of Her Fornication.—
“Babylon hath been a golden cup in the LORD’s
hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations have
drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad.”
Jer. 51:7.
“Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because
she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of
her fornication.” Revelation 14:8.
“And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the
means of those miracles which he had power to do in the
sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the
earth, that they should make an image to the beast,
which had the wound by a sword, and did live.”
Revelation 13:14.
“God appointed the church to be the light of the
world, and at the same time ordained that His Word
should be the light of the church. But when the church
becomes unfaithful to her trust, and corrupts the pure
doctrines of the gospel, as a natural consequence the
world becomes intoxicated with her false doctrine.
That the nations of the earth are in such a condition at
the present time, is too obvious to be denied. The world
is intoxicated in the pursuit of riches and honor, but the
sin lies at the door of the church; for the church
sanctions what the Lord strictly forbade, and she sets the
example to the world. If the church had not intoxicated
the world with the wine of her false doctrines, the plain
truths of the Bible would powerfully move the public
mind. But the world seems hopelessly drunken with
the wine of Babylon.” Andrews, TAM, 53.
(See more comments on Revelation 14:8.)
Drunk of the Wine.—
“What is that wine?—Her false doctrines. She
has given to the world a false sabbath instead of the
Sabbath of the fourth commandment, and has repeated
the falsehood that Satan first told Eve in Eden—the
natural immortality of the soul. Many kindred errors
she has spread far and wide, ‘teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men’ (Matt. 15:9).” Selected
Messages, Vol. 2, 118.
Examples of False Doctrines Served.—
“1—Tradition. 2—Infant Baptism. 3—Auricular
Confession. 4—Penance. 5—The Mass. 6—Omission
of the Cup. 7—Masses and Purgatory. 8—Peter and the
Rock. 9—Peter and the Keys. 10—The Immaculate
Conception. 11—Invocation of the Saints. 12—
Immortality of the Soul. 13—Eternal Torment in Hell.
14—Extreme Unction.
15—Sunday Observance.”
Walsh, TWORB, Table of Contents.

510

REVELATION 18
“The churches of the New Testament were
composed of those only who repented of their sins,
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, and were buried with
him in baptism. But the churches which com-pose the
Romish apostasy are organized on a plan essentially
different from that of the apostles. By means of infant
baptism, the entire population is brought into the
church; the church and the world are no longer
distinct, and the church becomes an assembly of
unconverted men. This confusion of the world and the
church is one of the essential errors which made a
Babylon of the Catholic church.… The unlawful union
of Church and State is the natural consequence of the
prevalence of infant baptism; for that human
ordinance made the terms church and world two
names for one thing. This shows how appropriate is the
term Babylon as the name for this city of confusion.”
Andrews, TAM, 67,68.
Wrath.—
“It is a wrath which is created by false doctrines, and when kings and presidents drink this wine of
the wrath of her fornication, they are stirred with anger
against those who will not come into harmony with
the false and satanic heresies which exalt the false
sabbath, and lead men to trample underfoot God’s
memorial.” Testimonies to Ministers, 62.
Her Fornication.—
“Her fornication was her unlawful union with the
kings of the earth.” Andrews, TAM, 51.
Abundance.—
“Gr. dunamis, ‘power,’ here, probably in the sense
of ‘influence.’” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 861.
The Merchants of the Earth Are Waxed Rich Through
the Abundance of Her Delicacies.—
“Undoubtedly, it [this verse] has a literal
application in the enrichment of financiers,
multinationals, etc., through their co-operation with
spiritual Babylon. Avro Manhatten has declared:
“‘The Catholic church is the biggest financial
power, wealth accumulator and property owner in
existence. She is a greater possessor of material
riches than any other single institution, corporation,
bank, giant trust government, or state, of the whole
globe. The Pope as the visible ruler of this immense
amassment of wealth, is consequently the richest
individual of the 20th century.
No one can
realistically assess how much he is worth in terms of
billions of dollars.’ The Vatican Billions, p.197.
“The Church of Rome is the largest multi-national
in the world. Her tentacles spread through nearly all
other multi-nationals as a result of clever financial
investment. This means that she influences much or
most of the finance of the world. By their co-operation
with Babylon, the world’s merchants will be enriched
and in this way, Babylon will be able to boycott all who
do not comply with her policies as predicted in Rev.

13:17.” Cooke, #30-UR,9.
“Who take the lead in all the extravagances of the
age? Who load their tables with the richest and choicest
viands? Who are foremost in extravagance in dress, and
all costly attire? Who are the very personification of
pride and arrogance? Are they not church members in
the very forefront of those who seek after the
material and prideful things of life?” Smith, DR, 723.
“Apostate Christianity is in financial prosperity
and big business.” Burnside, RWU, 207.
“It is not large, expensive buildings, it is not rich
furniture, it is not tables loaded with delicacies, that
will give our work influence and success. It is the faith
that works by love and purifies the soul; it is the
atmosphere of grace that surrounds the believer, the
Holy Spirit working upon the mind and heart, that makes
him a savor of life unto life and enables God to bless his
work.” Counsels of Health, 278.
Timing of the Message of Revelation 18.—
“1. It is in the end time, prior to the close of
probation and the outpouring of the seven last
plagues.
“2. It is when spiritual Babylon is supreme—
receiving universal support.
“3. It is when Christendom is enveloped in dense
spiritual darkness, when satanic powers are in full
control of religious bodies.” Cooke, #30-UR, 9,10.
“4. It is when the Three Angels’ Messages become
present realities: The hour of God’s judgment (for the
living) is come. Babylon has fully fallen. The image
of the beast has been made. And the mark of the
beast is enforced.” PJ

“COME OUT OF HER,
MY PEOPLE”
REVELATION 18:4
And I heard another voice from heaven,
saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.
Another Voice From Heaven.—
“The voice coming from heaven denotes that it is a
message of power attended with heavenly glory. …This
voice from heaven is called ‘another’ voice, showing
that a new agency is here introduced. …The angel of
verse 1 here enters upon his mission, as conditions call
for his work. The divine call from heaven to come out
of Babylon takes place in connection with his work.”
Smith, DR, 724.

511

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“The ‘voice from heaven’ is doubtless the voice of
Christ, the author of truth and the Saviour of men.”
Bunch, TR, 252.
“This is the voice of the Lamb. It calls ‘my
people’ to come out of Babylon.” Maxwell, God Cares,
464.
Come Out of Her, My People.—
“Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver
every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for
this is the time of the LORD’S vengeance; he will render
unto her a recompence.
“My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and
deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of
the LORD.” Jeremiah 51:6, 45.
“Furthermore, in the eighteenth chapter of the
Revelation the people of God are called upon to come
out of Babylon. According to this scripture, many of
God’s people must still be in Babylon. And in what
religious bodies are the greater part of the followers
of Christ now to be found? Without doubt, in the
various churches professing the Protestant faith. At
the time of their rise these churches took a noble stand
for God and the truth, and His blessing was with them.
Even the unbelieving world was constrained to
acknowledge the beneficent results that followed an
acceptance of the principles of the gospel. In the words
of the prophet to Israel: ‘Thy renown went forth among
the heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect through My
comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord
God.’ But they fell by the same desire which was the
curse and ruin of Israel—the desire of imitating the
practices and courting the friendship of the ungodly.
‘Thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the
harlot because of thy renown.’ Ezekiel 16:14, 15.”
Great Controversy, 383.
“Before the final visitation of God’s judgments
upon the earth there will be among the people of the
Lord such a revival of primitive godliness as has not
been witnessed since apostolic times. The Spirit and
power of God will be poured out upon His children. At
that time many will separate themselves from those
churches in which the love of this world has
supplanted love for God and His word. Many, both of
ministers and people, will gladly accept those great
truths which God has caused to be proclaimed at this
time to prepare a people for the Lord’s second coming.”
Great Controversy, 464.
“God still has a people in Babylon; and before the
visitation of His judgments these faithful ones must be
called out, that they partake not of her sins and
‘receive not of her plagues.’ Hence the movement
symbolized by the angel coming down from heaven,
lightening the earth with his glory and crying mightily
with a strong voice, announcing the sins of Babylon. In

connection with his message the call is heard: ‘Come
out of her, My people.’ These announcements, uniting
with the third angel’s message, constitute the final
warning to be given to the inhabitants of the earth.”
Great Controversy, 604.
“When Jesus began His public ministry, He
cleansed the Temple from its sacrilegious profanation.
Among the last acts of His ministry was the second
cleansing of the Temple. So in the last work for the
warning of the world, two distinct calls are made to
the churches. The second angel’s message is, ‘Babylon
is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made
all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication’ (Rev. 14:8). And in the loud cry of the
third angel’s message a voice is heard from heaven
saying, ‘Come out of her, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and
God hath remembered her iniquities’ (Rev. 18:4, 5).”
Review & Herald, 12/6/1892.
“No longer have the hosts of evil power to keep
the church captive; for ‘Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
that great city,’ which hath ‘made all nations drink of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication;’ and to
spiritual Israel is given the message, ‘Come out of her,
My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues.’ Verse 8; 18:4. As
the captive exiles heeded the message, ‘Flee out of the
midst of Babylon’ (Jeremiah 51:6), and were restored
to the Land of Promise, so those who fear God today
are heeding the message to withdraw from spiritual
Babylon, and soon they are to stand as trophies of divine
grace in the earth made new, the heavenly Canaan.”
Prophets & Kings, 715.
“Before its destruction the call is to be given from
heaven, ‘Come out of her, My people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.’ Rev. 18:4. As in the days of Noah and Lot,
there must be a marked separation from sin and
sinners. There can be no compromise between God and
the world, no turning back to secure earthly treasures.
‘Ye cannot serve God and mammon.’ Mt. 6:24.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 167.
“Notwithstanding the spiritual darkness and
alienation from God that exist in the churches which
constitute Babylon, the great body of Christ’s true
followers are still to be found in their communion.
There are many of these who have never seen the special
truths for this time. Not a few are dissatisfied with their
present condition and are longing for clearer light. They
look in vain for the image of Christ in the churches with
which they are connected. As these bodies depart
further and further from the truth, and ally
themselves more closely with the world, the
difference between the two classes will widen, and it
will finally result in separation. The time will come

512

REVELATION 18
when those who love God supremely can no longer
remain in connection with such as are ‘lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof.’
“Revelation 18 points to the time when, as the
result of rejecting the threefold warning of Revelation
14:6-12, the church will have fully reached the condition
foretold by the second angel, and the people of God still
in Babylon will be called upon to separate from her
communion. This message is the last that will ever be
given to the world; and it will accomplish its work.
When those that ‘believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness’ (2 Thess. 2:12), shall be
left to receive strong delusion and to believe a lie, then
the light of truth will shine upon all whose hearts are
open to receive it, and all the children of the Lord that
remain in Babylon will heed the call: ‘Come out of
her, My people’ (Revelation 18:4).”
Great
Controversy, 390.
“But to leave Babylon it is not enough to
separate from the communion of those who sustain
her errors. It is necessary to renounce these errors
by receiving the truth of God, and it is necessary,
also, to renounce the sins of Babylon by true
repentance. If the Protestants returned to the purity and
simplicity of the New Testament, then they ceased to be
a part of Babylon; but if they retained a considerable
number of the essential errors and sins of Babylon, and
contented themselves to preserve their part of the old
city, after a partial purification, instead of building anew
after the divine model, then they have never ceased to be
a part of Babylon.” Andrews, TAM, 67.
“My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and
deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of
the Lord.” Jeremiah 51:45.
“The call out of Babylon is typified in the Old
Testament by the call of Lot and his family out of
Sodom. [That is, Sodom is a symbol of the today’s
doomed churches. See Early Writings, p.279.]” Cooke,
#30-UR, 16
When This Call Is Given.—
“It is an interesting fact that the judgment on the
great harlot, which is so fully described in Rev. 18, is
shown to John by one of the seven angels having the
seven vials filled with the wrath of God. Rev. 17:1.
From chap. 16:17-21, we learn that the judgment on the
harlot Babylon is inflicted by the angel having the
seventh vial. Hence we may justly conclude that the
angel who shows John the judgment of Babylon, is that
one of the seven who has her judgment to inflict; in other
words, it is the angel who has the seventh vial. It is
agreed on all hands that the seventh angel of Rev. 16 is
yet future. It follows, therefore, that Rev. 18, which
describes the judgment on Babylon and gives the call
to come out of her, belongs to the future. It is
manifest that Babylon is rapidly becoming the hold of

foul spirits, and of unclean and hateful birds. The call to
come out of her is made while her plagues are
immediately impending.” Andrews, TAM, 62.
“Almost till the very close of time, apparently,
some—perhaps many—of God’s people have not heard
the call to come out of mystical Babylon. …As God’s
people formerly came out of literal Babylon in order
that they might return to Jerusalem, so His people
today are called out of mystical Babylon in order that
they may be accounted worthy to enter the New
Jerusalem.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 861.
Her Sins.—
“And in her was found the blood of prophets, and
of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.”
Rev. 18:24.
Why Come Out? That Ye Partake Not of Her Sins.—
“Those who partake of the sins of Babylon
obviously have a share of responsibility for them.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 861.
“Why must they be called out? The answer is
given in verse 4, ‘That ye be not partakers of her
sins.’ A man who is aware of Babylon’s sins and
remains there becomes a partaker of Babylon’s sins.
He is judged as sharing the responsibility for those sins.
This is why God has called his people out of apostasy
through the years. One’s example influences others. If
a man remains in Babylon and supports it, he is
publicly declaring that he believes in that
organization, whereas by his coming out of it, he
declares that he rejects that organization. He bears
witness for Christ to his fellow men. This call of God
flies in the face of the natural trend in our world today.
The calls that are sounding tell us to unite, to drop our
differences, to find accord. Union is the order of the day
and this is apparent in almost every sphere of modern
life. But God’s call is the opposite: ‘Come out,’
separate, divide, polarize. Instead of fellowshipping
together, separation.
Instead of forgetting our
differences, cherish them if they are Biblical. Instead
of unity in error, it must be unity only in truth. Instead
of sentimental love, it must be love as a principle.”
Cooke, #30-UR, 14.
“If we would not partake of her sins, and thus
share in the plagues that are about to be poured out upon
her, we must heed the voice from heaven, ‘Come out
of her, My people.’” Andrews, TAM, 64.
“As God called the children of Israel out of Egypt,
that they might keep His Sabbath, so He calls His
people out of Babylon, that they may not worship the
beast or his image.” (Review & Herald, 12/13/1892).
7BC, 984.
That Ye Receive Not of Her Plagues.—
“Most of ch. 18 consists of a graphic but highly

513

GEMS FROM REVELATION
figurative and indirect description of these ‘plagues.’
Whereas the first five of the seven last plagues are
poured out primarily upon those who collaborate with
Babylon—the rulers and the inhabitants of earth (ch.
17:1,2,8,12)—the punishment of Babylon, the united
apostate religious organizations of earth, takes place
under the seventh plague (see on chs. 16:19;
17:1,5,16). The sixth plague prepares the way for that
punishment.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 861.
“[Revelation 18:1-8 quoted.] This terrible picture,
drawn by John to show how completely the powers of
earth will give themselves over to evil, should show
those who have received the truth how dangerous it is
to link up with secret societies or to join themselves in
any way with those who do not keep God’s
commandments.” 7BC 985.
Parallels Between the Two Pentecosts.—

FIRST
PENTECOST
1. Fulfilled at
commencement of the
Christian era.
2. The Holy Spirit was
likened to early rain of
natural world.
3. The Holy Spirit fell
upon a purified people.
4. The Holy Spirit
manifested Himself in
spiritual glory in the
lives of believers.
5. The gospel was
proclaimed with power
and speed to the Jews
and the world of that
day—multitudes
converted to Christ.
6. The believers sold or
shared their possessions.
7. Wonders and
miracles were wrought
among the people by the
power of the Spirit.
8. Fierce persecution
fell upon believers.

FINAL
PENTECOST

Will be fulfilled at the
conclusion of the
Christian era.
The Holy Spirit is likened
to the latter rain of the
natural world.
Latter Rain will fall upon
a purified people.
The Spirit will manifest
Himself in spiritual glory
in the lives of the
remnant.
The final gospel message
will also be proclaimed
with power and speed to
the whole world—
multitudes converted to
Christ
Believers’ possessions
will be sold and shared.
Wonders and miracles
will be wrought among
the people under the
power of the Spirit.
Fierce persecution will
come to true believers in
reaction to the power of
the Latter Rain.
9. The Gospel among the The ‘everlasting gospel’
Jewish people was
to the world will be
completed.
completed.
10. The probation of the The probation of the
Jewish nation closed.
world will close.
11. The judgments of
The judgments of God
God fell upon and ended
will fall upon and end the
the Jewish nation that had civilization of this world
rejected Christ.
which has rejected Christ.
From: Cooke, #30-UR, 11,12.

Descriptions of The Loud Cry of Rev. 18:1-4..—
“Angels were sent to aid the mighty angel from
heaven, and I heard voices which seemed to sound
everywhere, ‘Come out of her, My people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven,
and God hath remembered her iniquities.’ This
message seemed to be an addition to the third message,
joining it as the midnight cry joined the second angel's
message in 1844. The glory of God rested upon the
patient, waiting saints, and they fearlessly gave the last
solemn warning, proclaiming the fall of Babylon and
calling upon God’s people to come out of her that they
might escape her fearful doom.
“The light that was shed upon the waiting ones
penetrated everywhere, and those in the churches who
had any light, who had not heard and rejected the three
messages, obeyed the call and left the fallen churches.
Many had come to years of accountability since these
messages had been given, and the light shone upon them,
and they were privileged to choose life or death. Some
chose life and took their stand with those who were
looking for their Lord and keeping all His
commandments. The third message was to do its work;
all were to be tested upon it, and the precious ones were
to be called out from the religious bodies. A compelling
power moved the honest, while the manifestation of
the power of God brought a fear and restraint upon
their unbelieving relatives and friends so that they
dared not, neither had they the power to, hinder
those who felt the work of the Spirit of God upon
them. The last call was carried even to the poor slaves,
and the pious among them poured forth their songs of
rapturous joy at the prospect of their happy deliverance.
Their masters could not check them; fear and
astonishment kept them silent. Mighty miracles were
wrought, the sick were healed, and signs and wonders
followed the believers. God was in the work, and every
saint, fearless of consequences, followed the
convictions of his own conscience and united with those
who were keeping all the commandments of God; and
with power they sounded abroad the third message. I
saw that this message will close with power and strength
far exceeding the midnight cry.
“Servants of God, endowed with power from on
high with their faces lighted up, and shining with holy
consecration, went forth to proclaim the message from
heaven. Souls that were scattered all through the
religious bodies answered to the call, and the precious
were hurried out of the doomed churches, as Lot was
hurried out of Sodom before her destruction. God’s
people were strengthened by the excellent glory which
rested upon them in rich abundance and prepared them
to endure the hour of temptation. I heard everywhere a
multitude of voices saying, ‘Here is the patience of the
saints: here are they that keep the commandments of
God, and the faith of Jesus.’” Early Writings, 277-279.
“As the time comes for it to be given with greatest

514

REVELATION 18
power, the Lord will work through humble instruments,
leading the minds of those who consecrate themselves to
His service. The laborers will be qualified rather by
the unction of His Spirit than by the training of
literary institutions. Men of faith and prayer will be
constrained to go forth with holy zeal, declaring the
words which God gives them. The sins of Babylon will
be laid open. The fearful results of enforcing the
observances of the church by civil authority, the inroads
of spiritualism, the stealthy but rapid progress of the
papal power—all will be unmasked. By these solemn
warnings the people will be stirred. Thousands upon
thousands will listen who have never heard words like
these. In amazement they hear the testimony that
Babylon is the church, fallen because of her errors and
sins, because of her rejection of the truth sent to her from
heaven. As the people go to their former teachers with
the eager inquiry, Are these things so? the ministers
present fables, prophesy smooth things, to soothe their
fears and quiet the awakened con-science. But since
many refuse to be satisfied with the mere authority of
men and demand a plain ‘Thus saith the Lord,’ the
popular ministry, like the Pharisees of old, filled with
anger as their authority is questioned, will denounce the
message as of Satan and stir up the sin-loving multitudes
to revile and persecute those who proclaim it.
“As the controversy extends into new fields and the
minds of the people are called to God’s downtrodden
law, Satan is astir. The power attending the message
will only madden those who oppose it. The clergy will
put forth almost super-human efforts to shut away the
light lest it should shine upon their flocks. By every
means at their command they will endeavor to
suppress the discussion of these vital questions. The
church appeals to the strong arm of civil power, and, in
this work, papists and Protestants unite.
As the
movement for Sunday enforcement becomes more bold
and decided, the law will be invoked against
commandment keepers. They will be threatened with
fines and imprisonment, and some will be offered
positions of influence, and other rewards and
advantages, as inducements to renounce their faith. But
their steadfast answer is: ‘Show us from the word of
God our error’—the same plea that was made by Luther
under similar circumstances. Those who are arraigned
before the courts make a strong vindication of the truth,
and some who hear them are led to take their stand to
keep all the commandments of God. Thus light will be
brought before thousands who otherwise would know
nothing of these truths.” Great Controversy, 606,607.
“Servants of God, with their faces lighted up
and shining with holy consecration, will hasten from
place to place to proclaim the message from heaven. By
thousands of voices, all over the earth, the warning will
be given. Miracles will be wrought, the sick will be
healed, and signs and wonders will follow the believers.
Satan also works, with lying wonders, even bringing
down fire from heaven in the sight of men. Rev. 13:13.
Thus the inhabitants of the earth will be brought to take

their stand.
“The message will be carried not so much by
argument as by the deep conviction of the Spirit of God.
The arguments have been presented. The seed has been
sown, and now it will spring up and bear fruit. The
publications distributed by missionary workers have
exerted their influence, yet many whose minds were
impressed have been prevented from fully
comprehending the truth or from yielding obedience.
Now the rays of light penetrate everywhere, the truth is
seen in its clearness, and the honest children of God
sever the bands which have held them. Family
connections, church relations, are powerless to stay
them now. Truth is more precious than all besides.
Notwithstanding the agencies combined against the
truth, a large number take their stand upon the Lord’s
side.” Great Controversy, 611-612.

JUDGMENT OF BABYLON
REVELATION 18:5
For her sins have reached unto heaven,
and God hath remembered her iniquities.
Her Sins Have Reached Unto Heaven.—
“The sins of Babylon are depicted as a
mountainous mass reaching upward, compact and
glued together. … As the figurative mountain pierces
the sky, so the criminal career of ‘Babylon the great’
(see on ch. 17:6) arises before God, calling for
retribution.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 861,862.
“For her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is
lifted up even to the skies.
“Though Babylon should mount up to heaven,
and though she should fortify the height of her strength,
yet from me shall spoilers unto her, saith the Lord.”
Jeremiah 51:9,53.
“With unerring accuracy the Infinite One still keeps
an account with all nations. While His mercy is tendered
with calls to repentance, this account will remain open;
but when the figures reach a certain amount which
God has fixed, the ministry of His wrath commences.
The account is closed. Divine patience ceases. There is
no more pleading of mercy in their behalf.”
5
Testimonies, 208.
“Like the ancient Babel builders, whose efforts to
build a tower whose top would reach up to heaven were
thwarted, and who were scattered by a divine hand, so
this modern Babylonian structure, whose ‘sins have
reached unto heaven’ (verse 5), will also collapse.”
Anderson, UR, 182.
“They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity.” Micah 3:10.

515

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the LORD’s house shall be established in
the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the
hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.” Isaiah 2:2.
“I saw that since Jesus left the holy place of the
heavenly sanctuary and entered within the second veil,
the churches have been filling up with every unclean and
hateful bird. I saw great iniquity and vileness in the
churches; yet their members profess to be Christians.
Their profession, their prayers, and their exhortations are
an abomination in the sight of God. Said the angel, ‘God
will not smell in their assemblies. Selfishness, fraud,
and deceit are practiced by them without the reprovings
of conscience. And over all these evil traits they throw
the cloak of religion.’ I was shown the pride of the
nominal churches. God is not in their thoughts; their
carnal minds dwell upon themselves; they decorate their
poor mortal bodies, and then look upon themselves with
satisfaction and pleasure. Jesus and the angels look upon
them in anger. Said the angel, ‘Their sins and pride
have reached unto heaven. Their portion is prepared.
Justice and judgment have slumbered long, but will soon
awake. Vengeance is Mine, I will repay, saith the
Lord.’ The fearful threatenings of the third angel are to
be realized, and all the wicked are to drink of the wrath
of God. An innumerable host of evil angels are
spreading over the whole land and crowding the
churches. These agents of Satan look upon the religious
bodies with exultation, for the cloak of religion covers
the greatest crime and iniquity.” Early Writings, 274.
“Men who claim to be Christians may now defraud
and oppress the poor; they may rob the widow and
fatherless; they may indulge their Satanic hatred because
they cannot control the consciences of God’s people; but
for all this God will bring them into judgment. They
‘shall have judgment without mercy’ that have
‘showed no mercy.’ (James 2:13.) Not long hence they
will stand before the Judge of all the earth, to render an
account for the pain they have caused to the bodies and
souls of His heritage. They may now indulge in false
accusations, they may deride those whom God has
appointed to do His work, they may consign His
believing ones to prison, to the chain gang, to
banishment, to death; but for every pang of anguish,
every tear shed, they must answer. God will reward them
double for their sins. Concerning Babylon, the symbol
of the apostate church, He says to His ministers of
judgment, ‘Her sins have reached unto heaven, and
God hath remembered her iniquities. Reward her
even as she rewarded you, and double unto her
double according to her works: in the cup which she
hath filled fill to her double.’ Rev. 18:5, 6.” Christ’s
Object Lessons, 178.
When do her sins reach unto heaven?—
“It is time for thee, LORD, to work: for they
have made void thy law.” Psalm 119:126.

“The sins of the world will have reached unto
heaven when the law of God is made void; when the
Sabbath of the Lord is trampled in the dust, and men are
compelled to accept in its stead an institution of the
papacy through the strong hand of the law of the
land. In exalting an institution of man above the
institution ordained of God, they show contempt for the
great Lawgiver, and refuse his sign or seal.” Review &
Herald, 11/5/1889.
“When the law of God is finally made void by
legislation. Then the extremity of God’s people is his
opportunity to show who is the governor of heaven
and earth. As a Satanic power is stirring up the
elements from beneath, God will send light and power to
his people, that the message of truth may be proclaimed
to all the world.” Signs, 6/12/1893.
God Hath Remembered Her Iniquities.—
“Of Babylon, at the time brought to view in this
prophecy, it is declared: ‘Her sins have reached unto
heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.’
Rev. 18:5. She has filled up the measure of her guilt,
and destruction is about to fall upon her.” Great
Controversy, 604.
“Remember this, that the enemy hath
reproached, O LORD, and that the foolish people
have blasphemed thy name.” Psalm 74:18.
“God’s longsuffering is about to end and His
judgment upon mystical Babylon about to be executed.
As applied to God, the word ‘remembered’ commonly
denotes that He is on the point of rewarding men for
a particular course of action, whether good or evil
(see Gen. 8:1; Ex. 2:24; Ps. 105:42; etc.).” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 862.

REVELATION 18:6
Reward her even as she rewarded you,
and double unto her double according to her
works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to
her double.
Reward Her Even As She Rewarded You.—
“The expression, ‘Reward her even as she
rewarded you,’ seems to show that the time for this
message to reach its climax, and for the saints to be
finally called out, will be when she begins to raise
against them the arm of oppression. As she fills up
the cup of persecution to the saints, so the angel of the
Lord will persecute her. (Ps.35:6.) Judgments from
on high will bring upon her in a twofold degree (‘double
unto her double’), the evil which she thought to bring
upon the humble servants of the Lord.” Smith, DR, 726.
“Literally, ‘according to her deeds.’ Her reward
will be paid in kind. …Her treatment of others is to be

516

REVELATION 18
the norm, or standard, by which God will deal with her.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 862.
“(Rev. 18:6 quoted). The multitudes she let loose
upon God’s people will then turn upon her.” Were,
WATB, 95,96.
“Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver
every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for
this is the time of the Lord’s vengeance; he will render
unto her a recompence.” Jeremiah 51:6.
“And I will render unto Babylon and to all the
inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have
done in Zion in your sight, saith the LORD.” Jer.
51:24.
“The violence done to me and to my flesh be
upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and
my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea shall
Jerusalem say.” Jeremiah 51:35.
“Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord,
when saw we thee an hungered, or athirst, or a stranger,
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto
thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say
unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least
of these, ye did it not to me.” Matthew 25:44,45
Double to Her Double According to Her Works.—
“The double punishment includes first the seven
last plagues, and then the second death. The wording
also reflects the fact that the papacy had lived twice.”
PJ
“Men who claim to be Christians may now defraud
and oppress the poor; they may rob the widow and
fatherless; they may indulge their Satanic hatred because
they cannot control the consciences of God’s people; but
for all this God will bring them into judgment. They
‘shall have judgment without mercy’ that have ‘showed
no mercy.’ (James 2:13.) Not long hence they will stand
before the Judge of all the earth, to render an account for
the pain they have caused to the bodies and souls of His
heritage. They may now indulge in false accusations,
they may deride those whom God has appointed to do
His work, they may consign His believing ones to
prison, to the chain gang, to banishment, to death;
but for every pang of anguish, every tear shed, they
must answer. God will reward them double for their
sins. Concerning Babylon, the symbol of the apostate
church, He says to His ministers of judgment, ‘Her sins
have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered
her iniquities. Reward her even as she rewarded you,
and double unto her double according to her works:
in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double.’
Rev. 18:5, 6.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 178,179.
“These professed Christians read of the sufferings
of the martyrs, and tears course down their cheeks. They
wonder that men could ever become so hardened as to
practice such cruelty toward their fellow men. Yet those

who think and speak thus are at the same time holding
human beings in slavery. And this is not all; they sever
the ties of nature and cruelly oppress their fellow
men. They can inflict most inhuman torture with the
same relentless cruelty manifested by papists and
heathen toward Christ’s followers. Said the angel, ‘It
will be more tolerable for the heathen and for papists in
the day of the execution of God’s judgment than for such
men.’ The cries of the oppressed have reached unto
heaven, and angels stand amazed at the untold, agonizing
sufferings which man, formed in the image of his Maker,
causes his fellow man. Said the angel, ‘The names of
the oppressors are written in blood, crossed with stripes,
and flooded with agonizing, burning tears of suffering.
God’s anger will not cease until He has caused this
land of light to drink the dregs of the cup of His fury,
until He has rewarded unto Babylon double. Reward
her even as she rewarded you, double unto her
double according to her works; in the cup which she
hath filled, fill to her double.’
“I saw that the slave master will have to answer for
the soul of his slave whom he has kept in ignorance; and
the sins of the slave will be visited upon the master.
God cannot take to heaven the slave who has been kept
in ignorance and degradation, knowing nothing of God
or the Bible, fearing nothing but his master’s lash, and
holding a lower position than the brutes. But He does
the best thing for him that a compassionate God can do.
He permits him to be as if he had not been, while the
master must endure the seven last plagues and then
come up in the second resurrection and suffer the
second, most awful death. Then the justice of God will
be satisfied.” Early Writings, 275,276.

REVELATION 18:7
How much she hath glorified herself,
and lived deliciously, so much torment and
sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I
sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see
no sorrow.
How Much She Hath Glorified Herself.—
“For that day shall not come, except there come a
falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the
son of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so
that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing
himself that he is God.” 2 Thess. 2:2.
And Lived Deliciously.—
“Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to
pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine
heart, I am, and none else beside me.” Isa. 47:8.
“Luxury.
…She lives in pompous palaces,
pleasantly situated, plentifully furnished.” Feyerabend,
RVBV, 170.

517

GEMS FROM REVELATION

So Much Torment and Sorrow Give Her.—
“Verses 6 and 7 are a prophetic declaration that she
will be rewarded or punished according to her works.”
Smith, DR, 726.
For She Saith in Her Heart.—
“Or, ‘is saying in her mind,’ that is, at the time the
angel of v. 4 delivers his message of warning, prior to
the close of probation, and later, during the sixth plague
(see on ch. 17:1). Inordinate conceit has spawned utter
confidence in her evil scheme to rule the world. The
attempt to deceive others has resulted in absolute
self-deception. Not only has she made others ‘drunk,’
she herself is in a state of intoxication.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 862.
I Sit a Queen, And Am No Widow.—
“In the Old Testament Babylon was called ‘the
lady of kingdoms’ (Isa. 47:5) denoting that she was the
best, she was supreme. ‘I shall be a lady forever.’ Is.
47:7. Her aim was to rule forever. This has always been
the spirit of Babylon. ‘I am, and none else beside me, I
shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss
of children.’ Vs. 8. This portrays Babylon’s intentions,
and reveals her arrogance, pride and ambition. In
Revelation, the same picture is presented of modern
Babylon. Little does the world dream of the aims of the
apostate religious system that will be led by the Papacy.”
Cooke, #27-UR, 6.
“Note the present tense. The true church is
represented in Scripture as a ‘chaste virgin,’ Christ’s
bride. The great harlot impersonates Christ’s bride
before the inhabitants of earth, over whom she claims
dominion in His name. But she is a counterfeit
‘queen’. She is a harlot who has never had a legal
husband, yet is able to boast of her conquests. Do not
the ‘kings’ and ‘great men’ of the earth wait upon her
(Rev. 18:9,23)? Are they not captive to her will and
dedicated instruments of her nefarious schemes?” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 862.
“Bear in mind that this testimony applies to that
part of Babylon which is subject to a moral fall. As
already pointed out, it must apply especially to the
‘daughters,’ the denominations who persist in
clinging to the personal traits of the ‘mother,’ and
keeping up the family resemblance. These, as pointed
out on a previous page, are to attempt a sweeping
persecution against the truth and the people of God. By
these the ‘image of the beast’ is to be formed. These
are to have what will be to them a new experience—
the use of the civil arm to enforce their dogmas.
“It is doubtless this first intoxication of power that
leads this branch of Babylon to cherish in her heart the
boast, ‘I sit a queen, and am no widow;’ that is, I am
no longer , ‘one bereaved,’ or destitute of power, as I
have been. She declares, Now I rule like a queen; I
shall see no sorrow. With blasphemy she boasts God is

in the Constitution, the church is enthroned, and will
henceforth bear sway.” Smith, DR, 726.
“The thought of Babylon is much like that of
Laodicea: ‘Because thou sayest, I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and
knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked.’ Revelation 3:17.” PJ.
And Shall See No Sorrow.—
“What she least expects is certain to come upon
her.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 862.
“Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt
not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall
upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and
desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou
shalt not know.” Isaiah 47:11.
“From the crest of Olivet, Jesus looked upon
Jerusalem. Fair and peaceful was the scene spread
out before Him. It was the season of the Passover, and
from all lands the children of Jacob had gathered there to
celebrate the great national festival. In the midst of
gardens and vineyards, and green slopes studded with
pilgrims’ tents, rose the terraced hills, the stately palaces,
and massive bulwarks of Israel’s capital. The daughter
of Zion seemed in her pride to say, I sit a queen and
shall see no sorrow; as lovely then, and deeming
herself as secure in Heaven’s favor, as when, ages
before, the royal minstrel sang: ‘Beautiful for situation,
the joy of the whole earth, is Mount Zion, ...the city of
the great King.’ Psalm 48:2.” Great Controversy, 17.

REVELATION 18:8
Therefore shall her plagues come in one
day, death, and mourning, and famine; and
she shall be utterly burned with fire: for
strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.
Therefore Shall Her Plagues Come in One Day.—
“Fallen angels upon earth form confederations
with evil men. In this age antichrist will appear as the
true Christ, and then the law of God will be fully made
void in the nations of our world. Rebellion against
God's holy law will be fully ripe. But the true leader of
all this rebellion is Satan clothed as an angel of light.
Men will be deceived and will exalt him to the place of
God, and deify him. But Omnipotence will interpose,
and to the apostate churches that unite in the exaltation
of Satan, the sentence will go forth, ‘Therefore shall
her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning,
and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire:
for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.’”
Testimonies to Ministers, 62.
“Some take this to be prophetic time, and thus to
represent one literal year. Others consider that the angel

518

REVELATION 18
here either stresses the suddenness and unexpectedness
of the ‘plagues’ upon mystical Babylon, particularly in
view of her false sense of security (vs. 7), or speaks of an
indefinite period of time. In view of the fact that the
same event is also said to take place in ‘one hour’ (vs.
10,17,19), the second explanation appears preferable.
Furthermore, the Greek form of the words here
translated ‘day’ and ‘hour’ (Rev. 18:10) suggest a
point—rather than a period—of time, and thus appear to
stress suddenness and unexpectedness rather than
duration. Compare Isa. 47:9,11; Jer. 50:31; 51:8.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 863.
Famine.—
“It will be a literal famine caused by a spiritual
famine.” PJ
“Behold, the days come, saith the Lord GOD, that I
will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread,
nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the
LORD: And they shall wander from sea to sea, and
from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro
to seek the word of the LORD, and shall not find it.”
Amos 8:11,12.
Fire.—
“And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the
beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire.” Revelation 17:16.
“Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud,
saith the Lord God of hosts: for thy day is come, the
time that I will visit thee. And the most proud shall
stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up: and I will
kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all round
about him.” Jer. 50:31,32.
For Strong is the Lord Who Judgeth Her.—
“Those who love God need not be surprised if those
who claim to be Christians are filled with hatred because
they cannot force the consciences of God’s people. Not
long hence they will stand before the Judge of all the
earth, to render an account for the pain they have caused
to the bodies and souls of God’s heritage. They may
indulge in false accusations now, they may deride
those whom God has appointed to do his work, they
may consign his believing ones to prison, to the chaingang, to banishment, to death; but for every pang of
anguish, every tear shed, they must answer. For
every drop of blood drawn forth by torture, for all
they have burned with fire, they will receive
punishment. God will reward them double for their
sins. They have drunk the blood of the saints, and have
become intoxicated with exultation. God says to his
ministers of judgment: (Rev. 18:6-8 quoted.)” Review
& Herald, 12/28/97.
“Their Redeemer is strong: the Lord of hosts is
his name: he shall thoroughly plead their cause, that he

may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants
of Babylon.” Jeremiah 50:34.

REVELATION 18:9
And the kings of the earth, who have
committed fornication and lived deliciously
with her, shall bewail her, and lament for
her, when they shall see the smoke of her
burning,
The Kings of the Earth Shall Bewail Her.—
“Or, ‘mourn for her,’ ‘sob on account of her,’ in
loud, unrestrained wailing. Anticipating their own
impending fate, the hapless ‘kings’ and ‘merchants’ (vs.
11) of earth join in a dirge of death for haughty Babylon,
now in torment upon her blazing funeral pyre. The
dramatic effect of vs. 9-20, which describe the
inexorable doom of the great harlot, is heightened by
their exotic Oriental literary form—poetic diffuseness
highlighted by graphic imagery. The appeal of ch. 18 is
primarily emotional, but that appeal is reinforced by
incisive logic: For those who respond to God’s call to
flee from the wrath to come (vs. 4) there is still respite
from her impending doom.
“…In ch. 17:16 it is the kings of the earth (cf. on v.
12) who set Babylon afire. Here, they are pictured
mourning the results of that deed, perhaps in the sad
realization that they must soon share Babylon’s fate
(cf. Isa. 47: 13-15).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 863.
“The wicked are filled with regret, not because of
their sinful neglect of God and their fellow men, but
because God has conquered. They lament that the
result is what it is; but they do not repent of their
wickedness. They would leave no means untried to
conquer if they could….
“The minister who has sacrificed truth to gain the
favor of men now discerns the character and influence of
his teachings. It is apparent that the omniscient eye was
following him as he stood in the desk, as he walked the
streets, as he mingled with men in the various scenes of
life. Every emotion of the soul, every line written, every
word uttered, every act that led men to rest in a refuge of
falsehood, has been scattering seed; and now, in the
wretched, lost souls around him, he beholds the harvest.
“Saith the Lord: ‘They have healed the hurt of the
daughter of My people slightly, saying, Peace, peace;
when there is no peace.’ ‘With lies ye have made the
heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad;
and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should
not return from his wicked way, by promising him life.’
Jeremiah 8:11; Ezekiel 13:22.
“ ‘Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter
the sheep of My pasture! ....Behold, I will visit upon you
the evil of your doings.’ ‘Howl, ye shepherds, and cry;
and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the
flock: for your days for slaughter and of your dispersions

519

GEMS FROM REVELATION
are accomplished;... and the shepherds shall have no way
to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.’ Jeremiah
23:1, 2; 25:34, 35, margin.
“Ministers and people see that they have not
sustained the right relation to God. They see that they
have rebelled against the Author of all just and righteous
law. The setting aside of the divine precepts gave rise to
thousands of springs of evil, discord, hatred, iniquity,
until the earth became one vast field of strife, one sink of
corruption. This is the view that now appears to those
who rejected truth and chose to cherish error. No
language can express the longing which the disobedient
and disloyal feel for that which they have lost forever—
eternal life. Men whom the world has worshiped for
their talents and eloquence now see these things in
their true light. They realize what they have forfeited
by transgression, and they fall at the feet of those whose
fidelity they have despised and derided, and confess that
God has loved them [Rev. 3:9].
“The people see that they have been deluded. They
accuse one another of having led them to destruction; but
all unite in heaping their bitterest condemnation upon the
ministers. Unfaithful pastors have prophesied smooth
things; they have led their hearers to make void the law
of God and to persecute those who would keep it holy.
Now, in their despair, these teachers confess before
the world their work of deception. The multitudes
are filled with fury. ‘We are lost!’ they cry, ‘and you
are the cause of our ruin;’ and they turn upon the false
shepherds. The very ones that once admired them most
will pronounce the most dreadful curses upon them. The
very hands that once crowned them with laurels will be
raised for their destruction. The swords which were to
slay God’s people are now employed to destroy their
enemies. Everywhere there is strife and bloodshed.
“ ‘A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth;
for the Lord hath a controversy with the nations, He will
plead with all flesh; He will give them that are wicked to
the sword.’ Jeremiah 25:31. For six thousand years the
great controversy has been in progress; the Son of God
and His heavenly messengers have been in conflict with
the power of the evil one, to warn, enlighten, and save
the children of men. Now all have made their decisions;
the wicked have fully united with Satan in his warfare
against God.” Great Controversy, 654-656.
“Perhaps the chief reason for the mourning of kings
when Babylon receives her punishment is that they are
punished at the same time.
See Rev. 2:21-23.
Fornication always brings its retribution to all who
share in its guilt.” Bunch, TR, 255.
“And I gave her space to repent of her fornication;
and she repented not.
“Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that
commit adultery with her into great tribulation,
except they repent of their deeds.” Rev. 2:21-23.
“They are lamenting, but they are not lamenting
her sins or their own guilt as her accomplices. The

kings lament the suddenness of her judgment…. Not
one king, merchant, or seafarer has anything to say about
her crimes and demons or about the ‘blood of prophets
and of saints, and of all who have been slain on
earth.’ Verse 24.” Maxwell, God Cares, 465,466.
When They Shall See the Smoke of Her Burning.—
“It is manifest that the destruction of Babylon
begins before the great battle takes place; for the kings
are spared to witness her destruction (Rev. 18); but in
the great battle they are all destroyed. Rev. 19. While
the saints eat the marriage supper, they behold the smoke
of her burning; and in response to the call of Rev. 18:20,
they rejoice over her. Rev. 19:1-9.” Andrews, TAM, 63.

“And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty
of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall be as when God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.” Isaiah 13:19.
Like Sodom.—
“And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the
place where he stood before the Lord: And he looked
toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of
the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country
went up as the smoke of a furnace.” Genesis 19:27,28.

REVELATION 18:10
Standing afar off for the fear of her
torment, saying, Alas, alas that great city
Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is
thy judgment come.
Standing Afar Off For the Fear of Her Torment.—
“The question may arise how persons involved in
the same calamity can stand afar off and lament. It must
be remembered that this desolation is brought to view
under a figure, and the figure is that of a city visited with
destruction. Should calamity come upon a literal city,
it would be natural for its inhabitants to flee from
that city if they had opportunity, and standing afar
off, lament its fall. Just in proportion to their terror
and amazement at the evil impending, would be the
distance at which they would stand from their
devoted city. Now the figure the apostle uses would not

520

REVELATION 18
be complete without a feature of this kind, and he uses it,
not to imply that people would literally flee from the
symbolic city, which would be impossible, but to
denote their terror and amazement at the descending
judgments.” Smith, DR, 727.

REVELATION 18:11
And the merchants of the earth shall
weep and mourn over her; for no man
buyeth their merchandise any more:

Alas, Alas.—
“They had expected to ‘receive power’
permanently with their paramour, mystical Babylon.
She had assured them that she was enthroned a ‘queen’
forever and that, should they cast their lot with her, they
too would enjoy endless dominion. Realizing, too late,
the futility of such a scheme, they now give way to
utter remorse.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 863,864.

Merchants.—
“…These ‘merchants’ are the literal commercial
and business leaders of earth, whose financial and
material support have contributed so much to the luxury,
splendor, and success of Babylon the great. …In ch.
18:23 these ‘merchants’ are said to be ‘the great men
of the earth.’” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 864.

That Great City, That Mighty City.—
“In the Greek the ascription of former greatness
and power to mystical Babylon is most emphatic. The
emptiness of her claims in now full apparent, for
‘strong is the Lord God who judgeth her’ (vs.8).”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 864.
“‘During the Middle ages the rich rivaled each
other in leaving their estates to the Church, and the poor
gave out of their poverty till the Church became the
richest landowner in every country. In several
countries the Church own one-half of the land and
one-third of all the invested funds. It built great
cathedrals and bishop’s palaces and left the poor to
live in huts and shanties.’” Burnside, RWU, 211.
In One Hour.—
“It is for just ‘one hour’ that the powers of the
world reign with her (Revelation 17:12); in ‘one hour’
her judgment comes (Revelation 18:10); in ‘one hour’
her riches come to nought (verse 17); in ‘one hour’ she
is made desolate (verse 19).” Anderson, UR, 181,182.
“This ‘hour’ for the destruction of Babylon can be
no more than ‘a number of days’—that is, when the
entire length of time taken to completely destroy
Babylon, from the time of the 6th plague until the
coming of Christ, is considered. The use of the word
hour may also be intended to convey the suddenness
with which disaster overtakes Babylon.”
Were,
WATB, 222.
Is Thy Judgment Come.—
“For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then
sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon
a woman with child; and they shall not escape.” 1Thess.
5:3.
“Whereas ch. 17 deals primarily with the sentence
against Babylon, ch. 18 is concerned with the
execution of that sentence.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
864.

Merchants of the Earth Shall Weep and Mourn.—
“The infliction of the first plague must result in
a complete suspension of traffic in those articles of
luxury for which Babylon is noted. When the
merchants of these things, who are to a great extent
citizens of this symbolic city, and who have been made
rich by their traffic in these things, suddenly find
themselves and their neighbors smitten with putrefying
sores, their traffic suspended, and vast stores of
merchandise on hand, but none to buy them, they lift up
their voices in lamentation for the fate of this great city.
If there is anything which will draw from the men of
this generation a sincere cry of distress, it is that
which touches their treasures. There is a fitness in this
retribution. They who but a short time before had
issued a decree that the saints of God should neither
buy nor sell, now find themselves put under the same
restriction in a far more effectual way.” Smith, DR,
727.
“The merchants and seafarers lament the
destruction of such vast stores of merchandise, because
they ‘gained wealth from her’ and ‘grew rich by her
wealth.’ Verses 15,19.” Maxwell, God Cares, 466.
“When the voice of God turns the captivity of His
people [7th plague], there is a terrible awakening of those
who have lost all in the great conflict of life. While
probation continued they were blinded by Satan’s
deceptions, and they justified their course of sin. The
rich prided themselves upon their superiority to those
who were less favored; but they had obtained their
riches by violation of the law of God. They had
neglected to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to deal
justly, and to love mercy. They had sought to exalt
themselves and to obtain the homage of their fellow
creatures. Now they are stripped of all that made
them great and are left destitute and defense-less.
They look with terror upon the destruction of the idols
which they preferred before their Maker. They have sold
their souls for earthly riches and enjoyments, and have
not sought to become rich toward God. The result is,
their lives are a failure; their pleasures are now turned to
gall, their treasures to corruption. The gain of a lifetime
is swept away in a moment. The rich bemoan the
destruction of their grand houses, the scattering of

521

GEMS FROM REVELATION
their gold and silver. But their lamentations are
silenced by the fear that they themselves are to perish
with their idols.” Great Controversy, 654.
“What a picture of disappointment and distress
is expressed in those who have put their trust in the
final organizations of men and who put their trust in
the beast. The merchants of earth and great men of
earth, those who were interested in material things and
commerce, gave their power and authority to the beast,
thinking she might bring about peace. But at that
juncture the seven last plagues began to fall. Traffic was
then cut off because of the plagues and commerce
ceased. Some of these plagues were turned especially
upon the beast and its seat. As they see the fourth and
fifth plagues applied to the beast they weep and wail,
for this had been their last hope. Now it has failed.
To what can they then turn? Nothing. It is now too
late. Probation has closed.” Straw, SR, 111.
No Man Buyeth Their Merchandise Any More.—
“Babylon the great has not only ruled over kings
and nations, but has also largely controlled world
commerce.
The church festivals have been so
commercialized that they constitute one of the chief
sources of revenue for the merchants of earth. In
verse 3 we are told that ‘the merchants of the earth are
rich as the result of her ability to indulge.’
(Concordant).” Bunch, TR, 256.

REVELATION 18:12
The merchandise of gold, and silver, and
precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen,
and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all
thyine wood, and all manner vessels of ivory,
and all manner vessels of most precious
wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,
Babylon’s Merchandise.—
“Babylon’s merchants trade with her in 30 items
(6X5) commencing with gold the highest value in her
sight, and concluding with the item of lowest value in
her sight, ‘the souls of men.’ (18:12-14). …This
description is drawn from Ezekiel’s prediction of the
destruction of ancient Tyre. See Eze. 27:3-25,33. [The
merchants of Babylon trade in 30 of the commodities
listed in ancient Tyre’s 36 items.] ” Cooke, #20-UR, 29;
#30-UR, 22.
“But he shall have power over the treasures of
gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of
Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his
steps.” Daniel 11:43.
“In these verses is pictured the dainties, personal
adornments, expensive furniture, and the luxuries of the
modern church and society. The inhabitants of the

earth are the slaves of both religion and business.
Both the bodies and the souls of men are enslaved by the
universal acceptance of modern business maxims and
practices which involve a fearful trifling with the
conscience.” Bunch, TR, 256.
“Here we see the Church in finance and
business. Babylon will say, ‘You cannot buy or sell
unless you receive my Mark.’ Rev. 13:17. This is
quickly followed by their own financial collapse. The
present inflation, industrial unrest and increasing
business perplexity, is but the gathering clouds of the
coming storm.” Burnside, RWU, 208.
“This list of merchandise in Rev. 18 are articles
used by God in building temples:
“Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring
me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly
with his heart ye shall take my offering.
“And this is the offering which ye shall take of
them; gold, and silver, and brass, And blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,
And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and
shittim wood, Oil for the light, spices for anointing
oil, and for sweet incense, Onyx stones, and stones to be
set in the ephod, and in the breastplate.
“And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may
dwell among them.” Exodus 25:2-8.
‘Now I have prepared with all my might for the
house of the my God the gold for things to be made of
gold, and the silver for things of silver, and the brass
for things of brass, the iron for things of iron, and wood
for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set,
glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner
of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance.” 1
Chron. 29:2.
God’s people give these materials as a free-will
offering from the heart. In Babylon these materials
are bought and sold. Babylon has a form of godliness,
but denies the power thereof.” PJ
Thyine Wood.—
“Literally, ‘scented wood,’ that is, odoriferous
wood used for incense.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 864.

REVELATION 18:13
And cinnamon, and odours, and
ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts,
and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and
slaves, and souls of men.
And Slaves and Souls of Men.—
“The declaration concerning ‘slaves and souls of
men’ may pertain more particularly to the spiritual
domain, and have reference to slavery of conscience by
the creeds of these bodies, which in some cases is
more oppressive than physical bondage.” Smith, DR,

522

REVELATION 18
728.
“The doctrine of purgatory has sometimes been
referred to as ‘the gold mine of the priesthood’ since
it is the source of such lucrative income. The Roman
Church might well say, ‘By this craft we have our
wealth.’
“In general it is held that the period of suffering in
purgatory can be shortened by gifts of money, prayers
by the priest, and masses, which gifts, prayers, and
masses can be provided by the person before death or by
relatives and friends after death.
“Every year millions of dollars are paid to
obtain relief from this imagined suffering. …It is due
in no small measure to this doctrine of purgatory that the
Roman Catholic Church has been able to draw in large
sums of money and to build magnificent cathedrals,
monasteries, and convents, even in regions where the
people are poor. This has been particularly true in the
Latin American countries. It is a common experience
in Mexico, for instance, to find in almost every town
an impressive Roman Catholic church surrounded by
the miserable huts of the natives.
“We charge in the strongest terms that the practice
of saying mass for souls in purgatory is a gigantic hoax
and fraud, a taking of money under false pretenses,
because it purports to get people out of purgatory
when actually no such place exists.
“‘Purgatory has been called “a gigantic fraud,” and
“a colossal racket,” for it deprives the poor of their last
pennies and extorts large funds from the rich in
exchange for nothing.’” Burnside, RWU, 210,211.
“Babylon is represented as trafficking in the souls
of men. Look at the Church of England. There the
vacant parishes are in some cases even set up for sale,
and the highest bidder becomes the possessor of its
revenue and the pastor of its people! To come nearer
home, let us look at the various religious de-nominations
in every place where they have sufficient wealth and
strength to become popular. They must erect a
splendid house of worship and furnish it in the most
expensive style; and the members of the church must
dress in all the fashion and pride of life. Then they
must have an eloquent man to preach smooth things to
fashionable ears. The church which can outdo the
others in these particulars will succeed in securing
the fashionable sinners of the place as permanent
members of the congregation.” Andrews, TAM, 47.
“This prophecy also has its fulfillment in the
demand made on non-Catholics before marriage to sign
away the destiny of their unborn children. No person
has the right to sign away his own religious liberty,
let alone the liberty of his own children.” Burnside,
RWU, 208.
“Shortly after the Portuguese began the European
slave trade by raiding for blacks on the African coast,
Prince Henry asked the Pope to approve more raids.

The Pope’s reply granted “to all of those who shall be
engaged in the said war, complete forgiveness of all
their sins.” In 1455 a papal bull, or declaration,
authorized Portugal to reduce to servitude all nonChristian peoples.
“The Church did its best to keep Christians from
becoming the slaves of infidels (non-Christians). But
this ban did not extend to unbelievers. They were
thought not to deserve freedom. If infidels were
enslaved by Christians, new souls would be procured for
the Church to convert. So slavery was seen as a
weapon to extend Christianity, and as a deserved
punishment for pagans and heretics.
“In the New World colonies established by Spain
and Portugal the clergy themselves owned thousands
of slaves. That, to many minds, made the African
slave trade legitimate.
“In a way, this was like the rationale some Africans
gave themselves when they chose not to enslave people
of their own community, but only those so-called
“strangers,” or “outsiders.” But merchants—European
or African—who handled thousands of slaves, could
not have cared less about the religion or origin of
their commodities. Meltzer, They Came in Chains, 31.

Currently more than 27 million
people are enslaved.
“I am instructed to say to our people throughout the
cities of the South, Let everything be done under the
direction of the Lord. The work is nearing its close. We
are nearer the end than when we first believed. Satan is
doing his best to block the way to the progress of the
message. He is putting forth efforts to bring about the
enactment of a Sunday law, which [if enacted] will
result in slavery in the Southern field and will close
the door to the observance of the true Sabbath, which
God has given to men to keep holy.” [1909] Manuscript
Releases, Vol. 20, 395.

“Houses of prostitution, dens of vice, criminal
courts, prisons, almshouses, insane asylums, hospitals,
all are, to a great degree, filled as a result of the liquor

523

GEMS FROM REVELATION
seller’s work.
Like the mystic Babylon of the
Apocalypse, he is dealing in ‘slaves, and souls of men.’
Behind the liquor seller stands the mighty destroyer of
souls, and every art which earth or hell can devise is
employed to draw human beings under his power.”
Ministry of Healing, 338.
“Multitudes feel under no moral obligation to curb
their sensual desires, and they become the slaves of lust.
Men are living for the pleasures of sense; for this world
and this life alone. Extravagance pervades all circles of
society. Integrity is sacrificed for luxury and display.
They that make haste to be rich pervert justice and
oppress the poor, and ‘slaves and souls of men’ are
still bought and sold. Fraud and bribery and theft stalk
unrebuked in high places and in low.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 101,102.
“Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy
[Tyre’s] merchants: they traded the persons of men
and vessels of brass in thy market.” Ezekiel 27:13.

REVELATION 18:14
And the fruits that thy soul lusted after
are departed from thee, and all things which
were dainty and goodly are departed from
thee, and thou shalt find them no more at
all.
Fruits That Thy Soul Lusted After.—
“They did not seek after spiritual fruit: ‘Set
your affection on things above, not on things on the
earth.” Colossians 3:2.

for the fear of her torment, weeping and
wailing,
And saying, Alas, alas that great city,
that was clothed in fine linen, and purple,
and scarlet, and decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls!
Were Made Rich By Her.—
“Partnership with Babylon had been mutually
beneficial [for the merchants, not the people] (cf. Eze.
27:33).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 865.
Emotions of the Wicked.—
“The reader can readily imagine the cause of this
universal voice of mourning, lamentation, and woe.
Imagine the plague of sores preying upon men, the rivers
turned to blood, the sea like the blood of a dead man, the
sun scorching men with fire, their traffic gone, and their
silver and gold unable to deliver them, and we need not
wonder at their exclamations of distress, nor that
shipmasters and sailors join in the general wail.”
Smith, DR, 728,729.
That Great City That Was Clothed In Fine Linen, and
Purple, and Scarlet.—
“And the woman was arrayed in purple and
scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious
stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full
of abominations and filthiness of her fornication.”
Revelation 17:4.
“The power that for so many centuries maintained
despotic sway over the monarchs of Christendom is
Rome. The purple and scarlet color, the gold and
precious stones and pearls, vividly picture the
magnificence and more than kingly pomp affected by
the haughty see of Rome.” Great Controversy, 382.

REVELATION 18:17,18
For in one hour so great riches is come
to nought. And every shipmaster, and all
the company in ships, and sailors, and as
many as trade by sea, stood afar off,
And cried when they saw the smoke of
her burning, saying, What city is like unto
this great city!
Thou Shalt Find Them No More At All.—
“The finality of the fate that has overtaken Babylon
is repeated in similar words six times in vs. 21-23.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 865.

REVELATION 18:15,16
The merchants of these things, which
were made rich by her, shall stand afar off

In One Hour So Great Riches Is Come to Nought.—
“The picture here is of a worldwide commercial
depression or business panic which brings lamentation
and weeping on the part of the merchant princes of the
earth. The destruction of Babylon is symbolized by the
destruction of a great and wealthy city whose
extravagance and luxury made the merchants rich.
…James 5:1-6 is doubtless a picture of the same
time.” Bunch, TR, 256.

524

REVELATION 18
“Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your
miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are
corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold
and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were
fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last
days. Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped
down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud,
crieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are
entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth. Ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye
have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Ye
have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not
resist you.” James 5:1-6.
“(Rev. 18:15-17 quoted). Such are the judgments
that fall upon Babylon in the day of the visitation of
God’s wrath. She has filled up the measure of her
iniquity; her time has come; she is ripe for destruction.
“When the voice of God turns the captivity of His
people, there is a terrible awakening of those who
have lost all in the great conflict of life. While probation
continued they were blinded by Satan’s deceptions, and
they justified their course of sin. The rich prided
themselves upon their superiority to those who were less
favored; but they had obtained their riches by violation
of the law of God. They had neglected to feed the
hungry, to clothe the naked, to deal justly, and to love
mercy. They had sought to exalt themselves and to
obtain the homage of their fellow creatures. Now they
are stripped of all that made them great and are left
destitute and defenseless. They look with terror upon the
destruction of the idols which they preferred before their
Maker. They have sold their souls for earthly riches and
enjoyments, and have not sought to become rich toward
God. The result is, their lives are a failure; their
pleasures are now turned to gall, their treasures to
corruption. The gain of a lifetime is swept away in a
moment. The rich bemoan the destruction of their
grand houses, the scattering of their gold and silver.
But their lamentations are silenced by the fear that
they themselves are to perish with their idols.
“The wicked are filled with regret, not because
of their sinful neglect of God and their fellow men,
but because God has conquered. They lament that
the result is what it is; but they do not repent of their
wickedness. They would leave no means untried to
conquer if they could.” Great Controversy, 653,654.
Every Shipmaster, All Sailors, All Trade.—
“This is a global collapse of business.” PJ.

The Smoke of Her Burning.—
“The Lord calls for His people to locate away from
the cities, for in such an hour as ye think not, fire and
brimstone will be rained from heaven upon these
cities. Proportionate to their sins will be their visitation.

When one city is destroyed, let not our people regard this
matter as a light affair, and think that they may, if
favorable opportunity offers, build themselves homes in
that same destroyed city....
“Let all who would understand the meaning of
these things read the eleventh chapter of Revelation.
Read every verse, and learn the things that are yet to take
place in the cities. Read also the scenes portrayed in
the eighteenth chapter of the same book.” Manuscript
Releases, Vol. 21, 92. Last Day Events, 95.
“And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the
place where he stood before the LORD: And he looked
toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land
of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the
country went up as the smoke of a furnace.” Genesis
19:28.

San Francisco Earthquake—1906
What City Is Like Unto This Great City.—
“And in their wailing they shall take up a
lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What
city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the
sea?” Ezekiel 27:32.
This Great City.—
“Though the account of the judgment upon
Babylon in Rev. 18 speaks of Babylon as if she were one
city, yet we learn from Rev. 16:19 that Babylon will be
divided into three parts before she receives her
punishment. This seems to indicate that these three
parts are not alike guilty, and that God makes this
division that he may punish each part according to the
light which it has had, and the crimes which it has
committed. It is therefore not unreasonable to conclude
that Babylon is now composed of three grand sections,
which are culpable in different degrees, and that God
will judge each according to its deserts.” Andrews,
TAM, 71.

REVELATION 18:19
And they cast dust on their heads, and

525

GEMS FROM REVELATION

cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas,
alas that great city, wherein were made rich
all that had ships in the sea by reason of her
costliness! for in one hour is she made
desolate.
Wherein Were Made Rich.—
“Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your
miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are
corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten. Your
gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall
be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last
days.” James 5:1-3.
(See vs. 15).
By Reason of Her Costliness.—
“Literally, ‘from her expensiveness.’ Babylon’s
extravagant requirements brought wealth to those who
traded in the goods in which she was interested.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 865.
For In One Hour Is She Made Desolate.—
“Babylon is a symbol of the world at large. When
its doom was made certain, its kings and officers seemed
to be as men insane, and their own course hastened its
destiny. When the doom of a nation is fixed, it seems
that all the energy, wisdom, and discretion of its
former time of prosperity, deserts its men of position,
and they hasten the evil they would avert. Outside
enemies are not the greatest peril to an individual or a
nation. The overthrow of a nation results, under the
providence of God, from some unwise or evil course of
its own. But the people who fear God, who are loyal to
his laws, who carry out the principles of righteousness in
their lives, have a sure defense; God will be the refuge of
those who trust in him.” Signs, 12/29/1890.
“And Babylon shall become heaps, a
dwellingplace for dragons, an astonishment, and an
hissing, without an inhabitant.” Jer. 51:37.
“Then shalt thou say, O Lord, thou hast spoken
against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain
in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate
for ever.” Jer. 51:62.

REVELATION 18:20
Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye
holy apostles and prophets; for God hath
avenged you on her.
A Dramatic Description of Babylon’s Destruction.—
“In this dramatic description [vs. 20-24], the
Revelator draws from the Old Testament
descriptions of four different cities. These were all
destroyed for their persistent rebellion against Heaven:

REV. 18
CITY
1.Vs. 20,21,
Babylon.
24.
2. Vs. 22.
Jerusalem
3. Vs. 22,23
Tyre
4. Vs. 23.
Nineveh
Cooke, #30-UR, 24.

DESTROYED
Jer. 51:28; Isa. 44:23;
Jer. 51:63,64; 49.
Jer. 25:10.
Ezek. 26:13; Isa. 23:8.
Nahum 3:4,7.

Emotions of the Righteous.—
“The apostles and prophets are here called upon to
rejoice over great Babylon in her destruction, as it is in
close connection with this destruction that they will
all be delivered from the power of death and the grave
by the first resurrection.” Smith, DR, 729.
“Verse 20 expresses the exultation and joy of
God’s people, maybe not just because Babylon has
gotten her just deserts, but that they are now free and
safe, vindicated by their God.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 285.
“When ancient Babylon was captured and
destroyed the Hebrew captives and the remnant of Israel
in Palestine were jubilant.
They knew from the
prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah that the destruction
was a judgment from God. All the nations that had
been oppressed by Babylon also rejoiced. See Jer.
51:48. Likewise there will be great rejoicing in
heaven and on earth when modern Babylon that had
so long ruled and oppressed the world is destroyed.”
Bunch, TR, 257.
Heaven.—
“The inhabitants of heaven are first to rejoice in
the triumph of Christ and His church.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 865.
Apostles and Prophets.—
“The most active for God are the most persecuted.”
PJ.
For God Hath Avenged You on Her.—
“A literal translation says, ‘God has judged her
judgment against you.’ The meaning is that Babylon
for centuries has falsely condemned God’s saints,
apostles, and prophets. She has excommunicated the
saints and turned them over to the state for execution.
She has borne false witness against the prophets and
apostles, forbidding common people to read the Bible,
and holding opinions of theologians and church councils
as more authoritative than the Scriptures. She has
judged and falsely condemned saints and apostles
and prophets.
“But in 1844 commenced the first, pre-advent,
phase of the final judgment. Babylon—the ‘little horn’
of Daniel 7, the ‘man of lawlessness’ of 2 Thessalonians
2—and the true saints as well, all who in every age have
claimed to worship God, have by the time of this

526

REVELATION 18
announcement in John’s vision been investigated. And
where Babylon has been found to have wrongfully
condemned the saints, apostles, and prophets, God has
judged the judgment oppressive, condemned the
condemnation, and ruled against the oppressor in
favor of the oppressed. The sentence which the false
witnesses imposed on God’s people, God now imposes
on the false witnesses.
“The Old Testament established such a principle.
Scholars refer to the ‘law of malicious witness’ in
Deuteronomy 19:16-19.
When someone accused
another person, both were to be brought to trial, and if
the accuser was found to have made a false, malicious
accusation, the judge was required to ‘do to him as he
had meant to do to his brother.’” Maxwell, God
Cares, 466.
“Thus, God answers the prayer of the righteous
souls under the altar of the 5th seal: ‘How long, O
Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth?’” PJ
“So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he
had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the king's wrath
pacified.” Esther 7:10.
“Reward her even as she rewarded you, and
double unto her double according to her works: in the
cup which she hath filled fill to her double.” Rev 18:6.
“For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
should follow his steps: Who did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth: Who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not;
but committed himself to him that judgeth
righteously.” 1Peter 2:21-23.
“Let everyone bear in mind that God delights to
listen to the supplications of His people; for the
prevailing iniquity calls for more earnest prayer, and
God has promised that He will avenge His own elect,
who cry day and night unto Him, though He bear long
with them.” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 372.

REVELATION 18:21,22
And a mighty angel took up a stone like
a great millstone, and cast it into the sea,
saying, Thus with violence shall that great
city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be
found no more at all.
And the voice of harpers, and musicians,
and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be
heard no more at all in thee; and no
craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall
be found any more in thee; and the sound of

a millstone shall be heard no more at all in
thee.
A Great Millstone Cast Into the Sea.—
“When thou hast made an end of reading this book,
that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the
midst of Euphrates. And thou shalt say, Thus shall
Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will
bring upon her…” Jeremiah 51:63,64.
“The same illustration was used in fore-telling
the fate of ancient Babylon. See Jer. 51: 63,64. The
city was never to be rebuilt or inhabited again. See Isa.
26:2. Modern Babylon sinks to rise no more just as
Pharaoh and his army ‘sank unto the bottom’ of the
Red Sea ‘as a stone’ and ‘as lead in the mighty
waters’ (Ex. 15:4,5,10).
The destruction of the
Egyptians in the Red Sea was typical of the final
destruction of Babylon. For that reason the song of
Moses will be repeated by those who escape from
Babylon and then witness her destruction.” Bunch, TR,
257.
“And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that
they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land;
and their persecutors thou threwest into the deeps, as a
stone into the mighty waters.” Nehemiah 9:11.
“The doom pronounced in this verse coincides
with the doom Jesus threatened upon anyone who would
cause His children to fall. ‘Whoso shall offend [hurt]
one of these little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck and that he were drowned in the depths of the
sea.’ Matt. 18:6.” Cooke #30-UR, 25.
“Like a millstone, she had ground and oppressed
the church of God. Here ruin would be violent,
irrecoverable, and irreparable…. The casting of a stone
into the sea was anciently the emblem of everlasting
forgetfulness.” Feyerabend, RVBV, 172.
No More At All.—
“The expression ‘no more at all,’ in verses 21-23,
is employed six times. Six is Babylon’s number. Like a
funeral knell this expression is repeated over the
departed greatness of Babylon.” Cooke, #30-UR, 25.
Heard No More At All.—
“Like a great millstone, Babylon sinks to rise no
more. The various arts and crafts that have been
employed in her midst, and have ministered to her
desires, shall be practiced no more. The pompous music
that has been employed in her imposing but formal and
lifeless service, dies away forever. The scenes of
festivity and gladness, when the bridegroom and the
bride have been led before her altars, shall be witnessed
no more.” Smith, DR, 729.

527

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Their ‘music unsurpassed’ will be heard ‘no more
at all.’” Burnside, RWU, 209.
“The arts and merrymaking have ceased.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 866.
Craftsman.—
“They have hired the world’s best ‘craftsmen,’
but this does not save.” Burnside, RWU, 209.
“The artisans, mechanics, and skilled workmen
have all gone. Manufacture has ceased.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 866.

REVELATION 18:23
And the light of a candle shall shine no
more at all in thee; and the voice of the
bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard
no more at all in thee: for thy merchants
were the great men of the earth; for by thy
sorceries were all nations deceived.
Candle.—
“Literally, ‘lamp’.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 866.
“The word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
my path.” “The entrance of thy words giveth light; it
giveth understanding unto the simple.”
Psalm
119:105,130.
“If thy whole [church] body therefore be full of
light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of
light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give
thee light.” Luke 11:36.
Candle Shall Shine No More At All In Thee.—
“The light from the lamp of God’s Word will no
more shine in her.” PJ.
“Moreover I will take from them the voice of
mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of
the millstones, and the light of the candle. And this
whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonish-ment;
and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy
years.” Jeremiah 25:10,11.
Voice of Bridegroom and Bride Heard No More.—
“Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah,
and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and
the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and
the voice of the bride: for the land shall be desolate.”
Jeremiah 7:34.
“He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the
friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth
him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom’s

voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled.” John 3:29.
“And the Spirit and the bride say, Come.” Rev.
22:17.
“No more is the voice of Jesus, or the voice of
Jesus’s bride found inside the churches of fallen
Babylon. God’s people have all left, having been
called out in vs. 4.” PJ
“No means of propagation of mankind by
marriage. The usual human activities and festivities,
such as weddings, will no longer resound in the houses
and streets.
Babylon will become a dead city.”
Feyerabend, RVBV, 173.
“All social and family life have come to an end.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 866.
Thy Merchants Were the Great Men of the Earth.—
“Jesus was the poorest of the poor. For our sakes
He became poor, but apostate Christendom has
become the richest of the rich, ‘the wealthiest
institution on earth.’ Vatican Billions, p. 15, by Avro
Manhattan. She controls ‘at least one-third of all the
sources of wealth of the western world.’ Ibid. p. 212.
‘She is a greater possessor of material riches than any
other single institution, corporation, bank, giant
trust, government, or state of the whole globe.’ Ibid.
p. 197.” Burnside, RWU, 209.
“Tyre the crowning city, whose merchants are
princes, whose traffickers [merchants] are the
honorable of the earth.” Isa. 23:8.
For By Thy Sorceries.—
“Gr. pharmakoi, ‘practicers of magical arts.’
Basically, the root refers to magic, enchantment,
sorcery, and to the use of drugs to produce a stupefied
condition. A modern counterpart of the ancient practice
of sorcery is spiritism.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 891.
“Ancient Babylon was the birthplace of sorcery and
magic. See Isa. 47:13-15. …Sorcery and magic in the
form of modern spiritism has its headquarters in
modern Babylon. See Rev. 16:13; 18:2.” Bunch, TR,
258.
“What is sorcery?
It is from the Greek,
‘pharmakeia’ from which we derive our word
pharmacy or pharmaceutical. According to Dr.
Yond it means, ‘Enchantment with drugs.’ This
probably refers to the use of drugs by the pagan priests
to prepare their minds for communication with the
powers of the occult. There is evidence that the use of
drugs in many instances is involved with the occult
today. By paralyzing the mental faculties, people are
being manipulated by the invisible powers of evil.
Sorcery is the occult. It is the practice of consulting and
using Satanic powers. This has been the diabolical
secret of Babylon’s phenomenal success through
history. It is a repetition of the prediction of

528

REVELATION 18
Revelation 16:13,14.” Cooke, #30-UR, 26,27.
“Her sorceries constitute her leading crime, and
sorcery is a practice which is involved in the spiritism of
today.” Smith, DR, 729.
“The conversion of the Ephesians was attended
with the results that always follow genuine conversion.
When convinced that their magical books were false
and pernicious, they were unwilling to sell them and
thus place temptation in the way of others. They
promptly burned the records of divination, at a great
personal sacrifice. The power of truth triumphed over
men's prejudices, favorite pursuits, and love of money.
“Those magical books contained rules and forms of
communication with evil spirits. They were, in fact, the
regulations of the worship of Satan; directions for
soliciting his help, and obtaining information from him.
The system of magic or sorcery then extant was in reality
the same as that which is now known as modern
Spiritualism. Many were deceived in Paul’s day by
this Satanic delusion, and many are deceived today
by the same power. ‘Magical books’ were not confined
to the apostolic age, or to nations that are called heathen.
The sorcerers of our time are taking advantage of the
freedom of the press to spread abroad their baleful
literature. Could all the productions of modern
Spiritualism be treated as were the magical books of
the Ephesians, one of Satan’s most successful avenues
to destroy the souls of men would be cut off.” Signs,
5/18/1882.
Were All Nations Deceived.—
“By the false doctrines of this apostate system, the
nations have been deceived instead of led to the light of
Christ. This eventually brings her doom. … False
doctrines and pretended miracles have been her tools
of trade to deceive.” Burnside, RWU, 209.
“If men would consent to follow the Lord fully, if
they were not confused with the wine of Babylon, they
would see that to tamper with the Lord’s standard, to
depart from his commandments, is the worst species
of rebellion. This is well represented as the wine of the
wrath of the abomination of Babylon, the cup which she
has presented to all nations to drink. Were it not for this,
thousands, yes, millions, would be found in the path
cast up for the ransomed of the Lord to walk in.”
Signs, 11/14/1895.
“Cities, nations—a world, are ignorant of the truth;
they are deceived and deluded by false shepherds.”
Gen. Conf. Bulletin, 4/1/1895.

REVELATION 18:24
And in her was found the blood of
prophets, and of saints, and of all that were
slain upon the earth.
“In a general sense Babylon may be said to be
‘drunken’ with the blood of the martyrs of all ages (cf.
ch. 18:24), but in a more immediate sense with that of
martyrs and prospective martyrs in the closing scenes of
earth’s history. God holds Babylon accountable for
the blood of those whose death she has decreed but
whom she is prevented from slaying (see Great
Controversy, 628).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 852.
“As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to
fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.”
Jer. 51:49.
“It may be asked how the last generation of the
wicked can be said to have shed the blood of saints and
prophets, since the last generation of saints are not to be
slain. Reference to Matt.23:34, 35; 1John 3:15, will
explain. These scriptures show that guilt attaches to
motive no less than to action. No generation ever
formed a more determined purpose to devote the
saints to indiscriminate slaughter than the present
generation will, not far in the future. (See chapter
12:17; 13:15.) In motive and purpose, they do shed the
blood of saints and prophets, and are every whit as guilty
as if they were able to carry out their wicked intentions.”
Smith, DR, 689,690.
“Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and
wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill
and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your
synagogues, and persecute them from city to city: That
upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon
the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the
blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew
between the temple and the altar.” Matt. 23:34,35.
“Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer:
and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in
him.” 1John 3:15.
“The blood of all the slain, is laid by our Lord at
the door of Babylon—the great deceiver and
counterfeiter. She is not only a persecuting, but also a
war-mongering power. She has planned wars for
power and gain. Persecutions, confiscations and wars
have been her weapons and now she is ‘no more at
all.’” Burnside, RWU, 209.

529

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 19
REVELATION 19: 1-21
1 And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in
heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour, and
power, unto the Lord our God:
2 For true and righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged
the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication,
and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.
3 And again they said, Alleluia And her smoke rose up for ever
and ever.
4 And the four and twenty elders and the four beasts fell down
and worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen;
Alleluia.
5 And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all
ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.
6 And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as
the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings,
saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.
7 Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself
ready.
8 And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine
linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of
saints.
9 And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called
unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me,
These are the true sayings of God.
10 And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said unto me, See
thou do it not: I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that
have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he
that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in
righteousness he doth judge and make war.
12 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many
crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he
himself.
13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his
name is called The Word of God.
14 And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon
white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.
15 And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he
should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron:
and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of
Almighty God.
16 And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written,
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.
17 And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a
loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven,
Come and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great
God;
18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains,
and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them
that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both
small and great.
19 And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their
armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the
horse, and against his army.
20 And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that
had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his
image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone.
21 And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat
upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all
the fowls were filled with their flesh.

REVELATION 19:1
And after these things I heard a great
voice of much people in heaven, saying,
Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour,
and power, unto the Lord our God:
After These Things.—
“After the judgment on Babylon, that is after the
Plagues and our Lord’s return. [See Rev. 18:8].”
Burnside, RWU, 214.
“ ‘After…’ doubtless refers to the events
previously described. After the prophet was shown
the defeat and destruction of Babylon, the church of
Satan, he was given a view of the church triumphant
on the sea of glass celebrating their triumph. Several
times in the Apocalypse, after the darkest scenes, we are
given visions of the final triumph of Zion over her rival,
Babylon the great. See Zeph. 3:13-17. To Zion the
assurance is given, ‘He hath cast out thine enemy.’
The enemy and rival of Zion down through the ages has
been Babylon. See Zech. 2:7.” Bunch, TR, 259.
“That is, after witnessing the scenes of chs. 17 and
18 (see on ch. 18:1). Those of ch. 19 were presented to
John immediately, without interruption. From vs. 2 it is
apparent that this song is sung after judgment has been
executed upon the ‘great whore,’ an event that takes
place under the seventh plague…, and thus after the
scene described in chs. 17:16,17; 18:4-23.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 871.
I Heard a Great Voice.—
“‘Voice’ is in the singular indicating perfect
unity and harmony on the part of those who celebrate.”
Bunch, TR, 259.
I Heard a Great Voice of Much People in Heaven.—
“According to Rev. 8:1 during the events of the
Second Advent ‘there is silence in heaven.’ This is
because all the heavenly hosts escort Christ at his return
to this world and witness the final destruction of
Babylon. But after the Second Advent, the heavenly
hosts with the translated saints return to heaven. The
saints are the guests at the marriage supper of the
Lamb (ch. 19:9), and this is the fulfillment of Jesus’
promise: ‘In my father’s house are many mansions; I
go to prepare a place for you, and if I go and prepare
a place for you, I will come again and receive you
unto myself, that where I am there ye may be also.’
John 14:1-3.” Cooke, #30-UR, 29,30.
“This refutes two popular errors:

530

REVELATION 19
“1. Some have taught that Christ sets up His
Kingdom on earth and that the redeemed never go to
heaven, but this Scripture shows that people do go to
heaven at Christ’s return. A thousand years later they
inherit the earth. The fact that the redeemed go to
heaven before inhabiting the New Earth is confirmed by
many Scriptures.
“Rev. 5:10. This Scripture describes people in
heaven who have been redeemed from all nations (vs.9),
and who look forward to the time when they ‘shall
reign on the earth.’
“2 Kings 2:11. Elijah was translated ‘into
heaven.’
“Rev. 15:2. The victorious saints are seen ‘on the
sea of glass.’ Rev. 5:6 states this is before the throne,
which is in heaven, vs. 2.
“John 13:36. The disciples could not go to heaven
with Christ at His ascension, but Jesus promised ‘thou
shalt follow Me afterwards.’
“Matt. 5:12. ‘Rejoice and be exceeding glad: for
great is your reward in heaven.’ Revelation now
confirms the fulfillment of these promises.
“2. Not merely the 144,000, but ‘much people in
heaven,’ is the assurance of God’s unerring Word. ‘A
vast throng,’ N.E.B.
“Rev. 7:9. ‘A great multitude which no man can
number of all nations … stood before the throne.’
This is the throne of God, vs. 10. Thus again the clear
light of God’s Word wipes out the darkness of man’s
erring statements. This ‘great host in heaven’ are
responding to the call in Rev. 18:20 to praise our God for
His justice and mercy in destroying Babylon, ‘the great
whore.’” Burnside, RWU, 214,215.
“Continuing the subject of Revelation 18, the
apostle here introduces the song of triumph which the
redeemed saints strike up on their harps when they
behold the complete destruction of the system of great
Babylon, which is in opposition to God and His true
worship. This destruction takes place and this song is
sung in connection with the second coming of Christ at
the beginning of the thousand years.” Smith, DR, 731.
“The fall of Babylon in chapter 18 has been fixed,
finished and declared to be fatal. Here the saints
answer to the call of their Lord in triumph to ‘Rejoice
over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and
prophets.’ [rev. 18:20] Their prayers now turn into
praise and their songs into Halleluiahs.
The
thankfulness is because of the truthfulness of His Word
and the wonderfulness of His leading and especially in
the ruin of Babylon which has been the mother, nurse
and nest of deception and falsehood.” Burnside, RWU,
214.
Alleluia.—
“Gr. Alleluouia, a transliteration of the Heb.
Halelu-Yah, ‘Praise ye Jehovah,’ from halal, ‘to shine,’
‘to boast,’ ‘to celebrate,’ ‘to praise,’ and Yah, a shortened
form of Yah-weh, Jehovah.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,

871.
“‘Alleluia,’—‘Praise ye the Lord,’ is repeated
four times in Rev. 19:1-6. It is used nowhere else in
the New Testament.” Burnside, RWU, 215.
“The term is borrowed from the Psalms, fifteen
of which begin and end with ‘hallelujah.’ Psalms 104109 were sung chiefly during the feasts of the Passover
and Tabernacles and together were known as the ‘Great
Hallel.’ Most of the hallelujah psalms have to do with
the triumph of the Israelites over the Egyptians, or to
the culmination of this earth’s history when modern
Israel triumphs over all her enemies. How beautiful and
thrilling will be this great alleluia chorus after the woeful
lamentations which immediately precede it.” Bunch, TR,
259.
Two Anthems and Two Responses.—
“Verse 1-7 constitute an antiphonal choral
arrangement composed of two anthems and two
responses: (1) In vs. 1-3 a great voice in heaven leads
out with the theme of the song, ascribing honor and
justice to God for having punished Babylon. (2) In v. 4
the ‘beasts’ and the ‘elders’ respond in affirmation. (3)
In v. 5 a voice from the throne summons all loyal
subjects throughout the universe to a joint recognition of
the truth of the theme. (4) In vs. 6,7 the entire universe
unites in acclaiming the right of God to universal
sovereignty. This paean of praise stands in striking
contrast with the dirge of death in ch. 18:10-19.
“The motif of this antiphonal hymn of praise is
similar to that of Ps. 24:7-10, which is likewise
composed of two anthems and two responses. This
responsive chorus was first used during the triumphal
procession marking the return of the ark to Jerusalem
(Patriarchs & Prophets, 708), and centuries later at the
resurrection (Early Writings, 187) and the ascension
(Desire of Ages, 833; Early Writings, 190,191).” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 871.
Salvation.—
“Literally, ‘the salvation.’ In the Greek each of the
virtues here ascribed to God is preceded by the definite
article. This suggests the fullness, the sum total, of each
attribute. The ‘salvation’ of ch. 12:10 is specifically
salvation from ‘the accuser of our brethren’; here, it
is salvation from mystical Babylon. The one refers to
what was accomplished at the first advent, the other, to
what is to be accomplished at the second.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 871.

REVELATION 19:2
For true and righteous are his
judgments: for he hath judged the great
whore, which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication, and hath avenged the blood of

531

GEMS FROM REVELATION
yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it
shall not be.” Psalm 37: 20,10.

his servants at her hand.
For True and Righteous Are His Judgments.—
“The redeemed have now seen the whole program
of God fulfilled and they unite in proclaiming our God as
just and His judgments righteous. If we could see the
whole conflict and the end of it all, we too would
agree to all of God’s acts. ‘Vengeance is Mine,’ saith
the Lord. He has repaid.” Burnside, RWU, 215,216.
“And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art
righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be,
because thou hast judged thus. For they have shed the
blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them
blood to drink; for they are worthy. And I heard another
out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true
and righteous are thy judgments.” Rev 16:5-7.
Judgments.—
“The seven last plagues in general and the
judgment of mystical Babylon in particular.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 871.
Which Corrupted the Earth With Her Fornication.—
“The union of church and state (spiritual
fornication) corrupts the earth because the influence of
that corporate action starts a chain reaction. Union with
the state causes the church system to lower the Bible
standards. Doctrines are watered down and re-defined.
The world then floods into the church. Sin is allowed.
Thus, society is corrupted. Families are destroyed.
Souls are lost.” PJ.
And Hath Avenged.—
“Or, ‘in that he hath avenged.’ The judging is the
avenging.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 871.
“Praise is given to God for answering the prayer of
Rev. 6:10.” PJ

REVELATION 19:3
And again they said, Alleluia And her
smoke rose up for ever and ever.
Alleluia.—
“God is pleased to have us rejoice at the
eradication of evil. God would much rather have
sinners repent than be punished. He has ‘no pleasure in
the death of the wicked.’ Ezekiel 33:11. He is ‘not
wishing that nay should perish, but that all should
reach repentance.’ 2 Peter 3:9.” Maxwell, God Cares,
468.
For Ever and Ever.—
“But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of
the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall
consume; into smoke shall they consume away.
“For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be:

“This expression is taken from the Old
Testament, and to gain a correct understanding of it, we
must go back to its first introduction, and consider its
import as there used. In Isaiah 34 will be found the
language from which, in all probability, such expressions
as these are drawn. Under the figure of Idumea, a certain
destruction is brought to view. It is said of that land that
its streams should be turned into pitch, its dust into
brimstone, that it should become burning pitch, and not
be quenched night nor day, but that its smoke should go
up forever. This language is spoken, as all must
concede, of one of two things, either of the particular
country called Idumea, or of the whole earth under that
name. In either case it is evident that this phrase,
‘forever and ever,’ must be limited in its application.
Probably the whole earth is meant, from the fact that the
chapter opens with an address to the earth ‘and all that
is therein; the world, and all that come forth of it;’
and ‘the indignation of the Lord’ is declared to be
upon all nations.
“Whether this refers to the depopulation and
desolation of the earth at the second advent, or to the
purifying fires that shall purge it of the effects of the
curse at the end of the thousand years, the expression
must still be limited; for after all this, a renovated
earth is to come forth, to be the abode of the nations
of the saved throughout eternity. Three times in the
Bible smoke is spoken of as going up forever: once here
in Isaiah 34, of the land of Idumea as a figure of the
earth; in Revelation 14, of the worshipers of the beast
and his image; and again in the chapter we are now
considering, in regard to the destruction of great
Babylon. All these apply to the very same time, and
describe the same scenes, namely, the destruction
visited upon this earth, the worshipers of the beast,
and all the pomp of great Babylon, at the second
advent of our Lord and Saviour.” Smith, DR, 731,732.

REVELATION 19:4
And the four and twenty elders and the
four beasts fell down and worshipped God
that sat on the throne, saying, Amen;
Alleluia.
The Four and Twenty Elders.—
“The elders are often found in an attitude of
prostration and praise. It is before these heavenly
beings that the 144,000 sing a new song (14:3). As
witnesses to God’s works in favor of the redeemed, they
adore the Creator (4:10-11) and Saviour (5:8-10) and
give their approval (‘amen’) to the invitation to praise
God for His judgment on the great prostitute (19:4).”
Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 212.
“Notice how the 24 elders are here again
noticed with the four living creatures, and not with the

532

REVELATION 19
“great multitude” of the redeemed in verse 6. The 24
elders are a class of commanding angels.” PJ.
Fell Down and Worshipped God.—
“Considering the meaning that we attributed to the
word ‘amen,’ it can be understood that the elders not
only join the first narrator’s voice, but also commit
themselves to the realization of the invitation to
praise by assuming the appropriate attitude—they
bow down and worship.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 212.
“O come, let us worship and bow down: let us
kneel before the LORD our maker.” Psalm 95:6.
“In these perilous times, those who profess to be
God’s commandment-keeping people should guard
against the tendency to lose the spirit of reverence
and godly fear. The Scriptures teach men how to
approach their Maker—with humility and awe, through
faith in a divine Mediator. Let man come on bended
knee, as a subject of grace, a suppliant at the footstool of
mercy. Thus he is to testify that the whole soul, body,
and spirit are in subjection to his Creator.
“Both in public and in private worship, it is our
duty to bow upon our knees before God when we
offer our petitions to Him. Jesus, our example,
‘kneeled down, and prayed.’ And of His disciples it is
recorded that they, too, ‘kneeled down, and prayed.’
Stephen ‘kneeled.’ Paul declared: ‘I bow my knees
unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ’ (Eph. 3:14).
In confessing before God the sins of Israel, Ezra knelt.
Daniel ‘kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and
prayed, and gave thanks before his God’ (Dan. 6:10).
And the invitation of the psalmist is: ‘O come, let us
worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord
our Maker’ (Ps. 95:6).” Review & Herald, 11/30/1905.
“I have received letters questioning me in regard to
the proper attitude to be taken by a person offering
prayer to the Sovereign of the universe. Where have
our brethren obtained the idea that they should stand
upon their feet when praying to God?...
“[Luke 22:41; Acts 9:40; 7:59, 60; 20:36; 21:5;
Ezra 9:5, 6; Ps. 95:6; Eph. 3:14 quoted.]...
“Both in public and private worship it is our duty to
bow down upon our knees before God when we offer our
petitions to Him. This act shows our dependence upon
God.... [2 Chron. 6:1-13 quoted.]...
“Is it possible that with all the light that God has
given to His people on the subject of reverence, that
ministers, principals, and teachers in our schools, by
precept and example teach young men to stand erect in
devotion as did the Pharisees? Shall we look upon this
as significant of their self-sufficiency and selfimportance? Are these traits to become conspicuous?...
“We hope that our brethren will not manifest less
reverence and awe as they approach the only true and
living God than the heathen manifest for their idol
deities, or these people will be our judges in the day of

final decision. I would speak to all who occupy the place
of teachers in our schools. Men and women, do not
dishonor God by your irreverence and pomposity. Do
not stand up in your Phariseeism and offer your
prayers to God. Mistrust your own strength. Depend
not in it; but often bow down on your knees before
God, and worship Him.
“And when you assemble to worship God, be sure
and bow your knees before Him. Let this act testify
that the whole soul, body, and spirit are in subjection
to the Spirit of truth. Who have searched the Word
closely for examples and direction in this respect?...
“Man must come on bended knee, as a subject of
grace, a suppliant at the footstool of mercy. And as he
receives daily mercies at the hand of God, he is ever to
cherish gratitude in his heart, and give expression to it in
the words of thanksgiving and praise for these unmerited
favors.
“The prayer offered by Solomon during the
dedication of the temple, was not made while he stood
upon his feet. The king knelt in the humble position of
a petitioner.
“Herein is a lesson for God’s people today. Our
spiritual strength and our influence are not increased by
conformity to a worldly attitude during prayer.” Review
& Herald, 11/30/1905.
“I spoke to the people.... I felt the deep movings of
the Spirit of God upon me. Brother Lacey, a young man,
stood up before the people to pray. That act so pained
my heart I said, ‘Brother Lacey, get down upon your
knees,’ which he did. I knew if any human being knew
whom he was addressing—the great and holy God, who
dwelleth in light inapproachable, before whom angels
veil their faces and cry, ‘Holy, holy, holy’—he would
not stand erect before his students and present his
petitions to God.” Manuscript 174, 1897.
Amen.—
“The ‘Amen’ of the twenty-four elders indicates
that the reign of sin is over and their mediatorial
mission as assistant priests is finished.” Bunch, TR, 260.

REVELATION 19:5
And a voice came out of the throne,
saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants,
and ye that fear him, both small and great.
A Voice From the Throne.—
“And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying,
This is my beloved Son: hear him.” Luke 9:35.
“And again, when he bringeth in the first-begotten
into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God
worship him.” Hebrews 1:6.
Praise Our God.—
“The sinner

533

could

not

be

happy

in

the

GEMS FROM REVELATION
companionship of the saints in light, with Jesus, with the
Lord of hosts; for on every side will be heard the song
of praise and thanksgiving; and honor will be
ascribed to the Father and the Son. A song will be
raised that the unsanctified, unholy ones have never
learned, and it will be out of harmony with their
depraved tastes and desires. It will be unbearable to
them. The apostle John heard this song. He says, (Rev.
19:2,4-7 quoted.) It is impossible for the sinner to enjoy
the bliss of heaven.” Review & Herald, 2/17/1891.
All Ye His Servants.—
“And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he
[an angel] said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy
fellowservant, and of thy brethren that have the
testimony of Jesus.” Rev. 19:10.
Both Small and Great.—
“And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is
come, and the time of the dead, that they should be
judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy
servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them
that fear thy name, small and great….” Rev. 11:1518.

REVELATION 19:6
And I heard as it were the voice of a
great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of mighty
thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord
God omnipotent reigneth.
Great Multitude.—
“Therefore sprang there even of one [Abraham],
and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the
sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea
shore innumerable.” Hebrews 11:12.
“This great host must represent the redeemed of
all past ages; the resurrected gospel harvest.” Bunch,
TR, 260.

“When the last vial of God’s wrath is poured out,
they [the plague angels] return and lay their emptied
vials at the feet of the Lord.
“And the next scene is recorded, ‘After these
things... I heard as it were the voice of a great
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as
the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for
the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth.’” Testimonies to
Ministers, 432.
“No one born into the world, not even the most
gifted of God’s children, has ever been accorded such
demonstration of joy as greeted the Babe born in
Bethlehem. Angels of God sang His praises over the
hills and plains of Bethlehem. ‘Glory to God in the
highest,’ they sang, ‘and on earth peace, good will
toward men’ (Luke 2:14). O that today the human
family could recognize this song! The declaration then
made, the note then struck, the tune then started, will
swell and extend to the end of time, and resound to the
ends of the earth. It is glory to God, it is peace on earth,
good will to men. When the Sun of Righteousness
shall arise with healing in His wings, the song then
started in the hills of Bethlehem will be reechoed by
the voice of a great multitude, as the voice of many
waters, saying, ‘Alleluia: for the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth’ (Rev. 19:6).” Selected Messages,
Vol. 1, 250.
“Satan’s work of ruin is forever ended. For six
thousand years he has wrought his will, filling the earth
with woe and causing grief throughout the universe. The
whole creation has groaned and travailed together in
pain. Now God’s creatures are forever delivered from
his presence and temptations. ‘The whole earth is at
rest, and is quiet: they [the righteous] break forth
into singing.’ Isaiah 14:7. And a shout of praise and
triumph ascends from the whole loyal universe. ‘The
voice of a great multitude,’ ‘as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings,’ is
heard, saying: ‘Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent
reigneth.’ Revelation 19:6.” Great Controversy, 673.

Voice of Great Multitude, Many Waters, and Mighty
Thunderings.—
“The hallelujah chorus of the redeemed swells to a
fitting climax when every voice joins in a song of
praise that rolls through the universe with the
majesty and sound of ‘many waters’ and of ‘mighty
thunderings.’” Bunch, TR, 261.

REVELATION 19:7
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give
honour to him: for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife hath made
herself ready.

“When the Sun of Righteousness shall arise, with
healing in His wings, that song will be re-echoed by the
voice of a great multitude, as the voice of many
waters, saying, ‘Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent
reigneth.’ Rev. 19:6.” Desire of Ages, 48.

7SDA

The Lord God Omnipotent Reigneth.—

Be Glad.—
“The inward experience of the heart.”
Bible Commentary, 872.

Rejoice.—
“The outward expression that results from the
inward emotion of gladness. It comes from a heart
overflowing with happiness that Christ is now reigning
as king (cf. ch. 18:20).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 872.

534

REVELATION 19

The Marriage of the Lamb.—
“The Lamb’s wife is the New Jerusalem which is
above. This will be noticed more fully in Revelation 21.
The marriage of the Lamb is His reception of this city.
When He receives this city, He receives it as the glory
and metropolis of His kingdom; hence with it He
receives His kingdom, and the throne of His father
David. This may well be the event designated by the
marriage of the Lamb.
“That the marriage relation is often taken to
illustrate the union between Christ and His people, is
granted, but the marriage of the Lamb here spoken of is a
definite event to take place at a definite time. If the
declaration that Christ is the head of the church as the
husband is the head of the wife (Ephesians 5:23), proves
that the church is now the Lamb’s wife, then the
marriage of the Lamb took place long ago. But that
cannot be, according to this scripture, which locates it
in the future. Paul told his Corinthian converts that he
had espoused them to one husband, even Christ. This is
true of all converts. But while this figure is used to
denote the relation that they then assumed to Christ, was
it a fact that the marriage of the Lamb took place in
Corinth in Paul’s day, and that it has been going on for
the past nineteen hundred years?
“…But if the city is the bride, it may be asked how
it can be said that she made herself ready. We answer,
By the figure of personification, which attributes life
and action to inanimate objects. (See a notable
example in Psalm 114.)” Smith, DR, 732,733.
“The coming of Christ as our high priest to the
most holy place, for the cleansing of the sanctuary,
brought to view in Dan. 8:14; the coming of the Son of
man to the Ancient of Days, as presented in Dan. 7:13;
and the coming of the Lord to His temple, foretold by
Malachi, are descriptions of the same event; and this is
also represented by the coming of the bridegroom to the
marriage, described by Christ in the parable of the ten
virgins, of Matthew 25.
“In the summer and autumn of 1844 the
proclamation, ‘Behold, the Bridegroom cometh,’ was
given. The two classes represented by the wise and
foolish virgins were then developed—one class who
looked with joy to the Lord’s appearing, and who had
been diligently preparing to meet Him; another class that,
influenced by fear and acting from impulse, had been
satisfied with a theory of the truth, but were destitute of
the grace of God. In the parable, when the bridegroom
came, ‘they that were ready went in with him to the
marriage.’ The coming of the bridegroom, here brought
to view, takes place before the marriage. The marriage
represents the reception by Christ of His kingdom. The
Holy City, the New Jerusalem, which is the capital
and representative of the kingdom, is called ‘the
bride, the Lamb’s wife.’ Said the angel to John: ‘Come
hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife.’
‘He carried me away in the spirit,’ says the prophet, ‘and
showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem,

descending out of heaven from God.’ Revelation 21:9,
10. Clearly, then, the bride represents the Holy City, and
the virgins that go out to meet the bridegroom are a
symbol of the church. In the Revelation the people of
God are said to be the guests at the marriage supper.
Rev. 19:9. If guests, they cannot be represented also as
the bride. Christ, as stated by the prophet Daniel, will
receive from the Ancient of Days in heaven, ‘dominion,
and glory, and a kingdom;’ He will receive the New
Jerusalem, the capital of His kingdom, ‘prepared as a
bride adorned for her husband.’ Daniel 7:14;
Revelation 21:2. Having received the kingdom, He will
come in His glory, as King of kings and Lord of lords,
for the redemption of His people, who are to ‘sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,’ at His table in
His kingdom (Matthew 8:11; Luke 22:30), to partake of
the marriage supper of the Lamb.
“The proclamation, ‘Behold, the Bridegroom
cometh,’ in the summer of 1844, led thousands to expect
the immediate advent of the Lord. At the appointed time
the Bridegroom came, not to the earth, as the people
expected, but to the Ancient of Days in heaven, to the
marriage, the reception of His kingdom. ‘They that
were ready went in with Him to the marriage: and
the door was shut.’ They were not to be present in
person at the marriage; for it takes place in heaven, while
they are upon the earth. The followers of Christ are to
‘wait for their Lord, when He will return from the
wedding.’ Luke 12:36. But they are to understand
His work, and to follow Him by faith as He goes in
before God. It is in this sense that they are said to go
in to the marriage.” Great Controversy, 426,427.
There are Two Marriages.—
“There are two marriages in the plan of
salvation as well as two brides. There is a spiritual
bride, a spiritual marriage, with a spiritual marriage
supper. There is also a literal bride, a literal
marriage, and a literal supper.
“The spiritual bride is the Christian church—
God’s chosen people. [Ephesians 5:23,25,31,32; Isaiah
62:5, quoted.] The spiritual marriage takes place at
conversion. After the believer is wooed by the Holy
Spirit, he yields his heart to Christ and is joined to Him
in a spiritual union, or marriage. The believer takes the
husband’s name—Christian. The husband provides the
food—the Word of God—and also the clothing for His
wife. This is the robe of Christ’s own righteousness. At
the same time the spiritual marriage supper is celebrated.
[Rev. 3:20 quoted.]
“The literal marriage is of Christ to the New
Jerusalem. This concept is based on an Old Testament
practice of a ruler involving his son in the rule of the
kingdom. This was initiated by a ceremony of marrying
the son to a leading city of the kingdom. Likewise, God
the Father, at an appointed time, conducts the ceremony
in which He marries His Son to the leading city of the
kingdom, the New Jerusalem. This city is the literal
bride of Christ. [Rev. 21:9,10 quoted.]
“This marriage of Christ to the New Jerusalem is

535

GEMS FROM REVELATION
being conducted during the pre-advent, or investigative
judgment, which the book of Daniel reveals commenced
in 1844 and concludes at the Close of Probation of the
human race. In this period, the kingdoms of this world
become the kingdom of Christ. [Daniel 7:9,10,13,14
quoted.]” Cooke #31-UR, 1-3.
When the Marriage Takes Place.—
“Jesus sent His angels to direct the minds of the
disappointed ones to the most holy place, where He
had gone to cleanse the sanctuary and make a special
atonement for Israel. Jesus told the angels that all who
found Him would understand the work which He was to
perform. I saw that while Jesus was in the most holy
place He would be married to the New Jerusalem; and
after His work should be accomplished in the holiest, He
would descend to the earth in kingly power and take to
Himself the precious ones who had patiently waited His
return.” Early Writings, 251.
“Then He [Jesus] raised His right arm, and we
heard His lovely voice saying, ‘Wait here; I am going to
My Father to receive the kingdom; keep your
garments spotless, and in a little while I will return
from the wedding and receive you to Myself.’ Then a
cloudy chariot, with wheels like flaming fire, surrounded
by angels, came to where Jesus was. He stepped into the
chariot and was borne to the holiest, where the Father
sat.” Early Writings, 55.
“While Jesus had been ministering in the sanctuary,
the judgment had been going on for the righteous dead,
and then for the righteous living. Christ had received
His kingdom, having made the atonement for His
people and blotted out their sins. The subjects of the
kingdom were made up. The marriage of the Lamb
was consummated. And the kingdom, and the greatness
of the kingdom under the whole heaven, was given to
Jesus and the heirs of salvation, and Jesus was to reign as
King of kings and Lord of lords.” Early Writings, 280.
“The kingdom is the ‘Bride’ and the ‘holy city.’
New Jerusalem stands for Christ’s human kingdom in the
same way that London stands for Great Britain and
Canberra for Australia. Individual believers, who have
homes in the city, are called ‘guests’ at the wedding.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 470.
“The wedding here referred to consists of the
reception of Christ of His kingdom, as represented by
the New Jerusalem, and His coronation as King of
kings and Lord of lords, in heaven at the close of His
priestly ministry before the plagues are poured out.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 872.
Is Come.—
“Or, ‘has [finally] come,’ that is, the event has
already taken place when this announcement is
made.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 872.

His Wife.—
“And there came unto me one of the seven angels
which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues,
and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew
thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife. And he carried me
away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and
shewed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from God.” Revelation
21:9,10.
“We could say that the term ‘bride/wife’
expresses the communal character of the church. The
‘guests’ or the ‘friends’ are those who individually have
responded to the call of Christ.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 216.
“The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall
come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee
shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and
they shall call thee; The city of the LORD, The Zion of
the Holy One of Israel.” Isaiah 60:14.
“Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and the
name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem,
which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I
will write upon him my new name.” Revelation 3:12.
“God is the husband of His church. The church is
the bride, the Lamb’s wife. Every true believer is a
part of the body of Christ.
Christ regards
unfaithfulness shown to Him by His people as the
unfaithfulness of a wife to her husband. We are to
remember that we are members of Christ’s body.”
(Letter 39, 1902). 7BC, 985,986.
“The church is the bride, the Lamb’s wife. She
should keep herself pure, sanctified, holy. Never should
she indulge in any foolishness; for she is the bride of a
King. Yet she does not realize her exalted position. If
she understood this, she would be all-glorious within.”
(Letter 177, 1901). 7BC, 986.
New Jerusalem Also Represented as the Mother.—
“ ‘But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is
the mother of us all.’ Gal. 4:26. Christ is represented
(Isa. 9:6), as the ‘everlasting Father’ of His people; the
New Jerusalem, the mother, and the subjects of the first
resurrection, the children. And beyond all doubt, the
resurrection of the just is represented by birth. How
appropriate, then, is the view that the marriage of the
Lamb takes place in Heaven before the Lord come,
and before the children of the great family of Heaven are
brought forth at the resurrection of the just.” White,
James, Life, 204,205.
His Wife Hath Made Herself Ready.—
“‘Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.’ Isa. 60:1. To

536

REVELATION 19
those who go out to meet the Bridegroom is this message
given. Christ is coming with power and great glory. He
is coming with His own glory and with the glory of the
Father. He is coming with all the holy angels with Him.
While all the world is plunged in darkness, there will
be light in every dwelling of the saints. They will
catch the first light of His second appearing. The
unsullied light will shine from His splendor, and Christ
the Redeemer will be admired by all who have served
Him. While the wicked flee from His presence, Christ’s
followers will rejoice. The patriarch Job, looking down
to the time of Christ’s second advent, said, ‘Whom I
shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not a stranger.’ Job 19:27, margin. To His faithful
followers Christ has been a daily companion and familiar
friend. They have lived in close contact, in constant
communion with God. Upon them the glory of the
Lord has risen. In them the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ has been
reflected. Now they rejoice in the undimmed rays of the
brightness and glory of the King in His majesty. They
are prepared for the communion of heaven; for they
have heaven in their hearts.
“With uplifted heads, with the bright beams of the
Sun of Righteousness shining upon them, with rejoicing
that their redemption draweth nigh, they go forth to meet
the Bridegroom, saying, ‘Lo, this is our God; we have
waited for Him, and He will save us.’ Isa. 25:9. [Rev.
19:6-9 quoted.]” Christ’s Object Lessons, 420,421.
“From those who have rejected truth, the light of
God has departed. They did not heed the message of the
True Witness, ‘[Rev. 3:18 quoted]’. But that message
will do its work, and a people will be prepared to stand
without fault before God.
“John beheld this company, and he says, [Rev.
19:7, 8 quoted.]” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 17, 18.
“It is the acceptance of the Laodicean message
which proclaims the glorious truth of righteousness
by faith which clothes the church of Christ in the
wedding garments that are ‘without spot, or wrinkle, or
any such thing.’ See Rev. 3:18; Eph. 5:25-27.” Bunch,
TR, 263.
“And in their mouth was found no guile: for they
are without fault before the throne of God.”
Revelation 14:5.

REVELATION 19:8
And to her was granted that she should
be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for
the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.
To Her.—
“ ‘And to her [the church who are obeying a ‘Thus
saith the Lord’] was granted that she should be
arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine

linen is the righteousness of saints.’”
Bulletin, 4/6/1899.

Gen. Conf.

“It may be that in a special sense the 144,000 make
up the bride here pictured as they are to ‘follow the
Lamb withersoever He goeth’ (Rev. 14:4).” Bunch,
TR, 264.
To Her Was Granted.—
“‘To her was granted’ indicates that the bride
makes herself ready by permitting Christ to make her
ready. That the wedding is not made or prepared by the
bride is also evident from the fact that she is to buy it of
Christ “without money and without price.” See Rev.
3:18. Without Christ the Church could not make herself
ready, and without her love and consent Christ could not
make her ready. She works out her own salvation by
permitting Christ to work in her ‘both to will and to do
of his good pleasure’ (Phil. 2:12,13). A Christian can
only work out in conduct what Christ has worked
into the character. Adam and Eve attempted to make
fig-leaf garments that would cover their nakedness, but
the ‘girdles’ or ‘aprons’ were not sufficient to cover their
sins in the presence of God. He then provided garments
to cover them. ‘No fig-leaf garment, no worldly citizendress can be worn by those who sit down with Christ and
his angels at the marriage supper of the lamb. Only the
covering which Christ himself has provided can make us
meet to appear in God’s presence. This covering, the
robe of his own righteousness, Christ will put on
every repenting, believing soul…. This robe, woven in
the loom of heaven, has in it not one thread of human
devising. Christ in His humanity wrought out a
perfect character, and this character He offers to
impart to us.’ Christ’s Object Lessons, 311.” Bunch,
TR, 263.
That She Should Be Arrayed.—
NEW JERUSALEM: “In what way is the holy city
arrayed in fine linen? In a symbolic sense. The fine
linen represents the righteousness or the righteous deeds
of the saints. In what way is the holy city arrayed or
adorned by the righteousness of the saints? We suggest
that this will occur when the saints, resurrected and
translated, at the Second Advent, in perfection of
character and body, enter into the holy city and dwell
there. This will be the union of the spiritual bride
and literal bride. They become one. The chief
adornment of a city is its citizens. Thus, when the
saints on reaching heaven are welcomed into the New
Jerusalem, that city will literally be arrayed or adorned
with the righteousness of the saints. What adornment!”
Cooke, #31-UR, 4.
“The query may arise on verse 8, how a city can be
arrayed in the righteousness of the saints, but if we
consider that a city without inhabitants would be but a
dreary and cheerless place, we see at once how this is.
Reference is had to the countless number of its glorified
inhabitants in their shining apparel. The raiment was

537

GEMS FROM REVELATION
granted to her. What is granted to her? Isaiah 54 and
Galatians 4:21-31 will explain. To the new-covenant
city are granted many more children than to the old.
These are her glory and rejoicing. The goodly apparel
of this city, so to speak, consists of the hosts of the
redeemed and immortal ones who walk its golden
streets.” Smith, DR, 733,734.
“Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all
these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I
live, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thee
with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on
thee, as a bride doeth.” Isaiah 49:18.
GOD’S PEOPLE: “Now Joshua was clothed with
filthy garments, and stood before the angel. And he
answered and spake unto those that stood before him,
saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And
unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity
to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change
of raiment. And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon
his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and
clothed him with garments. And the angel of the LORD
stood by.” Zech. 3:3-5.
“Satan has an accurate knowledge of the sins that
he has tempted God’s people to commit, and he urges his
accusations against them, declaring, that by their sins
they have forfeited divine protection, and claiming that
he has the right to destroy them. He pronounces them
just as deserving as himself of exclusion from the favor
of God. ‘Are these,’ he says, ‘the people who are to
take my place in heaven, and the place of the angels
who united with me? They profess to obey the law of
God; but have they kept its precepts? Have they not
been lovers of self more than lovers of God? Have they
not placed their own interests above His service? Have
they not loved the things of the world? Look at the sins
that have marked their lives. Behold their selfishness,
their malice, their hatred of one another. Will God
banish me and my angels from His presence, and yet
reward those who have been guilty of the same sins?
Thou canst not do this, O Lord, in justice. Justice
demands that sentence be pronounced against them.’
“But while the followers of Christ have sinned, they
have not given themselves up to be controlled by the
satanic agencies. They have repented of their sins and
have sought the Lord in humility and contrition, and the
divine Advocate pleads in their behalf. He who has been
most abused by their ingratitude, who knows their sin
and also their penitence, declares: ‘The Lord rebuke
thee, O Satan. I gave My life for these souls. They are
graven upon the palms of My hands. They may have
imperfections of character; they may have failed in their
endeavors; but they have repented, and I have forgiven
and accepted them.’
“The assaults of Satan are strong, his delusions are
subtle; but the Lord’s eye is upon His people. Their
affliction is great, the flames of the furnace seem about
to consume them; but Jesus will bring them forth as

gold tried in the fire. Their earthliness will be
removed, that through them the image of Christ may
be perfectly revealed.
“At times the Lord may seem to have forgotten the
perils of His church and the injury done her by her
enemies. But God has not forgotten. Nothing in this
world is so dear to the heart of God as His church. It is
not His will that worldly policy shall corrupt her record.
He does not leave His people to be overcome by Satan’s
temptations. He will punish those who misrepresent
Him, but He will be gracious to all who sincerely repent.
To those who call upon Him for strength for the
development of Christian character, He will give all
needed help.
“In the time of the end the people of God will sigh
and cry for the abominations done in the land. With
tears they will warn the wicked of their danger in
trampling upon the divine law, and with unutterable
sorrow they will humble themselves before the Lord in
penitence. The wicked will mock their sorrow and
ridicule their solemn appeals. But the anguish and
humiliation of God’s people is unmistakable evidence
that they are regaining the strength and nobility of
character lost in consequence of sin. It is because they
are drawing nearer to Christ, because their eyes are
fixed on His perfect purity, that they discern so
clearly the exceeding sinfulness of sin. Meekness and
lowliness are the conditions of success and victory. A
crown of glory awaits those who bow at the foot of the
cross.
“God’s faithful, praying ones are, as it were, shut in
with Him. They themselves know not how securely they
are shielded. Urged on by Satan, the rulers of this world
are seeking to destroy them; but could the eyes of God’s
children be opened as were the eyes of Elisha’s servant
at Dothan, they would see angels of God encamped
about them, holding in check the hosts of darkness.
“As the people of God afflict their souls before
Him, pleading for purity of heart, the command is
given, ‘Take away the filthy garments,’ and the
encouraging words are spoken, ‘Behold, I have caused
thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee
with change of raiment.’ Zechariah 3:4. The spotless
robe of Christ’s righteousness is placed upon the
tried, tempted, faithful children of God. The despised
remnant are clothed in glorious apparel, nevermore to
be defiled by the corruptions of the world. Their names
are retained in the Lamb’s book of life, enrolled among
the faithful of all ages. They have resisted the wiles of
the deceiver; they have not been turned from their loyalty
by the dragon’s roar. Now they are eternally secure from
the tempter’s devices. Their sins are transferred to the
originator of sin. A ‘fair miter’ is set upon their heads.
“While Satan has been urging his accusations, holy
angels, unseen, have been passing to and fro, placing
upon the faithful ones the seal of the living God. These
are they that stand upon Mount Zion with the Lamb,
having the Father’s name written in their foreheads.
They sing the new song before the throne, that song
which no man can learn save the hundred and forty and

538

REVELATION 19
four thousand which were redeemed from the earth.
‘These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever
He goeth. These were redeemed from among men,
being the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb. And
in their mouth was found no guile: for they are
without fault before the throne of God.’ Rev. 14:4, 5.”
Prophets & Kings, 588-591.
“I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall
be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the
garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the
robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself
with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her
jewels.” Isaiah 61:10.
Fine Linen.—
“The white raiment is the righteousness of Christ,
the wedding garment which Christ alone can give.”
(Review & Herald, 4/1/1890). 7BC, 965.
“The ‘fine linen’ was used in the curtains of the
sanctuary and to make garments for the high priest for
his daily duties. They were ‘garments of glory and
beauty.’ But the choicest of all was the very fine linen
which was glistening white and of dazzling
appearance. This was worn by the kings and high
priests on important occasions. It was symbolic of great
joy and triumph. It was worn by David when the ark was
brought to Jerusalem; and by the priests and Levites on
the occasion of the dedication of the temple. See 1
Chron. 15:27; 2 Chron. 5:12.” Bunch, TR, 264.
Clean.—
“Literally, ‘splendid,’ brilliant and shining like
the light of a lamp. The same word is translated
‘gorgeous’ in Luke 23:11, and ‘bright’ in Rev. 22:16.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 872.
Righteousness.—
“Gr. dikaiomata, ‘righteous deeds,’ not
dikaiosune, ‘righteous character.’ Righteous deeds are
the natural and inevitable result of a righteous
character.
Dikaiomata applies particularly to the
sanctified deeds of the Christian, his victorious life
developed by the grace of the indwelling Christ.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 872.
Fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints.—
“By the wedding garment in the parable is
represented the pure, spotless character which Christ’s
true followers will possess. To the church it is given
‘that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white,’ ‘not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing.’ Rev. 19:8; Eph. 5:27. The fine linen, says the
Scripture, ‘is the righteousness of saints.’ Rev. 19:8. It
is the righteousness of Christ, His own unblemished
character, that through faith is imparted to all who
receive Him as their personal Saviour.
“The white robe of innocence was worn by our first
parents when they were placed by God in holy Eden.

They lived in perfect conformity to the will of God. All
the strength of their affections was given to their
heavenly Father. A beautiful soft light, the light of God,
enshrouded the holy pair. This robe of light was a
symbol of their spiritual garments of heavenly
innocence. Had they remained true to God it would ever
have continued to enshroud them. But when sin entered,
they severed their connection with God, and the light that
had encircled them departed. Naked and ashamed, they
tried to supply the place of the heavenly garments by
sewing together fig leaves for a covering.”
“…Nothing can man devise to supply the place of
his lost robe of innocence. No fig-leaf garment, no
worldly citizen dress, can be worn by those who sit down
with Christ and angels at the marriage supper of the
Lamb.
“Only the covering which Christ Himself has
provided can make us meet to appear in God’s presence.
This covering, the robe of His own righteousness, Christ
will put upon every repenting, believing soul. ‘I counsel
thee,’ He says, ‘to buy of Me ...white raiment, that
thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear.’ Rev. 3:18.
“This robe, woven in the loom of heaven, has in it
not one thread of human devising. Christ in His
humanity wrought out a perfect character, and this
character He offers to impart to us.
‘All our
righteousness are as filthy rags.’ Isa. 64:6. Everything
that we of ourselves can do is defiled by sin. But the Son
of God ‘was manifested to take away our sins; and in
Him is no sin.’ Sin is defined to be ‘the transgression
of the law.’ 1 John 3:5, 4. But Christ was obedient to
every requirement of the law. He said of Himself, ‘I
delight to do Thy will, O My God; yea, Thy law is
within My heart.’ Ps. 40:8. When on earth, He said to
His disciples, ‘I have kept My Father’s
commandments.’ John 15:10.
By His perfect
obedience He has made it possible for every human
being to obey God’s commandments. When we submit
ourselves to Christ, the heart is united with His heart,
the will is merged in His will, the mind becomes one
with His mind, the thoughts are brought into
captivity to Him; we live His life. This is what it
means to be clothed with the garment of His
righteousness. Then as the Lord looks upon us He sees,
not the fig-leaf garment, not the nakedness and deformity
of sin, but His own robe of righteousness, which is
perfect obedience to the law of Jehovah.
“The guests at the marriage feast were inspected by
the king. Only those were accepted who had obeyed his
requirements and put on the wedding garment. So it is
with the guests at the gospel feast. All must pass the
scrutiny of the great King, and only those are received
who have put on the robe of Christ’s righteousness.
“Righteousness is right doing, and it is by their
deeds that all will be judged. Our characters are
revealed by what we do. The works show whether the
faith is genuine.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 310-312.

539

“‘And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe

GEMS FROM REVELATION
to do all these commandments before the Lord our
God, as he hath commanded us.’ Deut. 6:25. The
happiness of man is found in obedience to the laws of
God. In obedience to God’s law he is surrounded as with
a hedge and kept from the evil.
“The tempter’s voice will be heard on every side,
telling you that you are not now required to keep the law
of God. This is a device of Satan. God has a law, and
men must keep it.” Son & Daughters, 66.
“There is a dress which every child and youth may
innocently seek to obtain. It is the righteousness of the
saints. If they will only be as willing and persevering in
obtaining this as they are in fashioning their garments
after the standard of worldly society, they will very soon
be clothed with the righteousness of Christ, and their
names will not be blotted out of the book of life.
Mothers, as well as youth and children, need to pray,
‘Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right
spirit within me.’ [Ps. 51:10.] This purity of heart and
loveliness of spirit are more precious than gold, both for
time and for eternity. Only the pure in heart shall see
God.”
“Then, mothers, teach your children, line upon line
and precept upon precept, that the righteousness of
Christ is the only dress in which they can be admitted
into heaven, and that robed in this apparel they will be
constantly doing duties in this life which will glorify
God.” Child Guidance, 418.
“Let the children be taught that as they open their
minds to pure, loving thoughts and do loving and
helpful deeds, they are clothing themselves with His
beautiful garment of character. This apparel will
make them beautiful and beloved here, and will hereafter
be their title of admission to the palace of the King. His
promise is: ‘They shall walk with Me in white: for
they are worthy.’ Revelation 3:4.” Education, 249.

REVELATION 19:9
And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed
are they which are called unto the marriage
supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me,
These are the true sayings of God.
Write.—
“The command to ‘Write’ occurs twelve times in
the Apocalypse and is always repeated just before or
after some important announcement of vital interest
to the church. It indicates a revelation that the church
must not forget.” Bunch, TR, 264.
Blessed.—
“This is one of the seven beatitudes of
Revelation.” PJ
Blessed Are They Which Are Called.—
“Jesus saw in every soul one to whom must be

given the call to His kingdom.” Desire of Ages, 151.
“A certain man made a great supper and bade
many: And sent his servant at supper time to say to
them that were bidden, Come; for all things are now
ready. And they all with one consent began to make
excuse.” Luke 14:16,17.
“For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not
many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, are called.” 1Cor. 1:26.
“The invitation to attend this marriage and banquet
comes to all who hear the gospel message. ‘Many are
called, but few are chosen’ because only the few are
willing to make the necessary preparation. See Matt.
22:1-14.” Bunch, TR, 264.
“The word of God plainly tells us that few will be
saved, and that the greater number of those, even, who
are called will prove themselves unworthy of
everlasting life. They will have no part in heaven, but
will have their portion with Satan, and experience the
second death.” 2 Testimonies, 293.
Blessed Are They Which Are Called Unto the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb.—
“The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king,
which made a marriage for his son, And sent forth
his servants to call them that were bidden to the
wedding: and they would not come.
Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell
them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my
dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things
are ready: come unto the marriage. But they made
light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another
to his merchandise: And the remnant took his servants,
and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.
But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and
he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers,
and burned up their city. Then saith he to his servants,
The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden
were not worthy. Go ye therefore into the highways,
and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage. So
those servants went out into the highways, and gathered
together all as many as they found, both bad and good:
and the wedding was furnished with guests.” Matthew
22:1-14
“In my dream a sentinel stood at the door of an
important building, and asked every one who came for
entrance, ‘Have ye received the Holy Ghost?’ A
measuring-line was in his hand, and only very, very few
were admitted into the building. ‘Your size as a human
being is nothing,’ he said. ‘But if you have reached the
full stature of a man in Christ Jesus, according to the
knowledge you have had, you will receive an
appointment to sit with Christ at the marriage supper
of the Lamb; and through the eternal ages, you will
never cease to learn of the blessings granted in the
banquet prepared for you.

540

REVELATION 19
“‘You may be tall and well-proportioned in self, but
you cannot enter here. None can enter who are grown-up
children, carrying with them the disposition, the habits,
and the characteristics which pertain to children. If you
have nurtured suspicions, criticism, temper, self-dignity,
you cannot be admitted; for you would spoil the feast.
All who go in through this door have on the wedding
garment, woven in the loom of heaven.’” Selected
Messages, Vol. 1, 109,110.
“And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for
their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that
when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him
immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom the
lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say
unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to
sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve
them.” Luke 12:36,37.
“The voice from heaven, which, during the loud
cry, says, ‘Come out of her My people,’ gathers guests
for this supper from the very last people of earth.
Probation closes when the last guest has accepted the
invitation…. In the sixteenth chapter are recorded the
plagues which fall upon those who turn from the
invitation; The eighteenth chapter describes the character
of the church and the governments which attract the
minds of men from the call of God, and so infatuate
them with the feasts of the whore that they lose the
privilege of eating at the table of the Lamb. John saw
these things, and understood why the time of trouble
came; and then the curtain was drawn aside, and from the
scenes of debauchery and destruction, which earth
presents, his eye rested upon the heavenly gathering at
the great supper of the Son of God.
“He saw the hosts of the redeemed from earth
mingling with angels and the inhabitants of other worlds.
And he ‘heard a great voice of much people in
heaven,’ the greatest chorus the universe ever heard; that
in which all voices unite in singing, ‘Alleluia; salvation,
and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our
God.’ Salvation is the one theme throughout creation.”
Haskell, SSP, 316-318.
“In our knowledge of Jesus and his love, the
kingdom of God has been placed in the midst of us.
Christ has been proclaimed to us in sermons and chanted
to us in songs. The spiritual banquet has been set
before us in rich abundance. We have had presented to
us by the messengers of God the richest feast—the
righteousness of Christ, justification by faith, the
exceeding great and precious promises of God in his
word, free access to the Father by Jesus Christ, the
comforts of the Holy Spirit, and the well-grounded
assurance of eternal life in the kingdom of God. We ask,
What could God do for us that he has not done in
preparing the great supper, the heavenly banquet?”
Review & Herald, 1/17/1899.
“Let there be far more wrestling with God for the

salvation of souls. Work disinterestedly, determinedly,
with a spirit never to let go. Compel souls to come in to
the marriage supper of the Lamb. Let there be more
praying, believing, and receiving, and more working
together with God.” 6 Testimonies, 66.
Supper.—
“Gr. deipnon, the evening meal. The ‘marriage
supper of the Lamb’ takes place at the end of earth’s
long day.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 873.
Invitation to Satan’s Banquet.—
“Professed Christians who are superficial in
character and religious experience are used by the
tempter as his decoys. This class are always ready for
the gatherings for pleasure or sport, and their
influence attracts others. Young men and women who
have tried to be Bible Christians are persuaded to join the
party, and they are drawn into the ring. They do not
prayerfully consult the divine standard, to learn what
Christ has said in regard to the fruit to be borne on the
Christian tree.
They do not discern that these
entertainments are really Satan’s banquet, prepared
to keep souls from accepting the call to the marriage
supper of the Lamb and preventing them from
receiving the white robe of character, which is the
righteousness of Christ. They become confused as to
what it is right for them as Christians to do. They do
not want to be thought singular, and naturally incline to
follow the example of others. Thus they come under the
influence of those who have never had the divine touch
on heart or mind....” Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and
Students, 340.
The Marriage Supper of the Lamb.—
“After we beheld the glory of the temple, we went
out, and Jesus left us and went to the city. Soon we
heard His lovely voice again, saying, ‘Come, My
people, you have come out of great tribulation, and
done My will; suffered for Me; come in to supper, for
I will gird Myself, and serve you.’ We shouted,
‘Alleluia! glory!’ and entered into the city. And I saw a
table of pure silver; it was many miles in length, yet
our eyes could extend over it. I saw the fruit of the
tree of life, the manna, almonds, figs, pomegranates,
grapes, and many other kinds of fruit.” Early
Writings, 19,20.
“That the Saviour takes his people to the house
of the Father, the New Jerusalem, immediately after he
has made them immortal, and invited them in the
Father’s name to share Paradise with him, is further
proved by what is said respecting the marriage supper.
This is eaten directly after the saints are received into
Christ’s presence. Luke 12:36, 37. But the marriage
supper must be eaten where the bride is. The saints are
the invited guests. But the bride, the Lamb’s wife, is that
holy city, the New Jerusalem. Rev.19:9; 21:2,9, 10;
Gal.4:26-28; Isa.54.
“The saints are in the Father’s presence, near

541

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the throne of God, when they eat the marriage supper
of the Lamb. Rev.19:1-9; Luke 12:36, 37; 22:16-18.
Our Lord does, therefore, introduce his saints to the holy
city, and to the presence of his Father, where they eat the
marriage supper, in the kingdom of God. This is the
grand celebration of our Lord’s assumption of his
own throne and of his royal city, the metropolis of his
everlasting kingdom. When this is past, the great work
of the judgment upon the wicked remains to be entered
upon by Christ and his saints.” Andrews, JEO, 115,116.
“When our Lord says to those at his right hand,
‘Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world,’ he
takes his saints into the presence of his Father
(compare John 13:36; 14:1-3; 1Thess.4:14-17; Rev.19:19), to the Paradise of God, once here upon earth
(Gen.2:8,9; 3:22-24), now in the third heaven (2 Cor.
12:2-4), within the heavenly Jerusalem itself (compare
Rev.2:7; 22:2,14). Here they sit down with him at his
table and eat the marriage supper. Rev.19:1-9. These
things being accomplished, the work of judgment is
committed to the saints, a work so vast that we may
well conceive the long period which lies between the two
resurrections to be requisite for its accomplishment.
Rev.20:4-6.” Andrews, JEO, 118.

through fiery trials, made white and tried, and, finally,
victorious overcomers, gloriously saved in the kingdom
of God. The countenance of the angel grew radiant with
joy and was exceeding glorious, as he showed John the
final triumph of the church of God. As the apostle
beheld the final deliverance of the church, he was
carried away with the glory of the scene and with
deep reverence and awe fell at the feet of the angel to
worship him. The heavenly messenger instantly raised
him up and gently reproved him, saying, ‘See thou do it
not: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that
have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.’” Early
Writings, 230,231.
“Only members of the Godhead are worthy of
worship, and all creature worship is idolatry. How
different the spirit and attitude of the two angels, Lucifer
and Gabriel. Lucifer craved worship to the extent that he
offered Christ this world and all its glory and dominion
for one act of worship. The answer of the Creator to the
creature was: ‘Get thee behind Me, Satan: for it is
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and
Him only shalt thou serve.’ See Luke 4:5-8.” Bunch,
TR, 265.
(See similar experience of John in Rev. 22:8.)

These Are The True Sayings of God.—
“(Rev. 19:5-9 quoted.) Why is this statement made
that ‘these are the true sayings of God?’ Why is this
statement made? Because it is in contradiction to the
statements made by the world that Christ changed the
seventh-day Sabbath to the first day of the week. There
are thousands upon thousands who bear aloft the
standard of the world’s sabbath, exalting the image of the
papacy created by the man of sin.” Gen. Conf. Bulletin,
3/7/1899.
“Like all Scripture, Revelation is the Word of
God. Here is found no faulty human element, no errors,
no flaws. It is pure.” Burnside, RWU, 217.

REVELATION 19:10
And I fell at his feet to worship him.
And he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am
thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that
have the testimony of Jesus: worship God:
for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy.
I Fell At His Feet To Worship Him.—
“The angel from heaven came to John in majesty,
his countenance beaming with the excellent glory of
God. He revealed to John scenes of deep and thrilling
interest in the history of the church of God and brought
before him the perilous conflicts which Christ’s
followers were to endure. John saw them passing

I Am Thy Fellowservant.—
“A word on verse 10, in reference to those who
think they find here an argument for consciousness in
death. The mistake which such persons make on this
scripture is in supposing that the angel declares to John
that he is one of the old prophets come back to
communicate with him. The person employed in
giving the Revelation to John is called an angel, and
angels are not the departed spirits of the dead.
Whoever takes the position that they are, is to all intents
a spiritist, for this is the very foundation stone of their
theory. But the angel says no such thing. He simply
says that he is the fellow servant of John, as he had been
the fellow servant of his brethren the prophets. The term
‘fellow servant’ implies that they were all on a
common footing as servants of the great God; hence
he was not a proper object for John to worship. Calling
the prophets ‘thy brethren,’ signifies that they all
belong to the same class in the service of God.” Smith,
DR, 734.
“What a privilege it is that devoted workers on
earth may share the companionship of, and be coworkers with, heavenly angels!”
7SDA Bible
Commentary, 873.
“Though the angel was of a higher order of being
than man, possessed of supernatural powers, yet he
classes himself as a fellow-servant of John. Here is an
example of the humility of the mind of those of the
heavenly world. Pride does not dwell there. Love of
self cannot abide there. This is why St. Paul declared:

542

REVELATION 19
“‘Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus…. Who made himself of no reputation
and took upon himself the form OF A SERVANT.’
Phil. 2:5,7.
“Humility is the mark of the genuine believer just
as it is of those of the heavenly world. But more than
that. The angel used the term ‘servant’. One of the
main principles of God’s kingdom is service. Heaven
is not an existence of inactivity, but of service to others,
and this brings contentment, happiness, and fulfillment,
just as it does in the earthly realm.” Cooke, #31-UR, 6.
“Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation.”
Hebrews 1:14.
Thy Brethren that Have the Testimony of Jesus.—
“Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. I thank my God
always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is
given you by Jesus Christ; That in every thing ye are
enriched by him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge;
“Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed
in you: So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 1 Cor. 1:3-7.
“Gabriel, as the angel of prophecy, feels a tender
regard for those with whom he has had open
communion; and as he sees the redeemed at the marriage
supper, he is able to trace their history and salvation,
through their adherence to the Spirit of Prophecy. And
he, the servant of God, in bearing light, is a fellow
worshiper with all who have received the light; for it
is the Spirit of Prophecy which brings all to the unity
of the faith.” Haskell, SSP, 319.
The Testimony of Jesus is The Spirit of Prophecy.—
“It was Christ that spoke to His people through the
prophets. The apostle Peter, writing to the Christian
church, says that the prophets ‘prophesied of the grace
that should come unto you: searching what, or what
manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in
them did signify, when it testified beforehand the
sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow.’
1 Peter 1:10, 11. It is the voice of Christ that speaks to
us through the Old Testament. ‘The testimony of Jesus
is the spirit of prophecy.’ Revelation 19:10.’”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 366.
“I recommend to you, dear reader, the Word of God
as the rule of your faith and practice. By that Word we
are to be judged. God has, in that Word, promised to
give visions in the ‘last days’; not for a new rule of
faith, but for the comfort of His people, and to correct
those who err from Bible truth. Thus God dealt with
Peter when He was about to send him to preach to the
Gentiles. (Acts 10.)” Early Writings, 78.

Ellen G. White, 1829-1915
“We must follow the directions given through the
Spirit of prophecy. We must love and obey the truth for
this time. This will save us from accepting strong
delusions. God has spoken to us through His word. He
has spoken to us through the testimonies to the
church, and through the books that have helped to make
plain our present duty and the position we should now
occupy.” Gospel Workers 308.
“God is either teaching His church, reproving their
wrongs, and strengthening their faith, or He is not. This
work is of God, or it is not. God does nothing in
partnership with Satan. My work ...bears the stamp of
God, or the stamp of the enemy. There is no halfway
work in the matter. The Testimonies are of the Spirit
of God, or of the devil.” 5 Testimonies, 671 (1889)
“In ancient times God spoke to men by the mouth
of prophets and apostles. In these days He speaks to
them by the Testimonies of His Spirit. There was never
a time when God instructed His people more
earnestly that He instructs them now concerning His
will and the course that He would have them pursue.”
4 Testimonies, 147,148.

THE SECOND COMING
OF JESUS
REVELATION 19:11
And I saw heaven opened, and behold a
white horse; and he that sat upon him was
called Faithful and True, and in
righteousness he doth judge and make war.
White Horse.—

543

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“He was seated on a pure white horse, a sign of
royalty.” Haskell, SSP, 319.
“The white horse and rider of the first seal
represents the success of the church militant at the
beginning of the Christian era as the soldiers of the cross
went forth for the conquest of the world, while here is
pictured the last charge of the forces of righteousness
against the hosts of evil.” Bunch, TR, 265.
“And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that
sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him:
and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.” Rev.
6:2.
He That Sat Upon Him.—
“Soon there appears in the east a small black cloud,
about half the size of a man’s hand. It is the cloud which
surrounds the Saviour and which seems in the distance to
be shrouded in darkness. The people of God know this
to be the sign of the Son of man. In solemn silence they
gaze upon it as it draws nearer the earth, becoming
lighter and more glorious, until it is a great white
cloud, its base a glory like consuming fire, and above it
the rainbow of the covenant. Jesus rides forth as a
mighty conqueror. Not now a ‘Man of Sorrows,’ to
drink the bitter cup of shame and woe, He comes, victor
in heaven and earth, to judge the living and the dead.
‘Faithful and True,’ ‘in righteousness He doth judge
and make war.’” Great Controversy, 640,641.
“We all in solemn silence gazed on the cloud as it
drew nearer and became lighter, glorious, and still more
glorious, till it was a great white cloud. The bottom
appeared like fire; a rainbow was over the cloud, while
around it were ten thousand angels, singing a most lovely
song; and upon it sat the Son of man. His hair was
white and curly and lay on His shoulders; and upon
His head were many crowns. His feet had the
appearance of fire; in His right hand was a sharp
sickle; in His left, a silver trumpet. His eyes were as a
flame of fire, which searched His children through
and through. Then all faces gathered paleness, and
those that God had rejected gathered blackness. Then we
all cried out, ‘Who shall be able to stand? Is my robe
spotless?’” Early Writings, 15,16.
Faithful.—
“If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.” 1 John 1:9.
In Righteousness.—
“And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not
crowned, except he strive lawfully.” 2 Timothy 2:5
He Doth Judge.—
“Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence:
a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very
tempestuous round about him. He shall call to the

heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge
his people. Gather my saints together unto me; those that
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. And the
heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is
judge himself. Selah.” Psalm 50:3-6
“And [the Father] hath given him [Jesus]
authority to execute judgment also, because he is the
Son of man.” John 5:27.
“When Jude describes the second advent, or rather
when he quotes Enoch’s description of that event, he
says, ‘Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his
saints, to execute judgment upon all.’ Verses 14,15.
Our Lord’s description of this grand event in Matt.25:3146, and of the things consequent upon it, relates wholly
to the execution of the judgment, and the convincing of
the ungodly of all their evil deeds and hard speeches.
And it is certain that the revelation of the King of kings,
followed by the armies of heaven, is for this very
purpose; for it is said (Rev.19:11), ‘In righteousness he
doth judge and make war.’” Andrews, JEO, 105,106.
“In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ.” 2 Thess. 1:8.
“He executes judgment by waging war.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 874.
“How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth?” Revelation 6:10.
And Make War.—
“The battle of Armageddon is soon to be fought.
He on whose vesture is written the name, King of kings
and Lord of lords, leads forth the armies of heaven on
white horses, clothed in fine linen, clean and white.”
(Manuscript 172, 1899). 7BC, 982.
“The power of the Holy Ghost must be upon us,
and the Captain of the Lord’s host will stand at the
head of the angels of heaven to direct the battle.”
(Letter 112, 1890). 7BC, 982.
“We are here carried back to the second coming of
Christ, this time under the symbol of a warrior riding
forth to battle. Why is He represented thus? Because
He is going forth to war, to meet ‘the kings of the
earth and their armies,’ and this would be the only
proper character in which to represent Him on such a
mission. His vesture is dipped in blood. (See a
description of the same scene in Isaiah 63:1-4.) The
armies of heaven, the angels of God, follow Him. Verse
15 shows how He rules the nations with a rod of iron
when they are given Him for an inheritance, as recorded
in the second Psalm.” Smith, DR, 735.

544

“They come from a far country, from the end of

REVELATION 19
heaven, even the LORD, and the weapons of his
indignation, to destroy the whole land.” Isaiah 13:5.

tomb. It was the head that once bowed on the cross
when He died. He was the One who once wept, for He
was the Man of Sorrows.” Burnside, RWU, 217.

REVELATION 19:12
His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on
his head were many crowns; and he had a
name written, that no man knew, but he
himself.

Name Written That No Man Knew, But Himself.—
“He had a name known only to Himself and the
Father—a name expressing the depths of divine character
which even eternity cannot interpret.
Since each
redeemed one has an inner experience with Christ, which
is a secret between two, so the Father and His eldest
Son know each other as none others can know them.”
Haskell, SSP, 320.

His Eyes Were As a Flame of Fire.—
His eyes were as a flame of fire, which searched
His children through and through.” Early Writings,
16.
“His eyes rested for a moment upon individuals,
His glance seemed to burn into their very souls, and
at the same moment every word and action of their
lives passed before their minds as clearly as though
traced before their vision in letters of fire. Trembling
seized them, and their faces turned pale.” 4 Testimonies,
385.
“A clear vision is necessary to righteous
judgment. The piercing, penetrating eyes of Christ see
everything. His omniscient gaze searches all depths and
looks through all masks and penetrates and understands
all mysteries. Nothing escapes the vision of the all-wise
Rider of the white horse as He leads His army to a
righteous victory. His eyes not only see everything, but
they blaze with righteous indignation against sin and
those who refuse to separate from it. His eyes blaze with
anger that is hot and an indignation that is consuming.
The symbol is that of a broad and deep vision, a
penetrating intelligence, a fervent love for
righteousness, and a burning hatred of iniquity.”
Bunch, TR, 266.
On His Head Were Many Crowns.—
“His (Jesus’) crown looked brilliant and glorious.
It was a crown within a crown, seven in number.”
Early Writings, 53,54.
“The red dragon has seven diadems upon his seven
heads, and the scarlet colored beast has ten crowned
horns. The sovereignty of Christ over the conquered
kingdom of Satan will be complete and eternal.”
Bunch, TR, 266.
“Christ, since the close of His priestly ministry, is
King of kings. This denotes that there are other ruling
powers under Christ. These involve the leaders of other
worlds and leading angels to whom is delegated ruling
authority as well as others whom heaven classes as
kings under Christ.” Cooke, #31-UR,11.
“It was the head once crowned with thorns. He
once ‘had nowhere to lay His head.’ It was the head
once wrapped in linen and place to rest in Joseph’s new

“Christ has ‘a name written, that no man knew,
but He Himself.’ This is because He has a character
that can never be fully know by others. Name is the
designation of character. …The same is said of the ‘new
name’ of every redeemed person. The promise is that
each saint will be given ‘a new name written, which no
man knoweth saving he that receiveth it’ (Rev. 2:17).”
Bunch, TR, 266.
“Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and the name
of the city of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which
cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will
write upon him My new name.” Rev. 3:12.

REVELATION 19:13
And he was clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood: and his name is called The
Word of God.
He Was Clothed With a Vesture Dipped in Blood.—
“Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed
garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his
apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Where-fore art
thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him
that treadeth in the winefat?
I have trodden the
winepress alone; and of the people there was none with
me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample
them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled
upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For
the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my
redeemed is come.” Isaiah 63:1-4.
“In Isa. 63:1-4, Christ is described as emerging
victoriously from two bloody conflicts. In the conquest
of sin at His first advent, Jesus had to tread ‘the
winepress alone’ and He came from the ordeal with
garments dyed red with blood. The second battle is at
‘the day of vengeance’ and the year of ‘recompense’ at
His second advent. The bloody sweat in the Garden of
Gethsemane, the scourging and crown of thorns applied
by the soldiers of Pilate, and the cruel nails of the
crucifixion, stained with His own blood the garments of

545

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Jesus.
Contrary to the earthly method, ‘Christ
overcomes His enemies by shedding, not their blood, but
His own’ (Cambridge Bible). But in the final conflict
when He tramples the wicked in His fury His raiment
is dyed by the blood of His enemies. He says: ‘I will
tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my
fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garments, and I will stain all by raiment.’” Bunch,
TR, 266,267.
“Satan the opposing general, had bruised and
wounded Him; but His sacrifice only endeared Him to
His own troops, and they became His loyal subjects for
eternity.” Haskell, SSP, 319.
“Although Christ horse is white, His robe is red. It
has been ‘dipped in blood.’ Rev. 19:13. The language
comes from Isaiah 63:1-6. So too does the phrase about
His treading a ‘winepress.’ In Isaiah 63, God’s robe is
stained with His enemies’ blood. The blood is portrayed
as the scarlet juice of grapes crushed under God’s feet in
an old-fashioned wine-press. But in Revelation 19 Jesus
hasn’t yet entered the winepress; so why is His robe red?
“As usual, John has adapted rather than merely
adopted Old Testament ideas. Christ’s robe is stained
with His own blood. At the cross, the serpent ‘bruised’
Christ’s ‘heel.’ Now at the second advent He arrives to
start ‘bruising’ Satan’s ‘head.’
“…But by allowing Satan to torture and kill Him,
Jesus demonstrated His own infinite goodness and
Satan’s unparalleled badness. Now Jesus can eliminate
oppressors and ultimately destroy the devil without being
misunderstood. Jesus became a man and died on the
cross so that ‘through death he might [obtain approval
to] destroy him who has the power of death, that is,
the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of
death were subject to lifelong bondage.’ Hebrews
2:14,15.
“The blood on Jesus’ robe certifies His right to
destroy the destroyer of His people. It also certifies
His right to claim and rescue His people. With His own
‘precious blood’ He has ‘ransomed’ them. 1 Peter
1:18,19. They are His.
“Jesus is still the Lamb that was slain. But at the
second coming the wicked seek to hide from the ‘wrath
of the Lamb.’ Rev. 6:16. The wrath of the Lamb is
divine outrage based on infinite, self-denying love for
people who have been sorely oppressed.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 488.
His Name is Called The Word of God.—
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.” John 1:1.
“To His Father, Christ is the Word of God. The
completest union is here signified. God has spoken
through Christ in all His creation, and the name
Word of God is an eternal reminder of the everlasting
covenant into which the Two entered when Christ
received that name. It was the Word of God which was

made flesh, and dwelt among us. It is the Word that
saves, and it is this same Word that destroys. To the one
who obeys the Word, it is a healing balm of all the ills
to which human flesh is heir. When disregarded, it
becomes the stone of stumbling, and rock of offense over
which men fall and die.” Haskell, SSP, 320.
“He [Christ] is the Living Word as the Bible is the
Written Word. He is the Author of the Bible, 1Peter
1:11. The wicked are slain by the sword of His mouth.
It was by the Word of God that the people of earth
were created—By His Word they end. Rev. 19:15.
The only one to stand in that day are those built on the
Rock—the Infallible, Unerring Word of Christ. We
build on the Rock by obeying His Word. Matt. 7:24-27.”
Burnside, RWU, 219.
“Thou hast magnified thy word above all Thy
name.” Psalm 138:2.
“Jesus is called the Word of God. He accepted His
Father’s law, wrought out its principles in His life,
manifested its spirit, and showed its beneficent power
in the heart. Says John: ‘The Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us, (and we beheld His glory, the
glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father,) full of
grace and truth.’ The followers of Christ must be
partakers of His experience. They must assimilate the
word of God. They must be changed into its likeness by
the power of Christ and reflect the divine attributes.
They must eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of
God, or there is no life in them. The spirit and work of
Christ must become the spirit and work of His disciples.”
5 Testimonies, 576.
“What speech is to thought, so is Christ to the
invisible Father. He is the manifestation of the Father,
and is called the Word of God. God sent His Son into
the world, His divinity clothed with humanity, that man
might bear the image of the invisible God. He made
known in His words, His character, His power and
majesty, the nature and attributes of God. Divinity
flashed through humanity in softening, subduing light.
He was the embodiment of the law of God, which is
the transcript of His character.” (Manuscript 77,
1899). 5BC, 1131.
“What He taught, He lived. ‘I have given you an
example,’ He said to His disciples; ‘that ye should do as
I have done.’ ‘I have kept My Father’s commandments.’
John 13:15; 15:10. Thus in His life, Christ’s words had
perfect illustration and support. And more than this;
what He taught, He was. His words were the
expression, not only of His own life experience, but of
His own character. Not only did He teach the truth,
but He was the truth. It was this that gave His
teaching, power.” Education, 78,79.

546

REVELATION 19

REVELATION 19:14
And the armies which were in heaven
followed him upon white horses, clothed in
fine linen, white and clean.
Armies Which Were in Heaven Followed Him.—
“And ‘the armies which were in heaven’ (Rev.
19:11,14) follow Him. With anthems of celestial melody
the holy angels, a vast, unnumbered throng, attend
Him on His way. The firmament seems filled with
radiant forms—‘ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands.’ No human pen can portray
the scene; no mortal mind is adequate to conceive its
splendor. ‘His glory covered the heavens, and the
earth was full of His praise. And His brightness was
as the light.’ Habakkuk 3:3,4.” Great Controversy,
641.
“The armies of heaven that follow Jesus at the
second coming are composed of angels. In the Olivet
Discourse Jesus said that at His second coming ‘all the
angels’ would accompany Him. See Matthew 25:31.
The angels will perform the highly important function of
gathering the redeemed and leading them into Christ’s
presence.” Maxwell, God Cares, 489.
“When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and
all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
throne of his glory.” Matt. 25:31.
“And he shall send his angels with a great sound
of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from
the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.”
Matt. 24:31.
“And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh
with ten thousands of his saints [angels, Dan.8:13], To
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against
him.” Jude 14, 15.
“This imagery is borrowed from Isaiah 13:1-3
where the prophet describes the invading forces of the
Medes and Persians and their allies to conquer literal
Babylon. This description is typical of the destruction of
spiritual Babylon.
ISAIAH 13:1-9
The burden of Babylon Vs.
1 Literal Babylon
“I have commanded my
Sanctified
ones.”
[the
soldiers
sanctified
or
dedicated to war.]
“My mighty ones for mine

REVELATION 19:11-16
The conquest of spiritual
Babylon.
“The armies of heaven” vs.
14. “The kings from the
sunrising.” Rev. 16:12.
“The Lord Jesus shall be

anger, even them that
rejoice inmy highness.” Vs.
3.
“the noise of a multitude
In the mountains…
The kingdoms of nations
Gathered together.” The
allied nations supporting
the Medes and Persians.
Vs. 4.
“The Lord of hosts
mustereth the battle.” Vs.
4.
“They come from a far
country, from the end of
heaven, even the Lord and
the
weapons
of
His
indignation to destroy the
whole land.” Vs. 5.
“Pangs shall overtake them
as a woman in travail.” Vs.
8
“The day of the Lord
comes, cruel and with
wrath to lay the land
desolate
and
destroy
sinners.” Vs. 9.

revealed from heaven with
His mighty angels in flaming
fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God.” 2
Th. 1:7,8.
The Lord shall roar from on
high… as they that tread the
grapes, against all the
inhabitants of the earth….
The Lord hath a controversy
with the nations…. He will
give them that are wicked to
the sword.” Jer. 25:30-33.
“In righteousness He doth
judge and make war… and
the armies of heaven follow
Him.” Vs. 11,14.
“The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven… in
flaming
fire
taking
vengeance on them that
know not God… who shall
be punished with everlasting
destruction.” 2 Thess. 1:7-9.
“The day of the Lord so
cometh as a thief in the
night… sudden destruction
comes upon a woman with
child.” 2 Th. 5:2,3.
“He shall smite the nations
and He shall rule them with a
rod of iron and He treads the
winepress of the fiercness
and wrath of Almighty
God.” Rev. 19:15.

From: Cooke, #31-UR, 15,16.
Fine Linen, Clean and White.—
“And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at
the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain.” John 20:12.

REVELATION 19:15
And out of his mouth goeth a sharp
sword, that with it he should smite the
nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of
iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the
fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.
Out of His Mouth Goeth a Sharp Sword.—
“But with righteousness shall he judge the poor,
and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he
shall smite the earth: with the rod of his mouth, and
with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.”
Isaiah 11:4.
“This is the same sharp two-edged sword
mentioned in Rev. 1:16. It is the sharp, quick and
powerful sword of the Spirit. See Hab. 4:12. The same
weapon that pricks the heart and conscience and that

547

GEMS FROM REVELATION
cuts sin out of the character, will also slay those who
refuse to confess and surrender. ‘It is written’ was the
weapon used by Christ in meeting the attacks of the
enemy in the wilderness of temptation. In that mighty
conflict Jesus unsheathed the sword of the Spirit and put
to flight the prince of devils. By this same weapon the
wicked will be slain at the Second Advent. See verse 21;
Isa. 11:4; 2 Thess. 2:8.” Bunch, TR, 267.
“And the remnant were slain with the sword of him
that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of
his mouth: and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.”
Rev. 19:21.
“Today sin is cherished and excused. The sharp
sword of the Spirit, the word of God, does not cut to
the soul. Has religion changed? Has Satan’s enmity to
God abated? A religious life once presented difficulties
and demanded self-denial. All is made very easy now.
And why is this? The professed people of God have
compromised with the power of darkness.”
5
Testimonies, 222.
He Should Smite the Nations.—
“It is Satan who fills man’s heart with a desire to do
evil. Those who follow him, the busy, incessant worker
of evil, are not content with imperiling their own souls.
They present every inducement that they think will lead
others to imperil their souls. If they cannot rule, they
seek to ruin. A spirit of exasperation, of revenge and
hatred, works in the children of disobedience, as it
worked in the first great rebel. He imbues his followers
with every species of malignity against those who cannot
be induced to join his ranks. Gaping prisons are open
before them. They are threatened with the chain-gang
and the stocks. Thus men treat those who worship
God according to the dictates of their own conscience.
Have they forgotten that as they judge and punish, so
they will be judged and punished?”
“God has said, ‘Touch not mine anointed, and do
my prophets no harm.’ Men have borne false witness
against God’s chosen ones. They have bruised their
limbs with fetters, and burned them at the stake. The
Lord will avenge his children. In proportion as men
have carried out the spirit and purposes of Satan in
causing pain to human beings, so will they suffer.
Thus will they perish who have done all in their power to
compel men to transgress the law that God has
commanded all to obey. (Rev. 19: 11-16 quoted.)”
Review & Herald, 6/19/1900.
Rod of Iron.—
“The shepherd’s rod was used for two purposes.
One end was used to guide the sheep while the other end
had an iron cap; this was used as a weapon of defense or
attack. It was used to protect the flock, to repel and kill
animals that would attack the flock. Now in ‘the day of
the Lord’ the Good Shepherd uses ‘the rod of iron’ to
free His flock as He destroys the ungodly nations.
This results in their annihilation as stated in Daniel

2:45.” Burnside, RWU, 219.
He Shall Rule Them With a Rod of Iron.—
“I will declare the decree: the LORD hath said unto
me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. Ask
of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron;
thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.”
Psalm 2:7-9.
“And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the
vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even
as I received of my Father.” Rev. 2:27.
“[Ps. 2:9 and Rev. 2:27 quoted.] These passages
tell of no gradual conversion of the godless nations,
but rather annihilation.… The smiting and ruling is
one and the same, it is annihilation. It is death to the
ungodly. The result is that the birds feast on the flesh of
kings and mighty men, Rev. 19:18. They have been
‘slain’ Rev. 19:21. This leaves the earth uninhabited for
the thousand years that follow in the following chapter.
(Rev. 20).
“1 Thess. 5:3: ‘Sudden destruction’ and not
gradual conversion is the fate of the godless when Christ
comes as ‘KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF
LORDS’.” Burnside, RWU, 218,219.
He Treadeth the Winepress of the Fierceness and
Wrath of Almighty God.—
“And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth,
and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the
great winepress of the wrath of God. 20 And the
winepress was trodden without the city, and blood came
out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the
space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.” Rev.
14:19,20.
“And the great city was divided into three parts,
and the cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came
in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.” Revelation
16:19.
“The great and final display of the ‘winepress of
God’s wrath,’ and also of ‘the lake of fire,’ occurs at the
end of the thousand years, as described in Revelation
20…. But the destruction of the living wicked at the
second coming of Christ, at the beginning of the
thousand years, furnishes a scene on a smaller scale,
similar in both these respects to what takes place at
the close of that period. Hence in the verses before us
we have this mention of both the winepress of wrath and
the lake of fire (vs. 20).” Smith, DR, 736.

REVELATION 19:16
And he hath on his vesture and on his

548

REVELATION 19

thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS,
AND LORD OF LORDS.
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.—
“Christ has at this time closed His mediatorial
work, and laid off His priestly robes for kingly attire; for
He has on His vesture and on His thigh a name written,
King of kings, and Lord of lords. This is in harmony
with the character in which He here appears, for it was
the custom of warriors anciently to have some kind of
title inscribed upon their vesture.” Smith, DR, 736.
“When He returns in power and great glory it will
be as the ‘KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS.’ It is for this reason that He wears ‘many
crowns.’ The revolted world has been recaptured and
the conqueror, having trampled ‘all enemies under His
feet’ and ‘put down all rule and all authority and
power,’ will ‘deliver up the kingdom to God, even the
Father’ (1 Cor. 15:24,25).” Bunch, TR, 268.
“The heavenly gates are again to be lifted up, and
with ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands of
thousands of holy ones, our Saviour will come forth as
King of kings and Lord of lords. Jehovah Immanuel
‘shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall
there be one Lord, and His name one.’ ‘The
tabernacle of God’ shall be with men, ‘and He will
dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and
God Himself shall be with them, and be their God.’
Zechariah 14:9; Rev. 21:3.” Mount of Blessing, 108.
“His [Christ’s] murderers were greatly annoyed by
the superscription, ‘The King of the Jews,’ placed upon
the cross above His head. But then they will be obliged
to see Him in all His glory and kingly power. They will
behold on His vesture and on His thigh, written in
living characters, ‘King of kings, and Lord of lords.’
They cried to Him mockingly, as He hung upon the
cross, ‘Let Christ, the King of Israel, descend from
the cross, that we may see and believe.’ They will
behold Him then with kingly power and authority. They
will demand no evidence of His being King of Israel; but
overwhelmed with a sense of His majesty and exceeding
glory, they will be compelled to acknowledge, ‘Blessed
is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.’” Early
Writings, 179.

REVELATION 19:17,18
And I saw an angel standing in the sun;
and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all
the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven,
Come and gather yourselves together unto
the supper of the great God;
That ye may eat the flesh of kings,
and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of

mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of
them that sit on them, and the flesh of all
men, both free and bond, both small and
great.
I Saw An Angel Standing in the Sun.—
“What is to be understood by the angel standing in
the sun? In Revelation 16:17 we read of the seventh vial
being poured out into the air, from which it was inferred
that as the air envelops the whole earth, that plague
would be universal. May not the angel standing in the
sun, and issuing his call from there to the fowls of
heaven to come to the supper of the great God, denote
that this proclamation will go wherever the sun’s rays
fall upon this earth?” Smith, DR, 736.
“Now the literal vultures and birds of prey are
summoned by the decree of the heavenly watcher to eat
the flesh and drink the blood of her followers. The angel
herald stands in the most public place known to man and
makes his dreadful announcement where he can be seen
and heard by all. The angel is ‘standing in the full
light of the sun’ (Weymouth) and he cries ‘with a
loud voice.’ In the most conspicuous place in the
heavens the angelic herald gives his terrible message to
his vast audience. This is the same supper or banquet
described in Eze. 39:17-20.” Bunch, TR, 268.
“Perhaps the blinding light of the sun is here
descriptive of the glorious light of the divine presence
(cf. 2 Thess. 2:8,9; Rev. 6:15-17). Thus the angel who
issues the challenge of ch. 19:17 would be standing next
to Christ, as in ancient combat an armor-bearer would be
near his lord.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 875.
Fowls.—
“This invitation to the ‘fowls’ warns the assembled
hosts of the wicked as to the fate that impends for them.
It is couched in the graphic Oriental phraseology of a
challenge to personal combat (cf. 1 Sam. 17:44-46). To
be devoured by the scavengers of the skies constituted
one of the curses for disobedience pronounced by
Moses in his valedictory address to the people of
Israel (Deut. 28:26). John’s phraseology in Rev.
19:17,18 appears to be based on God’s words to the
heathen nations of earth as recorded in Eze. 39:17-22 (cf.
Jer. 7:32,33).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 875.
“And thy carcass shall be meat unto all fowls of
the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man
shall fray them away.” Deut. 28:26.
The Supper of the Great God.—
“The fowls will be obedient to the call, and fill
themselves with the flesh of horses, kings, captains, and
mighty men. Thus, while the saints are partaking of the
marriage supper of the Lamb, the wicked in their own
persons furnish a great supper for the fowls of the
heavens.” Smith, DR, 736.

549

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“This chapter pictures two great suppers or
banquets. The first is called ‘the marriage supper of
the Lamb,’ and the second, ‘the supper of the great
God.’ Invitations are issued to each banquet and all
must attend one or the other. All are invited to the first
and those who refuse the divine call to the marriage of
the King’s Son, must attend the supper of the great
God where the guests will also be the victims. The
accepting of the invitation to attend the wedding banquet
of the Lamb and His bride is voluntary, but attendance at
the banquet of the birds of prey is mandatory on all who
refuse the invitation of mercy. In one sense the birds of
prey are the invited guests, for they alone partake of the
feast. To reject the invitation to attend the marriage of
the King of kings is a very serious matter. It is worse
still to accept the invitation and then neglect to put on
the wedding garment provided by the royal host. See
Matt. 22:1-14. The statement, ‘For many are called,
but few are chosen,’ is a sad comment on the attitude of
the human family toward the gospel. We have all been
called, but will we be chosen? This is a life and death
question that we alone can decide. Upon this decision
rests our eternal destinies.” Bunch, TR, 268,269.
“And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD;
Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of
the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather
yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do
sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the
mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink
blood. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the
blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and
of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan. And
ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be
drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.
Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and
chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith
the Lord GOD.” Ezekiel 39:17-20.
Kings, Captains, Mighty Men, Horses, Riders, All Men,
Free and Bond, Small and Great.—
“We read about a similar assortment of people
once before, in Revelation 6:15,16. We heard them
crying for the rocks and mountains to hide them from the
face of God and the wrath of the Lamb. Isaiah the
prophet also saw such people, hiding in the ‘caverns of
the rocks,’ throwing their gold and silver idols to moles
and bats. Isaiah 2:20,21. The prophet Haggai warned
against the uselessness of earning wages only to ‘put
them into a bag with holes.’ Haggai 1:6. Investments,
credit cards, promotions, extravagant pleasures, prestige,
will mean nothing at all to the frightened people who
have not prepared themselves for the second coming of
Christ.” Maxwell, God Cares, 492.
“And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise
men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty
men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not
wake, saith the King, whose name is the Lord of hosts.”

Jeremiah 51:57.

REVELATION 19:19
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the
earth, and their armies, gathered together to
make war against him that sat on the horse,
and against his army.
The Beast And The Kings of the Earth.—
“The beast and false prophet with the dragon are
said to be the three great divisions of Babylon in Rev.
16:13,19. Mother Babylon with her family of harlot
daughters and the kings of the earth with whom they
have committed spiritual fornication are among the
distinguished guests at the supper of the great God.”
Bunch, TR, 269.
Verses 19-21, A Repetition and Enlargement of
Revelation 16:14-16.—
REVELATION
REVELATION
16:14-16
19:19-21
The dragon
The kings of the earth
The beast
The beast
The False Prophet
The False Prophet
The whole
And their armies
[unsaved] world
Working miracles
That wrought miracles
‘To gather them’
Gathered together
‘He gathered them’
The battle of
To make war
the great day
[or battle]
Of God Almighty
‘Against him that sat
on the horse and
against his army.’
From: Cooke, #31-UR, 23,24.
Beast and Kings and Armies Gathered Together.—
“It is worthy of notice that the chain of events in
Matt.25:31-46, and the chain of events in Rev.19:11-21,
has each, as its second link, the gathering of the
nations before Christ. In Matt.25:32, we have simply
the statement of the fact, ‘And before him shall be
gathered all nations.’ But in Rev.19:19, we have the
occasion of this gathering stated: ‘I saw the beast, and
the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together
to make war against him that sat on the horse, and
against his army.’
“The gathering of the nations mentioned in these
two texts must be identical, as each gathering is at the
same time as the other, and both are connected with the
same event, viz., the advent of Christ. The nature of this
gathering is presented in the following passages:
“ ‘And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come
out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. For
they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go
forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world,

550

REVELATION 19
to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty.’ Rev.16:13,14.
“[Rev.19:19 quoted.]
“ ‘Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until
the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination
is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the
kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even
all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be devoured
with the fire of my jealousy. For then will I turn to the
people a pure language, that they may all call upon the
name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.’
Zeph.3:8,9.
“These texts clearly indicate that the gathering
of the nations is effected not by the good angels of
God, but by the evil angels of Satan. The mighty
working of the devil, even after men have passed the day
of grace, is plainly his final desperate struggle before he
is bound. This great gathering of the nations is, in the
providence of God, for the purpose of pouring on them
the fierceness of his wrath in their terrible destruction.
The battle of the great day of God Almighty is the very
scene of treading the wine-press of the wrath of God.
Rev.19:11-15.”
“This phrase describes a unity of thought and
understanding. The whole world see things the same
way. They are gathered together spiritually and
mentally into one place. See Rev. 16:16.” PJ.
Gathered Together to Make War.—
“How do the earthly powers make war, or battle,
against Christ? ‘In that ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren [says Christ] ye have done it
unto me.’ Mt. 25:40.” Cooke, #31-UR, 25.
“Our Lord is cognizant of the conflict of His
people in these last days with the satanic agencies
combined with evil men who neglect and refuse this
great salvation. With the greatest simplicity and candor,
our Saviour, the mighty General of the armies of heaven,
does not conceal the stern conflict which they will
experience. He points out the dangers, He shows us the
plan of the battle, and the hard and hazardous work to be
done, and then lifts His voice before entering the conflict
to count the cost while at the same time He encourages
all to take up the weapons of their warfare and expect
the heavenly host to compose the armies to war in
defense of truth and righteousness. Men’s weakness
shall find supernatural strength and help in every
stern conflict to do the deeds of Omnipotence, and
perseverance in faith and perfect trust in God will ensure
success. While the past confederacy of evil is arrayed
against them He bids them to be brave and strong and
fight valiantly for they have a heaven to win, and they
have more than an angel in their ranks, the mighty
General of armies leads on the armies of heaven. As
on the occasion of the taking of Jericho, not one of the
armies of Israel could boast of exercising their finite
strength to overthrow the walls of the city, but the
Captain of the Lord’s host planned that battle in the

greatest simplicity, that the Lord alone should receive
the glory and man should not be exalted. God has
promised us all power; for the promise is unto you and
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many
as the Lord our God shall call.” (Letter 51, 1895). 2BC
995.
“A terrible conflict is before us. We are nearing the
battle of the great day of God Almighty. That which has
been held in control is to be let loose. The angel of
mercy is folding her wings, preparing to step down from
the throne, and leave the world to the control of Satan.
The principalities and powers of earth are in bitter revolt
against the God of heaven. They are filled with hatred
against those who serve him, and soon, very soon, will
be fought the last great battle between good and evil.
The earth is to be the battlefield—the scene of the
final contest and the final victory. Here, where for so
long Satan has led men against God, rebellion is to be
forever suppressed.” Review & Herald, 5/13/1902.
“This is the Battle of Armageddon, which we read
about first in chapter 16:14,16 and again in 17:13,14.
Armageddon isn’t a battle of the East against the West;
it’s an attack of Satan and the human race against the
Lamb of God. It’s fought in the only ways human
beings can attack a heavenly Being, by opposing His
truth and oppressing His people. It is organized
through the lying propaganda of the froglike spirits who
come out of the mouths of the beast, the dragon, and the
false prophet. Their lying propaganda is accompanied by
misleading miracles, signs, and wonders.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 492,493.
“Evil angels unite their powers with evil men,
and as they have been in constant conflict and
attained an experience in the best modes of deception
and battle, and have been strengthening for centuries,
they will not yield the last great final contest without
a desperate struggle. All the world will be on one side
or the other of the question. The battle of Armageddon
will be fought, and that day must find none of us
sleeping.” (Letter 112, 1890). 7BC, 982.
“The slain of the Lord in the great battle shall be
from one end of the earth to the other. Jer.25:30-33.”
Andrews, JEO, 107.
Against Him and Against His Army.—
“Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and
against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up
thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of
Israel.” Isaiah 37:23.
“This is a symbolic picture of the final conflict.
How do they make war against Christ? He that touches a
true believer touches Jesus Christ. He declared: ‘In that
ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto Me.’ (Matt. 25:40). To
Saul of Tarsus, Jesus said, ‘Saul, Saul, why persecutest

551

GEMS FROM REVELATION
thou me?’ (Acts 9:4). ‘He that toucheth you toucheth
the apple of his eye.’ (Zech. 2:8). Whoever touches a
saint of God in the final conflict touches Christ and this
will result in divine intervention. ‘The Lamb shall
overcome them.’” Cooke, #29-UR, 35.

“The beast in Europe and the false prophet in the
United States, having blended their forces for the
accomplishment of their one desire—the destruction of
the remnant of God’s people—fall before Him who sits
on the white horse.” Haskell, SSP, 321.

“This verse shows indisputably that Armageddon is
not a conflict between earthly powers. While it is true
that ‘there will be storm and war and variance,’ until
the end, among the unsaved, yet Armageddon is a war
between heavenly and earthly powers.” Cooke, #31UR, 23.

The False Prophet.—
“The false prophet is the one that works
miracles before the beast and is identical with the
two-horned beast of Revelation 13, to whom the same
work, for the same purpose, is there attributed.” Smith,
DR, 736.

REVELATION 19:20
And the beast was taken, and with him
the false prophet that wrought miracles
before him, with which he deceived them
that had received the mark of the beast, and
them that worshipped his image. These both
were cast alive into a lake of fire burning
with brimstone.
The Beast Was Taken, and … the False Prophet.—
“Armageddon begins with the attack upon the
people of God. ‘The dragon was wroth with the
woman and went to make war [or battle] with the
remnant of her seed.’ Rev. 12:17. This leads to the
intervention by Christ and His angels in the sixth and
seventh plagues under which ‘the beast and the false
prophet’, [i.e. the clergy, the religious leaders], are
brought to their end. In Armageddon the first to fall
are the clergy. [Great Controversy, 656]. The second to
fall are their supporters when they turn on one
another in slaughter. The remnant are those of the
unsaved who still remain alive. These are symbolized as
being slain with the sword out of Christ’s mouth.”
Cooke, #31-UR, 25,26.
“We see the dragon appear in chapter 12, the two
beasts in chapter 13, and the Babylon prostitute in
chapter 17. The sequence reverses itself with the
destruction of Babylon (Rev. 17-18), then of the beast
and its false prophet (Rev. 19), and finally the dragon
(Rev. 20).
“…1. The judgment of Babylon establishes the
Lamb in His right to redeem (5:9,10) as opposed to the
prostitute’s claim over the witnesses of Jesus (17:6).
“2. The judgment of the beast and the false prophet
establishes ‘the Word of God’ in His right to reign as
opposed to the claim to sovereignty by the powers of this
world, and the beast and of the false prophet (19:19-20).
“3. The judgment of the wicked establishes God in
His justice as opposed to Satan’s claims over the martyrs
who are faithful to the testimony of Jesus and to the
Word of God (20:4).” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR,
217,218.

“The false prophet is here definitely identified
with the two-horned beast of chapter 13, which
deceived the world by false miracles and demanded that
an image to the beast be made and worshiped.” Bunch,
TR, 269.
“It was far more agreeable to the people to receive
the message of the false prophet, who predicted
prosperity; therefore it was received. It wounded their
pride to have their sins brought continually before their
eyes; they would much rather put them out of sight.” 4
Testimonies, 172.
Parallels Between False Prophet & 2-Horned Beast.—
REVELATION 13
REVELATION 19
Verse 20: He is ‘with the
1. Vs. 12: He causes
them …to worship the
beast’ (Papacy).
first beast (Papacy).
2. Verse 14: ‘Miracles he
Verse 20: ‘Worked
did in sight of the beast
miracles in sight of the
(Papacy).
beast’ (Papacy).
Verse 20: ‘By which he
3. Verse 14: He
deceives by the miracles
deceived them who
which he did …causes all received the mark of the
to receive a mark. (Verse
beast.’
16).
4. Vs. 14: to make an
Vs. 20: ‘Those who
image to the beast.
Worshipped his image.’
From: Cooke, #26UR, 14
Taken.—
“ ‘Taken’ or ‘captured’ seems to indicate a
frustrated effort to escape when all was lost. Long had
they been at large among the inhabitants of the earth
carrying on their work of deception and destruction. The
criminals are at last captured and punished.” Bunch, TR,
269.
Both Were Cast Alive Into a Lake of Fire.—
“This phrase immediately turns the reader’s mind to
an identical phrase in ch. 20:10, which in turn seems to
call for the conclusion that these phrases refer to the
same fiery event, namely, the destruction of the wicked
at the end of the thousand years, But to do so presents a
problem.
The 19th chapter is most evidently
discussing events in connection with the second

552

REVELATION 19
coming of Christ. Hence to hold that the lake of fire
mentioned in ch. 19:20 describes an event at the close of
the millennium is to lift this verse out of its contextual
sequence. It is always better, if possible, to find an
explanation that allows any given state-ment to maintain
its historical sequence in a passage of Scripture. As
regards ch. 19:20, this is possible on the reasonable
premise that there is a fiery judgment from God both
at the beginning and at the close of the millennium.
There is no inconsistency and certainly no contradiction
in speaking of a lake of fire at the beginning and a
lake of fire at the end of the millennium.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 875,876.
“Water will never destroy the earth again, but the
weapons of God are concealed in the bowels of the
earth, which He will draw forth to unite with the fire
from heaven to accomplish His purpose in the
destruction of all those who would not receive the
message of warning and purify their souls in obeying the
truth and being obedient to the laws of God.” (Signs,
1/3/1878). 7BC, 946.
“Before the Son of man appears in the clouds of
heaven, everything in nature will be convulsed.
Lightning from heaven uniting with the fire in the
earth, will cause the mountains to burn like a furnace,
and pour out their floods of lava over villages and cities.
Molten masses of rock, thrown into the water by the
upheaval of things hidden in the earth, will cause the
water to boil and send forth rocks and earth. There will
be mighty earthquakes and great destruction of human
life. But as in the days of the great Deluge Noah was
preserved in the ark that God had prepared for him, so in
these days of destruction and calamity, God will be the
refuge of His believing ones... [Ps. 91:9, 10; 27:5
quoted].” (Letter 258, 1907) 7BC, 946.
“In the bowels of the earth God has in reserve the
weapons that He will use to destroy the sinful race.
Since the Flood, God has used, to destroy wicked cities,
both the water and the fire that are concealed in the earth.
In the final conflagration God will in His wrath send
lightning from heaven that will unite with the fire in
the earth. The mountains will burn like a furnace, and
pour forth streams of lava [Nahum 1:5, 6; Ps. 144:5, 6
quoted]. (Manuscript 21, 1902). 7BC, 946, 947.
“The mountains quake at Him, and the hills melt,
and the earth is burned at His presence, yea, the world,
and all that dwell therein.” Nahum 1:6.
“Bow thy heaven, O Lord, and come down: touch
the mountains, and they shall smoke. Cast forth
lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and
destroy them.” Psalm 144:5,6.
“The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath
surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell
with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell

with everlasting burnings?
“He that walketh righteously, and speaketh
uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that
shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth
his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes
from seeing evil; He shall dwell on high: his place of
defence shall be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be
given him; his waters shall be sure. Thine eyes shall see
the king in his beauty: they shall behold the land that is
very far off.” Isa. 33:14-17.
“I beheld then because of the voice of the great
words which the horn spake: I beheld even till the beast
was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame.” Dan. 7:11.
“And to you who are troubled rest with us, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels, In flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 2 Thess. 1:7,8.
“Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a
fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very
tempestuous round about him.” Psalm 50:3.
“The fact that these are cast alive into the lake of
fire, shows that these powers will not pass away and be
succeeded by others, but will be living powers at the
second advent of Christ.
“The papacy has long been in the field, and has
come to the closing scenes of its career. Its overthrow is
emphatically predicted in other prophecies than the one
now before us, notably in Daniel 7:11, in which the
prophet says that he beheld until the beast was slain,
and his body destroyed and given to the burning
flame….
“How impressive is the thought that we see
before us two great prophetic agencies which are by
all the evidences near the close of their history, which
yet are not to cease until the Lord shall appear in all
His glory.” Smith, DR, 736,737.

REVELATION 19:21
And the remnant were slain with the
sword of him that sat upon the horse, which
sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all
the fowls were filled with their flesh.
The Remnant Were Slain With the Sword.—
“When the beast and the false prophet are cast into
the lake of fire (Rev. 19:20), ‘the remnant’ (vs. 21), or
‘the rest,’ of their followers are slain by the sword of
Christ. These are the kings, captains, mighty men,
and ‘all men, both free and bond’ (vs. 18). The same
classes are mentioned under the sixth seal, as seeking to
hide from the face of the Lamb (ch. 6:14-17) when the
heavens depart as a scroll and every mountain and island

553

GEMS FROM REVELATION
is moved. Obviously these scriptures depict the same
earth-shattering event, the second advent of Christ.
“…How many are involved in the death of ‘the
remnant’ (ch. 19:21)? According to ch. 13:8 there will
be only two classes on earth at the time of the advent:
‘all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him [the
beast], whose names are not written in the book of
life.’ It is evident, therefore, that when ‘the remnant’
are ‘slain with the sword’ (ch. 19:21), there are no
survivors except those who have withstood the beast,
namely, those who are written in the book of life (ch.
13:8).” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 885.
“It appears from verse 21 that there is a remnant
not numbered with the beast or the false prophet.
These are slain by the sword of Him that sits upon the
horse, which sword proceeds out of His mouth. This
sword is doubtless what is spoken of elsewhere as ‘the
spirit of His mouth’ and ‘the breath of His lips,’ with
which the Lord shall slay the wicked at His appearing
and kingdom. (2 Thessalonians 2:8; Isaiah 11:4.)”
Smith, DR, 737.
“Not only are there two suppers or banquets, one of
which we will attend, but there are also two remnants.
One is described in Rev. 12:17 and the other in the verse
[Rev. 19:21]…. It will be an honor to be numbered with
the first who will be honored guests at the marriage
banquet of the Lamb. The other remnant will be
slaughtered as food for the birds of prey at the supper
of the great God.” Bunch, TR, 270.

lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be
dung upon the ground.” Jer. 25:30-33
“At the coming of Christ the wicked are blotted
from the face of the whole earth—consumed with the
spirit of His mouth, and destroyed by the brightness
of His glory. Christ takes His people to the city of God,
and the earth is emptied of its inhabitants. (Isaiah 24:1,
3, 5, 6 quoted). The whole earth appears like a desolate
wilderness.” Great Controversy, 657.
The Sword of His Mouth.—
“The remnant are those of the unsaved who still
remain alive. These are symbolized as being slain with
the sword out of Christ’s mouth. This represents the
word of Christ which will be one of the agents of
destruction of the unsaved at the Second Advent.”
Cooke, #31-UR, 26.
All the Fowls Were Filled With Their Flesh.—
“For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and
shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of
the Son of man be. For wheresoever the carcass is,
there will the eagles be gathered together.” Matthew
24:27,28.

“But with righteousness shall he judge the poor,
and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he
shall smite the earth: with the rod of his mouth, and
with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.”
Isaiah 11:4.
“The LORD shall roar from on high, and utter his
voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar
upon his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that
tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the
earth. A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth;
for the LORD hath a controversy with the nations, he
will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are
wicked to the sword, saith the LORD. Thus saith the
LORD of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation
to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from
the coasts of the earth. And the slain of the LORD
shall be at that day from one end of the earth even
unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be
PJ.

All the Fowls Were Filled With Their Flesh.
“Are these fowls literal? The only other place the
word for fowl is used is in Rev. 18:2: ‘…Babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of
devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of
every unclean and hateful bird.’ Notice Isaiah 34:13:
‘And it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court
for owls. (See additional comments under vs. 17,18.)”

554

REVELATION 20

REVELATION 20
REVELATION 20: 1-15

heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit
and a great chain in his hand.

1 And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the
key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.
2 And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is
the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,
3 And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and
set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more,
till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must
be loosed a little season.
4 And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment
was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and
which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither
had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands;
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.
5 But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand
years were finished. This is the first resurrection.
6 Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they
shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand years.
7 And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be
loosed out of his prison,
8 And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the
four quarters of the earth, Gog, and Magog, to gather them
together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.
9 And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and
compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and
fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.
10 And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and
shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
11 And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it,
from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there
was found no place for them.
12 And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God;
and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which
is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things
which were written in the books, according to their works.
13 And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death
and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were
judged every man according to their works.
14 And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is
the second death.
15 And whosoever was not found written in the book of life
was cast into the lake of fire.

And I Saw.—
“The event with which this chapter opens seems to
follow the events of the preceding chapter in
chronological order.” Smith, DR, 739.
“The revelator foretells the banishment of Satan
and the condition of chaos and desolation to which the
earth is to be reduced, and he declares that this
condition will exist for a thousand years. After
presenting the scenes of the Lord’s second coming
and the destruction of the wicked, the prophecy
continues: [Rev. 20:1-3 quoted.]” Great Controversy,
658.
An Angel Comes Down.—
“The mighty angel who descends from heaven
and arrests and imprisons Satan is doubtless
Michael, the Archangel. See 1 Thess. 4:16; 1 Cor.
15:22-28. It was Michael who defeated Lucifer in the
first battle around the throne of God in heaven. See
Rev. 12:7-9. As Emmanuel, the ‘man child,’ Christ
again defeated the great rebel during His earthly visit in
the likeness of sinful flesh. It was Michael, the
Archangel, who volunteered to redeem man and restore
the dominion and sovereignty of this world to its
rightful owner. It was through His humiliation and
death that the destruction of the author of sin and death
was made possible. See Heb. 2:14,15. He who began
the task of wresting the lost dominion from the great
rebel, and fallen man from his power, will complete
the work and will not delegate its climaxing stages to
a mere created being. Christ cannot deliver up the
kingdom of this world to the Father, and put down and
place under His feet all opposing rule and authority and
power till Satan’s career is brought to an end and the
great arch-rebel punished.
“It was Christ Himself who enters ‘the strong
man’s house’ to ‘bind the strong man’ so that He can
‘spoil his house’ and ‘his goods,’ as pictured in Matt.
12:25-29. Satan is said to be the ‘strong man’ of this
parable.” Bunch, TR, 271.

THE ONE THOUSAND YEARS
INTRODUCTION.—
“We understand the events of this chapter, as
stated in verses 1-11, are given very nearly in strict
chronological order, and that verses 12-15 cover some
of the same ground, namely, that of the final
judgment.” Andrews, JEO, 126.

The Key.—
“Who is the ‘angel’ which descends ‘from
heaven’? He is described as in possession of a ‘key’
and a ‘chain.’ This key is significant in our understanding of the angel and his actions toward Satan. It
had been predicted of Christ, ‘And the key of the
house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he
shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut,

REVELATION 20:1
And I saw an angel come down from
555

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and none shall open.’ Isaiah 22:22. He was to be
given power that none could nullify. In His letter to the
church at Philadelphia, Christ is represented as being in
possession of the key that gives Him incomparable
power. Rev. 3:7. He told John, ‘I …have the keys of
hell and of death.’ Rev. 1:18. There will be no escape
for Satan from the bottomless pit into which he is to be
cast because Christ holds the key.” Metcalf, GPDR,
167.

chain, imprison, and destroy the great enemy. This right
and power is the result of Christ’s Calvary victory.
The second event in the chain that binds Satan
is the resurrection of the righteous dead which takes
place at the second coming of Christ.… The third
event in the chain is the removal of the living and
resurrected saints from the earth for one thousand
years. …The fourth link in the chain of events that end
Satan’s deceiving career for a millennium is the
destruction of all the living wicked by the sword of
Christ’s mouth, or the glory and brightness of His
coming. The fifth event of the series is the desolation
of the earth which is the result of the coming of
Christ and His judgments.” Bunch, TR, 272,273.

“It cannot be supposed that the key and the chain
are literal; they are rather used merely as symbols of the
power and authority with which this angel is clothed
on this occasion for the accomplishment of his
mission.” Smith, DR, 742.

(See comments on “Bound Him” in verse 2).
“And I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”
Matthew 16:19.

REVELATION 20:2
And he laid hold on the dragon, that old
serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and
bound him a thousand years,

Bottomless Pit.—
(See verse 3.)

He Laid Hold on the Dragon.—
“Chapters 17 and 18 picture the judgment of God
upon Babylon the Great, chapter 19 describes the
capture and punishment of the beast and false prophet,
and here is revealed the good news that Satan himself,
‘the prince of this world,’ and the great rebel against
the government of heaven, is to be captured,
imprisoned, and punished. … He was the first to sin,
and he will be the last to die as the result of sin. As far
as sinners or rebels are concerned, Satan is ‘the first and
the last,’ the ‘beginning and the ending.’” Bunch, TR,
271.

A Great Chain.—
“By this course of action Satan has forged a
chain by which he himself will be bound. The
heavenly universe will bear witness to the justice of
God in punishing him. Heaven itself saw what heaven
would be, if he were in it.” This Day With God, 14.
“The chain which binds him cannot be literal, for a
spirit being could not be held by a material chain. It is
rather a chain of circumstances, each link forged by an
event over which the devil and his angels have no
power.” Anderson, UR, 192.

“The three great powers that will oppose the work
of Christ and gather the kings of the earth to battle
immediately prior to the advent are identified as the
dragon, the beast, and the false prophet (ch. 16:13).
According to ch. 19:19, when ‘the beast , and the
kings of the earth, and their armies’ assemble to
make war with Christ at the time of His advent, the
beast and the false prophet are taken and cast alive into
a lake burning with fire and brimstone (vs. 20,21). The
narrative of ch. 20 proceeds to show the fate of the
third member of the trio, the dragon, who is seized
and cast into the bottomless pit, where he remains
for 1000 years.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 885.

“Since all the righteous (both living and
resurrected) are taken to heaven at Christ’s return (John
14:1-3), and since all the unsaved are dead, Satan (and
the demons) have no one to tempt or deceive. He is
therefore, bound by the situation, by a chain of
circumstances.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 239.
“The first link in the chain of events that ends
Satan’s deceiving career for a thousand years is the
coming of the angel from heaven, which represents
the coming of Christ, the Archangel. While Satan’s
work is restricted before the close of probation he has at
no time been bound. Between the close of probation
and the second coming of Christ he experiences his
greatest freedom in the rulership of this world. The
Holy Spirit will have finished His work and the angels
will then cease to hold in check the winds of war and
human passion. With the divine restraint removed
Satan makes the final demonstration that satisfies the
universe that as a ruler he is an utter failure. The period
of unrestrained control ends with the second coming of
Christ who alone has the right and power to arrest,

Dragon, That Old Serpent, The Devil, Satan.—
“He is the ‘dragon’ in his relation to earthly
powers through which he has ruled the world and
persecuted the church; he is ‘that old serpent’ because
of his subtlety and power to deceive and beguile the
human race; he is ‘the Devil’ because he is a malignant
slanderer and liar, and the father of liars; and he is
‘Satan’ because he is the adversary and accuser of
saints.” Bunch, TR, 271.

556

REVELATION 20
seat was sprinkled with it. Guilt was therefore canceled;
by this shedding of blood there was remission. But sin,
though pardoned, is yet hateful to God, and it cannot
dwell in His sight: it is removed away to a ‘land not
inhabited’—severed from God’s people, and sent away
to man’s first seducer. The sins of a believing world
are taken off them, and rolled back on Satan, their
prime author and instigator. Though the penalty is
remitted to believers, it is not remitted to him who
brought them into apostasy and ruin. The tempted
are restored, but the whole punishment is seen to fall on
the arch-tempter. Hell is ‘prepared for the devil and
his angels.’ (John Eadie, Biblical Cyclopedia, p. 577,
art. ‘Scape-Goat.’).” Smith, DR, 741,742.

Satan, the Scapegoat, Banished to Desolate Earth.—
“And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head
of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities
of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in
all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat,
and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man
into the wilderness:
“And the goat shall bear upon him all their
iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let
go the goat in the wilderness.” Leviticus 16:21,22.
“Now the event takes place foreshadowed in the
last solemn service of the Day of Atonement. When
the ministration in the holy of holies had been
completed, and the sins of Israel had been removed
from the sanctuary by virtue of the blood of the sin
offering, then the scapegoat was presented alive be-fore
the Lord; and in the presence of the congregation the
high priest confessed over him ‘all the iniquities of the
children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of the goat." Leviticus
16:21. In like manner, when the work of atonement in
the heavenly sanctuary has been completed, then in the
presence of God and heavenly angels and the hosts of
the redeemed the sins of God’s people will be placed
upon Satan; he will be declared guilty of all the evil
which he has caused them to commit. And as the
scapegoat was sent away into a land not inhabited, so
Satan will be banished to the desolate earth, an
uninhabited and dreary wilderness.
“The revelator foretells the banishment of Satan
and the condition of chaos and desolation to which the
earth is to be reduced, and he declares that this
condition will exist for a thousand years. After
presenting the scenes of the Lord’s second coming and
the destruction of the wicked, the prophecy continues:
[Revelation 20:1-3 quoted].” Great Controversy, 658.

Bound Him.—
“Satan, in order to work, must have subjects
upon whom to work. Without these, he can do
nothing.
But during the thousand years of his
confinement to this earth, all the saints are in heaven
beyond the power of his temptations, and all the wicked
are in their graves beyond his power to deceive. His
sphere of action is circumscribed, and thus is he bound,
being condemned throughout this period to a state of
hopeless inactivity. To a mind that has been as busy as
his has been for the past six thousand years in deceiving
the inhabitants of the world from generation to
generation, this must be a punishment of the most
intense severity. According to this exposition, the
‘binding’ of Satan means simply placing beyond his
reach the subjects upon whom he works.
“…More than this, there is here a great limitation
of Satan’s power, which may well be called a ‘binding.’
He no longer has the power of traversing space and
visiting other worlds, but like man he is confined to
this earth, which he nevermore leaves. The place of
the ruin he has wrought now becomes his gloomy prison
house until he is led out to execution at the end of the
thousand years.” Smith, DR, 743,745.

“Then I saw that Jesus’ work in the sanctuary will
soon be finished. And after His work there is
finished, He will come to the door of the first
apartment, and confess the sins of Israel upon the
head of the Scape Goat. Then He will put on the
garments of vengeance. Then the plagues will come
upon the wicked, and they do not come till Jesus puts on
that garment, and takes His place upon the great white
cloud. Then while the plagues are falling, the Scape
Goat is being led away. He makes a mighty struggle
to escape, but he is held fast by the hand that leads
him. If he should effect his escape, Israel would lose
their lives. I saw that it would take time to lead away
the Scape Goat into the land of forgetful-ness after the
sins were put on his head.” Spalding & Magan, 2.

“And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom
do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be
your judges. But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of
God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you. Or
else how can one enter into a strong man’s house,
and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong
man? and then he will spoil his house.” Matt. 12:2729.
“The binding of Satan precedes the resurrection
of the just. This seems plain enough from Revelation
20, but it is very plainly taught in our Lord’s parable of
binding the strong man and spoiling his house.
Matt.12:29; Mark 3:27; Luke 11:21, 22. He is evidently
bound before the complete slaughter of the wicked in
the battle of the great day.” Andrews, JEO, 128.

“It was Satan that brought sin into the world; and
this seduction of man adds to his guilt, and consequently
to his punishment. Sin is now pardoned in God’s
mercy. The one goat was sacrificed as a sin offering; its
blood was carried into the holy place, and the mercy-

Bound a Thousand Years.—
“Here is to be the home of Satan with his evil
angels for a thousand years. Limited to the earth, he

557

GEMS FROM REVELATION
will not have access to other worlds to tempt and
annoy those who have never fallen. It is in this sense
that he is bound: there are none remaining, upon
whom he can exercise his power. He is wholly cut off
from the work of deception and ruin which for so many
centuries has been his sole delight.
“…Even the wicked are now placed beyond the
power of Satan, and alone with his evil angels he
remains to realize the effect of the curse which sin has
brought. ‘The kings of the nations, even all of them,
lie in glory, everyone in his own house [the grave].
But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable
branch.... Thou shalt not be joined with them in
burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and
slain thy people.’ Isa. 14:18-20.
“For a thousand years, Satan will wander to and
fro in the desolate earth to behold the results of his
rebellion against the law of God. During this time his
sufferings are intense. Since his fall his life of
unceasing activity has banished reflection; but he is now
deprived of his power and left to contemplate the part
which he has acted since first he rebelled against the
government of heaven, and to look forward with
trembling and terror to the dreadful future when he must
suffer for all the evil that he has done and be punished
for the sins that he has caused to be committed.
“To God’s people the captivity of Satan will bring
gladness and rejoicing. Says the prophet: ‘It shall
come to pass in the day that Jehovah shall give thee
rest from thy sorrow, and from thy trouble, and
from the hard service wherein thou wast made to
serve, that thou shalt take up this parable against the
king of Babylon [here representing Satan], and say,
How hath the oppressor ceased!... Jehovah hath
broken the staff of the wicked, the scepter of the
rulers; that smote the peoples in wrath with a
continual stroke, that ruled the nations in anger,
with a persecution that none restrained.’ Verses 3-6,
R.V.” Great Controversy, 659,660.

the earth in a state of confusion and darkness is evident
from other scriptures. Concerning the condition of the
earth ‘in the beginning,’ the Bible record says that it
‘was without form, and void; and darkness was upon
the face of the deep.’ Genesis 1:2. Prophecy teaches
that it will be brought back, partially at least, to this
condition. Looking forward to the great day of God, the
prophet Jeremiah declares: ‘I beheld the earth, and, lo,
it was without form, and void; and the heavens, and
they had no light. I beheld the mountains, and, lo,
they trembled, and all the hills moved lightly. I
beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all the birds
of the heavens were fled. I beheld, and, lo, the
fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the cities
thereof were broken down [at the presence of the
LORD, and by his fierce anger].’ Jeremiah 4:23-26.
“The whole earth appears like a desolate
wilderness. The ruins of cities and villages destroyed
by the earthquake, uprooted trees, ragged rocks thrown
out by the sea or torn out of the earth itself, are scattered
over its surface, while vast caverns mark the spot where
the mountains have been rent from their foundations.”
Great Controversy, 658.

“There is a Bible principle that symbolic ‘time’ in
prophecy applies until the Second Advent. After that
event time is literal. The fact that this one thousand
year period transpires after the Second Advent means
that the period must be a literal period of time. This
answers the query as to whether the one thousand years
are literal or symbolic.” Cooke, #32-UR, 1.

“The original word signifies an abyss,
bottomless, deep, profound. Its use seems to be such
as to show that the word denotes any place of
darkness, desolation, and death. Thus in Revelation
9:1,2, it is applied to the barren wastes of the Arabian
desert, and in Romans 10:7, to the grave. But the use
which specially throws light upon the meaning of the
word here is found in Genesis 1:2, where we read that
‘darkness was upon the face of the deep.’ The word
there rendered ‘deep’ is the same word that is here
rendered ‘bottomless pit,’ and the text might have been
translated, ‘Darkness was upon the face of the abyss, or
bottomless pit.’ We all know that the word ‘deep’ as
there used is applied to the earth in its chaotic state.
Precisely this it must mean in this third verse of
Revelation 20. Let it be borne in mind that at the time
the angel does this work, the earth is a vast charnel
house of desolation and death. The voice of God has
shaken it to its foundations; the islands and mountains
have been moved out of their places; the great

The Earth in a Bottomless Pit Condition

REVELATION 20:3
And cast him into the bottomless pit,
and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceive the nations no more,
till the thousand years should be fulfilled:
and after that he must be loosed a little
season.
The Bottomless Pit.—
“That the expression ‘bottomless pit’ represents

558

REVELATION 20
earthquake has leveled to the earth the mightiest works
of man; the seven last plagues have left their alldesolating trail over the earth; the burning glory
attending the coming of the Son of man has borne its
part in accomplishing the general desolation; the wicked
have been given to the slaughter, and their putrefying
flesh and bleaching bones lie unburied, ungathered, and
unlamented from one end of the earth to the other.
“Thus is the earth made empty and waste, and
turned upside down. (Isaiah 24:1.) Thus is it brought
back again, partly at least, to its original state of
confusion and chaos. (See Jeremiah 4:19-26, especially
verse 23.) What better term could be used to
describe the earth thus rolling on in its course of
darkness and desolation for a thousand years than
that of abyss, or bottomless pit? Here Satan will be
confined during this time, amid the ruins which
indirectly his own hands have wrought, unable to flee
from his habitation of woe, or to repair in the least
degree its hideous ruin.” Smith, DR, 742,743.

“The revelator foretells the banishment of Satan
and the condition of chaos and desolation to which the
earth is to be reduced, and he declares that this
condition will exist for a thousand years. After
presenting the scenes of the Lord’s second coming and
the destruction of the wicked, the prophecy continues:
[Rev. 20:1-3 quoted.]” Great Controversy, 657,658.
“How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning! How art thou cut down to the
ground, which didst weaken the nations. …Yet thou
shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.
They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and
consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth
to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; That made the
world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?
…But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable
branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust
through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the
pit; as a carcass trodden under feet. Thou shalt not be
joined with them in burial, because thou hast
destroyed thy land, and slain thy people.” Is. 14:12,1517,19-20.

“The prophets of the Old Testament clearly
describe the desolation of the earth during the
millennium. See Isa. 6:8-11; 13:9; 24:1-3; 34:1-15;
28:21,22; Jer. 4:20,27; 25:32-38; Zeph. 1:2,3; 3:6-8.”
White, James, Bible Adventism, 85.

And Shut Him Up.—
“Just as the scapegoat wandered the wilderness
until it died, just so Satan is confined to wander this
chaotic planet and to contemplate the results of his
rebellion until his judgment and destruction at the
end of the millennium (Rev. 20:10).”
Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 237.

And Cast Him Into the Bottomless Pit.—

Set a Seal.—
“The present seal may be compared with that
placed on the tomb of Jesus (Matt. 27:66). The sealing
symbolizes that Satan will be effectively restrained
for the period indicated.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
880.
After That He Must Be Loosed.—
“This represents the reverse of the binding of the
devil at the second coming of Christ. Satan is again to
be in the position to deceive men, to work his will with
them in opposition to God. It was the depopulation of
the earth that terminated his deceptive work. His
loosing will therefore be accomplished by a
repopulation of the earth, an event brought about by
the resurrection of the wicked at the close of the
thousand years.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 880.
“And it shall come to pass in that day, that the
LORD shall punish the host of the high ones that are on
high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. And
they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are
gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison,
and after many days shall they be visited.” Isaiah
24:21,22.

“When the work of atonement in the heavenly sanctuary
has been completed, then in the presence of God and
heavenly angels and the hosts of the redeemed the sins
of God’s people will be placed upon Satan; he will be
declared guilty of all the evil which he has caused them
to commit. And as the scapegoat was sent away into
a land not inhabited, so Satan will be banished to the
desolate earth, an uninhabited and dreary
wilderness.

For a Little Season.—
“Or, ‘a little time.’ How long this ‘little’ time will

559

GEMS FROM REVELATION
be, we are not informed. It will be time enough for
Satan to organize the resurrected wicked for an assault
upon the New Jerusalem.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
880.

His ‘Father’s house’ (John 14:2,3). And the apostle
Paul writes that we shall ‘meet the Lord in the air;
and so we shall always be with the Lord’ (1 Thess.
4:17). The important thing these texts say, is that the
redeemed ones will not stay on earth after the
Second Coming. Since they are portrayed with Christ
in Revelation 20 after the Second Coming described in
chapter 19, we conclude that they are in heaven for the
time of the one thousand years. Meanwhile, there is
no sinner left alive on earth, all the wicked have been
killed (Rev. 19:15,18,21).
“John sees thrones (20:4). The word ‘throne’ is
used 47 times in the book of Revelation, and always in
relation with God or Christ in heaven. The exceptions
are 2:13 (the throne of Satan is in Pergamum), 13:2 (the
dragon gives his throne to the beast), and 16:10 (‘the
fifth angel poured his bowl on the throne of the
beast’). Thus, the only thrones on earth, from chapter 1
to chapter 19, are the thrones of Satan, the dragon, and
the beast—who are God’s enemies. By way of contrast
the throne of God and of the Lamb is in heaven.
Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the thrones
of 20:4 are in heaven, too, since they are thrones of
people who will ‘[reign] with Christ a thousand
years’ (20:4,6).
“John sees people ‘who had not worshiped the
beast or its image’ (20:4). This statement is similar to
another one: ‘those who had conquered the beast and
its image’ (15:2). The later group is in heaven. The
word ‘conquer’ of 15:2 is also used in 3:21 in reference
to believers who will sit on the throne of Jesus: ‘He
who conquers, I will grant him to sit with me on my
throne.’ When Revelation 3:21; 15:2; and 20:4 are read
together, the conclusion is that the millennial thrones
will be in heaven.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 240.

REVELATION 20:4
And I saw thrones, and they sat upon
them, and judgment was given unto them:
and I saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for
the word of God, and which had not
worshipped the beast, neither his image,
neither had received his mark upon their
foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived
and reigned with Christ a thousand years.
And I Saw.—
“From the devil in his gloomy confinement, John
now directs our attention to the saints in victory and
glory, the saints reigning with Christ.” Smith, DR, 746.
“Revelation 20:1-3 describes events on earth at the
beginning and during the one thousand years, whereas
verses 4-6 describe what happens in heaven during
the same period. Thus, they see a shift from earth to
heaven in verse 4, and from heaven back to earth in
verse 7. This is nothing new; the shift in focus between
earth and heaven is a common feature in the apocalyptic
books of Daniel and Revelation.” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 240.
And I Saw Thrones, and They Sat Upon Them.—
“They shall be priests of God and of Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand years.” Rev. 20:6.

And Judgment Was Given Unto Them.—
“Our Lord makes His people sharers with him
in the judgment work. That they may be such, he
exalts them to participate with him in his kingly dignity.
Rev.3:21; 2:26, 27. This exaltation is given them in the
morning of the great day. Compare Ps. 49:14, 15;
110:3; 30:5; Isa.21:11, 12; Rom.13:11,12.
“They are to sit with Christ in the judgment,
but not to determine who shall be saved or who lost.
God the Father has already pronounced the decision
who shall have immortality, and the Son has executed
that decision by immortalizing his saints. And thus all
others are counted unworthy of eternal life, and must
receive the second death as their portion. But there are
degrees of punishment. Some shall receive greater
damnation than others. Luke 20:47; Rom.2:6, 8, 9;
Luke 12:47, 48.
“Bear it in mind, therefore, that the saints have not
in their hands the determination of the salvation or
damnation of anyone. The Father has decided this when
he made them immortal and left all the others as
unworthy. Also bear in mind that God keeps books of
record (Isa.65:6, 7; Jer.2:22; Dan.7:9, 10; Rev.20:12),
and that he weighs men’s actions, so that they are set

“The fourth text relative to this judgment by the
saints is very remarkable. It shows that the resurrection
by the just precedes the work of judgment by them. It
elevates them to thrones of judgment, where they live
and reign with Christ, during the period between their
own resurrection and that of ‘the rest of the dead.’…
“There is in this statement respecting thrones,
an evident allusion to Daniel 7:9, which speaks of
thrones being ‘cast down,’ or, more correctly rendered,
‘were placed,’ as many able critics inform us. These
thrones were placed for the judgment work, when
entered upon, as we have seen, in the second apartment
of the heavenly temple by God the Father. And when
the judgment is given to the immortal saints, and they
are able to enter the temple after the outpouring of the
plagues (Rev. 15:8), it appears that they sit upon the
thrones thus placed for them, and with the Saviour at
their head finish the work of the judgment as indicated
in the text examined.” Andrews, JEO, 123,124.
“The NT states that the saved will go to heaven
with Jesus when He returns for them. Jesus promised to
return for His people and to take them with Him to

560

REVELATION 20
down for their true worth (1Sam.2:3). If the reader will
do this, it will not seem strange to him to learn that the
immortal saints, with Christ at their head, should be
commissioned by the Father to determine the measure
of punishment which each wicked man shall receive.
“As we have already shown that the final perdition
of the wicked is determined by the Father before he
makes his saints immortal, if we now clearly prove that
the glorified saints are to sit with Christ and determine
the measure of guilt of each sinful man, it will be a most
convincing proof that there is to be a resurrection of the
unjust, that God may inflict the just penalty upon every
soul of man that doeth evil. Rom.2:5-9.
“When our Lord says to those at his right hand,
‘Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world,’
he takes his saints into the presence of his Father
(compare John 13:36; 14:1-3; 1 Thess.4:14-17;
Rev.19:1-9), to the Paradise of God, once here upon
earth (Gen.2:8, 9; 3:22-24), now in the third heaven (2
Cor. 12:2-4), within the heavenly Jerusalem itself
(compare Rev.2:7; 22:2, 14). Here they sit down with
him at his table and eat the marriage supper. Rev.19:1-9.
These things being accomplished, the work of judgment
is committed to the saints, a work so vast that we may
well conceive the long period which lies between the
two resurrections to be requisite for its accomplishment.
Rev.20:4-6. The sitting of the saints in judgment upon
the wicked must begin after they have heard the words
of Christ approving them in his Father’s name, and
before the sentence, ‘Depart ye cursed,’ is pronounced
by the Saviour upon those who shall be thus judged.
This judgment by the saints is thus presented in the
Scriptures:
1. “ ‘I beheld, and the same horn made war with
the saints, and prevailed against them; until the Ancient
of Days came, and judgment was given to the saints
of the Most High; and the time came that the saints
possessed the kingdom.’ Dan. 7:21, 22.
2. “ ‘Therefore judge nothing before the time, until
the Lord come, who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man
have praise of God.’ 1 Cor.4:5.
3. “ ‘Dare any of you having a matter against
another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the
saints? Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the
world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are
ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know ye
not that we shall judge angels? How much more
things that pertain to this life?’ 1 Cor.6:1-3.
4. “(Rev. 20:4-6 quoted.)
“According to the first of these texts, the saints of
the Most High are to have the judgment work
committed to them. But before this is placed in their
hands, they are themselves to be judged by God the
Father. And this very act of determining who are
worthy to be saved, really determines that all the others
are unworthy of eternal life. The judgment work of the
saints cannot, therefore, relate to the salvation or

damnation of those who are judged by them, but solely
to the determination of the measure of their guilt. The
second of these texts, in forbidding the work of
judgment ‘before the time,’ plainly implies that when
that time does come, then this work is to be done by
those who are at present forbidden to do it. And the
time is fixed when this prohibition expires, for it is thus
limited, ‘Until the Lord come.’ That they will not err
in the judgment which they will then perform is
guaranteed in the further statement that the Lord
shall bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and make manifest the counsels of the heart. And
this will no doubt be accomplished by placing in their
hands the books of record, which contain an accurate
statement of the deeds of those to be judged by them….
“The third text states, in the most explicit
manner, ‘that the saints shall judge the world.’ As it
occurs in the same epistle which forbids this judgment
‘before the time until the Lord come,’ it is manifest
that this is a work which the saints enter upon
immediately after they have been exalted to reign with
Christ. The nature of the judgment which the saints are
to decide is clearly determined by two facts: 1. It is
rendered by the saints after the Lord has brought to light
the hidden works of darkness, and made manifest the
counsels of the hearts. 2. It is said in this same passage,
and in the same manner, that the saints ‘shall judge
angels,’ meaning of course those angels that have
sinned whose cases are thus stated:
“ ‘For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but
cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains
of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.’ 2 Peter
2:4.
“ ‘And the angels which kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment
of the great day.’ Jude 6.
“These two facts are decisive as to the nature of
the judgment which the saints are to engage in when
exalted at Christ’s right hand. They are not to be judges
over men in a state of probation, something as the
ancient judges of Israel were raised up to rule over
God’s ancient people, but their judgment is to be
rendered in the case of wicked men, when the Lord
brings ‘to light the hidden things of darkness,’ and it
is to be exercised alike in the case of sinful men and
fallen angels. It is not a judgment to determine the guilt
or innocence of the parties to be judged; for the guilt of
the angels was virtually pronounced to be unpardonable
when they were cast out of heaven, and delivered to
chains of darkness, i.e. to utter despair, and to the
hopeless bondage of their own sins. And the last
condition of wicked men has, before their judgment by
the saints, already been determined by the resurrection
and translation of the just, leaving all others as
unworthy of eternal life. This judgment of the saints
is, therefore, simply designed to determine the
measure of the guilt of wicked men and fallen angels.
As their rejection from the kingdom of God is
determined by God the Father before they are thus

561

GEMS FROM REVELATION
judged by the saints, this judgment by them for the
determination of the measure of each man’s guilt, is a
most convincing proof that God designs, in rendering to
every man according to his deeds, to inflict tribulation
and anguish upon every soul of man that doeth evil.
Rom.2:5-9.
The fourth text relative to this judgment by the
saints is very remarkable. It shows that the resurrection
by the just precedes the work of judgment by them. It
elevates them to thrones of judgment, where they live
and reign with Christ, during the period between their
own resurrection and that of ‘the rest of the dead.’ It
assigns the space of time occupied in this vast work,
viz., a thousand years, a period none too long for this
examination of the books containing the deeds of all
wicked men and fallen angels, even though all the saints
engage in it, as we have learned that they do.” Andrews,
JEO, 117-124.

“Why the Millennium?
…The complete
vindication of God in the eyes of all His created
intelligent beings. That God is just in all His acts runs
as a major theme throughout the book of Revelation (cf.
19:2). Before the executive phase of the final judgment,
that decides once for all the eternal destiny of every
human being and fallen angels, one thousand years are
given to the saved—not only the martyrs, but all the
believers—in heaven to examine the ways of God and
His judgment on the sinful rebellion of man and
angels (cf. 1 Cor. 6:2,3).” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 242.
I Saw the Souls of Them.—
“From that general assembly John then selects
two classes as worthy of especial attention: the
martyrs who had been beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and those who had not worshiped the beast
and his image. The latter class, those who refuse the
mark of the beast and his image, are of course the ones
who hear and obey the third message of Revelation 14.
But these are not the ones who are beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, as some who claim that the last
generation of saints are all to be slain, would have us
believe. The word rendered ‘which,’ in the expression,
‘and which had not worshipped the beast,’ shows that
there is another class introduced. The word is the
compound relative, hostis, ‘whoever,’ not merely the
simple relative, hos, ‘who,’ and is defined by Liddell
and Scott, ‘Whosoever, whichsoever, any one who,
anything which.’ As one class, John saw the martyrs,
and as another, he saw those who had not worshiped the
beast and his image.
“It is true that hostis is sometimes used as a simple
relative, as in 2 Cor. 3:14; Eph. 1:23, but never in such
constructions as this, preceded by the conjunction ‘and.’
“Lest any one should say that if we render the
passage ‘and whosoever had not worshiped the beast,’
we thereby include millions of heathen and sinners who
have not worshiped the beast, and promise them a reign
of a thousand years with Christ, we would call attention
to the fact that the preceding chapter states that the
wicked had all been slain, and the seal of death had been
set upon them for a thousand years. John is viewing
only the righteous company who have part in the first
resurrection.” Smith, DR, 746.

“And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works
unto the end, to him will I give power over the
nations: And he shall rule them with a rod of iron;
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers:
even as I received of my Father.” Rev 2:26,27.
“Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing
aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God be in
their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; To
execute vengeance upon the heathen, and
punishments upon the people; To bind their kings
with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; To
execute upon them the judgment written: this honour
have all his saints. Praise ye the LORD.” Psalm 149:59.
“In this great heavenly tribunal those who have
been unjustly judged in this world will sit in
judgment on their former judges. Paul will be a
judge and among those who are judged by him will be
Felix, Festus, Agrippa, and Nero. Jesus will then be the
Judge and Annas, Caiaphas, Pilate, and Herod will
receive sentence ‘according to their works.’” Bunch,
TR, 275.
“Then I saw thrones, and Jesus and the redeemed
saints sat upon them; and the saints reigned as kings and
priests unto God. Christ, in union with His people,
judged the wicked dead, comparing their acts with the
statute book, the Word of God, and deciding every case
according to the deeds done in the body. Then they
meted out to the wicked the portion which they must
suffer, according to their works; and it was written
against their names in the book of death. Satan also
and his angels were judged by Jesus and the saints.
Satan’s punishment was to be far greater than that of
those whom he had deceived. His suffering would so
far exceed theirs as to bear no comparison with it. After
all those whom he had deceived had perished, Satan was
still to live and suffer on much longer.” Early Writings,
289,290.

Them That Were Beheaded.—
“The first group appears to be the early Christian
martyrs—the first of the saints to suffer for Christ. The
apostle James was probably beheaded. (Acts 12:1,2).
Paul was beheaded, as well as many others. This was a
form of capital punishment in that age. The claims of
Christ clashed with earthly powers.” Cooke, #32-UR,
10.
Paul’s Example.—
“Ransomed by the sacrifice of Christ, washed from
sin in His blood, and clothed in His righteousness, Paul

562

REVELATION 20
has the witness in himself that his soul is precious in the
sight of his Redeemer. His life is hid with Christ in
God, and he is persuaded that He who has conquered
death is able to keep that which is committed to His
trust. His mind grasps the Saviour’s promise, ‘I will
raise him up at the last day.’ John 6:40. His thoughts
and hopes are centered on the second coming of his
Lord. And as the sword of the executioner descends
and the shadows of death gather about the martyr,
his latest thought springs forward, as will his earliest
in the great awakening, to meet the Life-giver, who
shall welcome him to the joy of the blest.” Acts of the
Apostles, 512,513.
Witness of Jesus.—
“Or, ‘testimony of Jesus.’”
Commentary, 880.

millennium.” Smith, DR, 747.
The First Resurrection.—
“Those who in the judgment are ‘accounted
worthy’ will have a part in the resurrection of the just.
Jesus said: ‘They which shall be accounted worthy to
obtain that world, and the resurrection from the
dead, ...are equal unto the angels; and are the
children of God, being the children of the
resurrection.’ Luke 20:35, 36. And again He declares
that ‘they that have done good’ shall come forth ‘unto
the resurrection of life.’ John 5:29. The righteous
dead will not be raised until after the judgment at which
they are accounted worthy of ‘the resurrection of life.’
Hence they will not be present in person at the tribunal
when their records are examined and their cases
decided.” Great Controversy, 482.

7SDA Bible

“When Christ appears on the white cloud, ‘He
shall send His angels with a great sound of a
trumpet, and they shall gather together His elect
from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the
other.’ [Mt. 24:31.] Paul saw the same scene, and thus
describes it: ‘The Lord Himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel,
and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be
with the Lord.’ This is the first resurrection, when the
righteous dead will come forth at the sound of the voice
of Christ, and with the living righteous, meet the Lord in
the air.” Haskell, SSP, 329.

Which Had Not Worshiped Beast, Nor the Image.—
“They heeded the warning of the third angel
(ch. 14:9-12) and refused to render obeisance to the
power represented by the beast, even though threatened
with boycott and death.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
880.
“The second group comprises those who are the
last to suffer for Christ. By being loyal to Christ they
clash with earthly powers who are led by ‘the beast and
his image.’
“These two groups form the first and the last of
the persecuted saints of the Christian era, and as
such, they represent the total number of the saints.”
Cooke, #32-UR, 10.
They Reigned With Christ a Thousand Years.—
“They reign in Heaven, not on earth. There is no
verse in the Bible that says Christ will reign on the
earth for 1,000 years. When He reigns on earth it will
be at the close of the 1,000 years and then it will be
‘forever.’ Luke 1:32,33; Rev. 11:15; Dan. 7:14.”
Burnside, RWU, 221.

The Rest of the Dead.—
“And shall come forth; they that have done good,
unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.” John 5:29.
“The wicked rise 1,000 years later. The 1,000
years is bounded on either end by a resurrection.”
Burnside, RWU, 221.

REVELATION 20:5
But the rest of the dead lived not again
until the thousand years were finished. This
is the first resurrection.

Lived Not Again Until the Thousand Years Were
Finished.—
“At the termination of the 1, 000 years all the
wicked dead hear the voice of the Son of God and
come forth (John 5:28, 29); the unjust have their
resurrection (Acts 24:15); ‘The rest of the dead’ live
again (Rev.20:5). They come forth from the depths of
the ocean and from the caverns of earth; for the sea
gives up the dead, and hades gives them up also. And
they come forth alive, for death itself gives them up.
Rev.20:13.” Andrews, JEO, 131.

Two Resurrections.—
“Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,
And shall come forth; they that have done good,
unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.” John
5:28,29.

The Second Resurrection.—
“At the close of the thousand years, Christ
again returns to the earth. He is accompanied by the
host of the redeemed and attended by a retinue of
angels. As He descends in terrific majesty He bids

“No language could more plainly prove two
resurrections. The first is a resurrection of the
righteous at the beginning of the thousand years.
The second is that of the wicked at the end of the

563

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the wicked dead arise to receive their doom. They
come forth, a mighty host, numberless as the sands of
the sea. What a contrast to those who were raised at the
first resurrection! The righteous were clothed with
immortal youth and beauty. The wicked bear the
traces of disease and death.” Great Controversy,662.

Blessed and Holy is He that Hath Part in the First
Resurrection.—
“The Life-giver will call up His purchased
possession in the first resurrection, and until that
triumphant hour, when the last trump shall sound and
the vast army shall come forth to eternal victory, every
sleeping saint will be kept in safety and will be guarded
as a precious jewel, who is known to God by name. By
the power of the Saviour that dwelt in them while
living and because they were partakers of the divine
nature, they are brought forth from the dead.
“ ‘The hour is coming,’ Christ said, ‘in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth.’ That voice is to resound through all
the habitations of the dead; and every saint who sleeps
in Jesus will awake and leave his prison-house. Then
the virtue of character we received from Christ’s
righteousness will ally us to true greatness of the highest
order.
“The victory of the sleeping saints will be
glorious on the morning of the resurrection.... The
Life-giver will crown with immortality all who come
forth from the grave.
“There stands the risen host. The last thought was
of death and its pangs. The last thoughts they had were
of the grave and the tomb, but now they proclaim, ‘O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory?’ ... Here they stand and the finishing touch of
immortality is put upon them and they go up to meet
their Lord in the air....” Son & Daughters, 359.

“In fearful majesty he calls forth the wicked
dead. They are wakened from their long sleep. What
a dreadful waking! They behold the Son of God in his
stern majesty and resplendent glory. All, as soon as
they behold him, know that he is the crucified one who
died to save them, whom they had despised and
rejected. They are in number like the sand upon the
seashore. At the first resurrection all come forth in
immortal bloom, but at the second, the marks of the
curse are visible upon all. All come up as they went
down into their graves. Those who lived before the
flood, come forth with their giantlike stature, more than
twice as tall as men now living upon the earth, and well
proportioned. The generations after the flood were less
in stature. There was a continual decrease through
successive generations, down to the last that lived upon
the earth. The contrast between the first wicked men
who lived upon the earth, and those of the last
generation, was very great. The first were of lofty
height and well proportioned—the last came up as
they went down, a dwarfed, feeble, deformed race.
A mighty host of kings, warriors, statesmen and nobles,
down to the most degraded, came up together upon the
desolate earth.” Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 3, 83-85.

“Those who have belonged to the family of God
here below, who have striven to honor His name, have
gained an experience that will make them as kings and
priests unto God; and they will be accepted as faithful
servants. To them the words will be spoken, ‘Well
done, good and faithful servant:... enter thou into the
joy of thy lord.’” Review & Herald, 1/5/1897.

“If the dead are already enjoying the bliss of
heaven or writhing in the flames of hell, what need of
a future judgment? The teachings of God’s word on
these important points are neither obscure nor
contradictory; they may be understood by common
minds. But what candid mind can see either wisdom or
justice in the current theory? Will the righteous, after
the investigation of their cases at the judgment, receive
the commendation, ‘Well done, thou good and faithful
servant: ...enter thou into the joy of thy Lord,’ when
they have been dwelling in His presence, perhaps for
long ages? Are the wicked summoned from the place of
torment to receive sentence from the Judge of all the
earth: ‘Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire’? Matt. 25:21, 41. Oh, solemn mockery! shameful
impeachment of the wisdom and justice of God!” Great
Controversy, 549.

Saints Given Special Bodies at First Resurrection.—
“At the first resurrection the believer is raised with
a body that is vastly different from the body he now
possesses.
As the apostle declared of the first
resurrection: ‘So also is the resurrection of the dead.
It [the body] is sown [buried] in corruption; it is
raised in incorruption [it can no longer decay], it is
sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory [a glorious
body]: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power; it
is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body.
There is a natural body and there is a spiritual
body.’ 1 Cor. 15:42-44.
“The body of the first resurrection is immortal,
impervious to age and decay. ‘We shall be changed in
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump: for the trumpet shall sound [at the Second
Advent] and the dead shall be raised incorruptible…
for this corruptible [body] must put on incorruption
and this mortal [subject to death] must put on
immortality [power over death].’ 1 Cor. 15:51-53.
“The spiritual body is still a body of flesh and

REVELATION 20:6
Blessed and holy is he that hath part in
the first resurrection: on such the second
death hath no power, but they shall be
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign
with him a thousand years.

564

REVELATION 20
bones, but it is not subject to the power of the natural
elements. It is a body that is able to pass through outer
space to the kingdom of heaven and dwell in the
presence of God who ‘is as a consuming fire.’ (Heb.
12:29).” Cooke, #32-UR, 13,14.

priests unto God. John in the Revelation says: ‘I saw
thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was
given unto them.’ ‘They shall be priests of God and
of Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand
years.’ Revelation 20:4, 6. It is at this time that, as
foretold by Paul, ‘the saints shall judge the world.’ 1
Cor. 6:2. In union with Christ they judge the wicked,
comparing their acts with the statute book, the Bible,
and deciding every case according to the deeds done in
the body. Then the portion which the wicked must
suffer is meted out, according to their works; and it is
recorded against their names in the book of death.
“Satan also and evil angels are judged by Christ
and His people. Says Paul: ‘Know ye not that we shall
judge angels?’ Verse 3. And Jude declares that ‘the
angels which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, He hath reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto the judgment of the
great day.’ Jude 6.” Great Controversy, 660,661.

On Such the Second Death Hath No Power.—
“What is the second death? It is annihilation at the
hands of God. It is death that results from the ‘fire that
comes down from God out of heaven and devours’
the unsaved. (vs. 9). From the first death there is a
return. From the second death there is not return. It is
being blotted out of existence forever. ‘They shall be
as though they had never been.’ Obadiah 1:16.”
Cooke, #32-UR, 13
“ ‘The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God
is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.’
Romans 6:23. While life is the inheritance of the
righteous, death is the portion of the wicked. Moses
declared to Israel: ‘I have set before thee this day life
and good, and death and evil.’ Deut. 30:15. The
death referred to in these scriptures is not that
pronounced upon Adam, for all mankind suffer the
penalty of his transgression. It is ‘the second death’
that is placed in contrast with everlasting life.
“In consequence of Adam’s sin, death passed upon
the whole human race. All alike go down into the
grave. And through the provisions of the plan of
salvation, all are to be brought forth from their graves.
‘There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of
the just and unjust;’ ‘for as in Adam all die, even so
in Christ shall all be made alive.’ Acts 24:15; I Cor.
15:22. But a distinction is made between the two
classes that are brought forth. ‘All that are in the
graves shall hear His voice, and shall come forth;
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life; and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation.’ John 5:28, 29. They who
have been ‘accounted worthy’ of the resurrection of
life are ‘blessed and holy.’ ‘On such the second
death hath no power.’ Rev. 20:6.” Great Controversy,
544.

They Shall Reign With Him a Thousand Years.—
“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne.” Rev. 3:21
“Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, And hath made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father.” Rev. 1:6.
“Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If thou wilt walk
in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou
shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my
courts, and I will give thee places to walk among these
that stand by.” Zech. 3:7.

REVELATION 20:7,8
And when the thousand years are
expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison,
And shall go out to deceive the nations
which are in the four quarters of the earth,
Gog, and Magog, to gather them together to
battle: the number of whom is as the sand
of the sea.

“On such as have part in the first resurrection, the
second death will have no power. They can pass
unharmed through the elements which destroy the
wicked like chaff. They will be able to dwell with
devouring fire and everlasting burnings.
(Isa.
33:14,15.) They will be able to go forth and look upon
the carcasses of the men who have transgressed against
the Lord, as the quenchless fire and undying worm are
preying upon them. (Isa.66:24.) The difference
between the righteous and the wicked in this respect is
seen again in the fact that while God is to the latter a
consuming fire, He is to His people both a sun and a
shield.” Smith, DR, 747.

After the Thousand Years, Satan Shall Be Loosed Out
of His Prison.—
“Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou
shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy
bands, and many people with thee.” Ezekiel 38:9.
“The chief [event] that releases Satan to his
work of deception, is the resurrection of the wicked
pictured in verse 5. If the removal of the wicked
through death bound Satan so that he could not deceive
for a thousand years, their resurrection will unbind him
so that he can deceive again. …As they come back to

They Shall Be Priests of God and of Christ.—
“At this time the righteous reign as kings and

565

GEMS FROM REVELATION
life at the call of the Lifegiver in the resurrection of ‘the
unjust’ and ‘to shame and everlasting contempt,’
their thoughts resume the same current that ruled them
before they died. Millions of them died on the fields of
battle, thirsting for the blood of their fellowmen. They
will arise to life with the same fighting instinct. Satan
will find them a ready prey to his deceptions. They
will readily respond to his plan to capture the holy city
which will be the only obstacle to his ambition for
world dominion.” Bunch, TR, 277.

‘godly sorrow that leadeth to repentance.’ He is the
same bitter enemy of God and His people, and at the
very first opportunity he resumes his work of
deception.” Bunch, TR, 276.
“He [Satan] will marshal all the armies of the lost
under his banner and through them endeavor to execute
his plans. The wicked are Satan’s captives. In rejecting
Christ they have accepted the rule of the rebel leader.
They are ready to receive his suggestions and to do
his bidding. Yet, true to his early cunning, he does not
acknowledge himself to be Satan. He claims to be the
prince who is the rightful owner of the world and whose
inheritance has been unlawfully wrested from him. He
represents himself to his deluded subjects as a
redeemer, assuring them that his power has brought
them forth from their graves and that he is about to
rescue them from the most cruel tyranny. The
presence of Christ having been removed, Satan works
wonders to support his claims. He makes the weak
strong and inspires all with his own spirit and energy.
He proposes to lead them against the camp of the
saints and to take possession of the City of God.
With fiendish exultation he points to the unnumbered
millions who have been raised from the dead and
declares that as their leader he is well able to overthrow
the city and regain his throne and his kingdom.” Great
Controversy, 663.

“While deprived of his power and cut off from his
work of deception, the prince of evil was miserable and
dejected; but as the wicked dead are raised and he sees
the vast multitudes upon his side, his hopes revive,
and he determines not to yield the great
controversy.” Great Controversy, 663.
Christ & His People Descend From Heaven At This
Time.—
“Then at the close of the one thousand years,
Jesus, with the angels and all the saints, leaves the
Holy City, and while He is descending to the earth with
them, the wicked dead are raised, and then the very
men that ‘pierced Him,’ being raised, will see Him
afar off in all His glory, the angels and saints with Him,
and will wail because of Him. …It is at the close of the
one thousand years that Jesus stands upon the Mount of
Olives, and the mount parts asunder and becomes a
mighty plain. Those who flee at that time are the
wicked, who have just been raised.” Early Writings,
53.

Gog and Magog.—
‘The sea gave up the dead which were in it; and
death and the grave delivered up the dead which
were in them.’ Rev. 20:13.

“In the Gospels Jesus declared that in the great
resurrections, all the dead rise up ‘at the voice of the
Son of God.’ (John 5:28). This means that Christ
must return to the earth again at the end of the 1000
years when the great resurrection of the unsaved
takes place. This event is often called the Third
Advent. It is at this Third Advent that Christ returns
from heaven and brings all his people back with him to
the earth.
“The great temple of truth is built upon three great
advents of Christ: the first at Bethlehem, the second
when He comes in the near future, and the third at the
end of the 1000 years. Some Christians have become
confused in this area. Whole churches have been
divided over it. Some believe Christ returns at the
beginning of the millennium, others at the end. The
truth is that Christ returns at both the beginning
and at the end of the thousand years. The prophet
Zechariah alluded to the Third Advent, [Zech.
14:1,4-5 quoted].” Cooke, #32-UR, 15,16.

“Magog was one of the descendants of Japheth,
the son of Noah, who was the ancestor of the northern
nations.
Gog and Magog seem to be terms
representing ‘the nations’ of the world, especially as
used in this text. …Some believe that the name Gog
represents Satan, the prince of this world, and
Magog the land of Gog or this earth. In the
Rabbinical writings Gog and Magog are reckoned as the
enemies of the Messiah. ‘The terms “Gog and Magog”
comprehend all the faithless upon earth.’ (Charles).”
Bunch, TR, 277.
“[Gog and Magog] represent the hosts of the
unsaved of all ages who come forth in the second
resurrection.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 882.
“Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land
of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal,
and prophesy against them.
“…After many days thou shalt be visited: in the
latter years thou shalt come into the land that is brought
back from the sword, and is gathered out of many
people, against the mountains of Israel, which have been
always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations,
and they shall dwell safely all of them. Thou shalt
ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a

And Shall Go Out to Deceive the Nations.—
“Satan’s long and lonesome vacation in the empty
and vacant earth makes no change in his character.…
The long period of idle reflection on his past career has
brought no change in his attitude toward the divine
administration. The terrible results of sin produce no

566

REVELATION 20
arise to receive their doom. They come forth, a mighty
host, numberless as the sands of the sea. What a
contrast to those who were raised at the first
resurrection! The righteous were clothed with immortal
youth and beauty. The wicked bear the traces of disease
and death.
“Every eye in that vast multitude is turned to
behold the glory of the Son of God. With one voice the
wicked hosts exclaim: ‘Blessed is He that cometh in the
name of the Lord!’ It is not love to Jesus that inspires
this utterance. The force of truth urges the words from
unwilling lips. As the wicked went into their graves, so
they come forth with the same enmity to Christ and the
same spirit of rebellion. They are to have no new
probation in which to remedy the defects of their past
lives. Nothing would be gained by this. A lifetime of
transgression has not softened their hearts. A second
probation, were it given them, would be occupied as
was the first in evading the requirements of God and
exciting rebellion against Him.
“Christ descends upon the Mount of Olives,
whence, after His resurrection, He ascended, and where
angels repeated the promise of His return. Says the
prophet: ‘The Lord my God shall come, and all the
saints with Thee.’ ‘And His feet shall stand in that
day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before
Jerusalem on the east, and the Mount of Olives shall
cleave in the midst thereof,... and there shall be a very
great valley.’ ‘And the Lord shall be king over all the
earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and His name
one.’ Zechariah 14:5,4,9. As the New Jerusalem, in its
dazzling splendor, comes down out of heaven, it rests
upon the place purified and made ready to receive it,
and Christ, with His people and the angels, enters
the Holy City.” Great Controversy, 662,663.

cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and
many people with thee.” Eze. 38:2,8,9.
To Gather Them to the Battle.—
“In that vast throng are multitudes of the longlived race that existed before the Flood; men of lofty
stature and giant intellect, who, yielding to the control
of fallen angels, devoted all their skill and knowledge to
the exaltation of themselves; men whose wonderful
works of art led the world to idolize their genius, but
whose cruelty and evil inventions, defiling the earth and
defacing the image of God, caused Him to blot them
from the face of His creation. There are kings and
generals who conquered nations, valiant men who
never lost a battle, proud, ambitious warriors whose
approach made kingdoms tremble. In death these
experienced no change. As they come up from the
grave, they resume the current of their thoughts just
where it ceased. They are actuated by the same desire
to conquer that ruled them when they fell.
“Satan consults with his angels, and then with
these kings and conquerors and mighty men. They look
upon the strength and numbers on their side, and declare
that the army within the city is small in comparison with
theirs, and that it can be overcome. They lay their
plans to take possession of the riches and glory of the
New Jerusalem. All immediately begin to prepare for
battle. Skillful artisans construct implements of war.
Military leaders, famed for their success, marshal the
throngs of warlike men into companies and divisions.”
Great Controversy, 664.

REVELATION 20:9
And they went up on the breadth of the
earth, and compassed the camp of the saints
about, and the beloved city: and fire came
down from God out of heaven, and
devoured them.

“Jesus closes the gates of the city, and this vast
army surround it, and place themselves in battle array,
expecting a fierce conflict. Jesus and all the angelic
host and all the saints, with the glittering crowns upon
their heads, ascend to the top of the wall of the city.
Jesus speaks with majesty, saying, ‘Behold, ye
sinners, the reward of the just! And behold, My
redeemed, the reward of the wicked!’ The vast
multitude behold the glorious company on the walls of
the city. And as they witness the splendor of their
glittering crowns and see their faces radiant with glory,
reflecting the image of Jesus, and then behold the
unsurpassed glory and majesty of the King of kings and
Lord of lords, their courage fails. A sense of the
treasure and glory which they have lost rushes upon
them, and they realize that the wages of sin is death.
They see the holy, happy company whom they have
despised, clothed with glory, honor, immortality, and
eternal life, while they are outside the city with every
mean and abominable thing.”
Early Writings,
293,294.

The Camp of the Saints.—
“The New Jerusalem is called ‘the camp of the
saints’ because for 1000 years it has been the saints’
temporary dwelling place in heaven during the
antitypical Feast of Tabernacles. The permanent home
of the saints will be in the earth made new. In verse 9
the New Jerusalem has descended from heaven and rests
on the earth before it is renewed by fire.” Cooke, #11UR, 13.
“And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem,
coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a
bride adorned for her husband.” Rev. 21:2.
“At the close of the thousand years, Christ again
returns to the earth. He is accompanied by the host of
the redeemed and attended by a retinue of angels. As
He descends in terrific majesty He bids the wicked dead

And the Beloved City.—
“Or, ‘even the beloved city.’ The beloved city is

567

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the New Jerusalem (ch. 21:10). …The fact that the
beloved city is being surrounded shows clearly that it
has descended, although the actual descent is not
described until ch. 21:1,9,10. One of the significant
events following the close of the 1000 years is the
descent of Christ, the saints, and the Holy City. The
narrative is told with extreme brevity, but the sequence
of events is clear when the entire context is
examined.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 882.

appointed leader. With military precision the serried
ranks advance over the earth’s broken and uneven
surface to the City of God. By command of Jesus, the
gates of the New Jerusalem are closed, and the armies
of Satan surround the city and make ready for the
onset.” Great Controversy, 664.
The Coronation of Jesus Christ.—
“Now Christ again appears to the view of His
enemies. Far above the city, upon a foundation of
burnished gold, is a throne, high and lifted up. Upon
this throne sits the Son of God, and around Him are
the subjects of His kingdom. The power and majesty
of Christ no language can describe, no pen portray. The
glory of the Eternal Father is enshrouding His Son. The
brightness of His presence fills the City of God, and
flows out beyond the gates, flooding the whole earth
with its radiance.
“…In the presence of the assembled inhabitants of
earth and heaven the final coronation of the Son of
God takes place.” Great Controversy, 665,666.

They Went Up On the Breadth of the Earth, and
Compassed the Camp.—
“And thou shalt come from thy place out of the
north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of
them riding upon horses, a great company, and a mighty
army:
“And thou shalt come up against my people of
Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the
latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that
the heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in
thee, O Gog, before their eyes.” Ezekiel 38:15, 16.
“Now Satan prepares for a last mighty struggle for
the supremacy. While deprived of his power and cut off
from his work of deception, the prince of evil was
miserable and dejected; but as the wicked dead are
raised and he sees the vast multitudes upon his side,
his hopes revive, and he determines not to yield the
great controversy. He will marshal all the armies of the
lost under his banner and through them endeavor to
execute his plans. The wicked are Satan’s captives. In
rejecting Christ they have accepted the rule of the rebel
leader. They are ready to receive his suggestions and
to do his bidding. Yet, true to his early cunning, he
does not acknowledge himself to be Satan. He claims to
be the prince who is the rightful owner of the world and
whose inheritance has been unlawfully wrested from
him. He represents himself to his deluded subjects as a
redeemer, assuring them that his power has brought
them forth from their graves and that he is about to
rescue them from the most cruel tyranny. The presence
of Christ having been removed, Satan works wonders to
support his claims. He makes the weak strong and
inspires all with his own spirit and energy. He
proposes to lead them against the camp of the saints
and to take possession of the City of God. With
fiendish exultation he points to the unnumbered millions
who have been raised from the dead and declares that
as their leader he is well able to overthrow the city
and regain his throne and his kingdom.” Great
Controversy, 662,663.

“And there was given him dominion, and glory,
and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages,
should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed.” Daniel 7:14.

“At last the order to advance is given, and the
countless host moves on—an army such as was never
summoned by earthly conquerors, such as the
combined forces of all ages since war began on earth
could never equal. Satan, the mightiest of warriors,
leads the van, and his angels unite their forces for this
final struggle. Kings and warriors are in his train, and
the multitudes follow in vast companies, each under its

“And I will call for a sword against him
throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord GOD:
every man's sword shall be against his brother. And I
will plead against him with pestilence and with blood;
and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and
upon the many people that are with him, an
overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and
brimstone.” Ezekiel 38:22.

Sentence Against Evil is Pronounced.—
“And now, invested with supreme majesty and
power, the King of kings pronounces sentence upon
the rebels against His government and executes
justice upon those who have transgressed His law
and oppressed His people. Says the prophet of God: ‘I
saw a great white throne, and Him that sat on it, from
whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and
there was found no place for them. And I saw the dead,
small and great, stand before God; and the books were
opened: and another book was opened, which is the
book of life: and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the books, according to
their works.’
Revelation 20:11, 12.”
Great
Controversy, 666.
(For a more full description of the sentence against
evil see comments under Revelation 20:11,12.)
Fire Came Down From God.—
“Let burning coals fall upon them: Let them be
cast into the fire; into deep pits, that they rise not up
again.” Psalm 140:10.

568

REVELATION 20
are therein shall be burned up.’” Spiritual Gifts, Vol.
3, 87,88.

“Jesus and his loyal subjects ascend to the top of
the city. The wicked host behold the splendor of the
city, and the happy redeemed company upon its walls,
and are amazed at the scene. They behold Jesus in his
kingly majesty, his countenance surpassing the
brightness of the sun, surrounded by the angelic throng.
As the wicked look upon the redeemed, and see their
faces radiant with glory, and glittering crowns upon
their heads, their courage fails, and they wail in
anguish as they realize that they chose a life of
rebellion against God, and Jesus Christ their
Saviour, and for their disloyalty have lost eternal
life, and an imperishable treasure. Then many who
had professed to be Christ’s followers, but who had not
honored God in their lives, enumerate their good deeds
performed when they lived upon the earth, and entreat
to be admitted into the city. They plead that their names
were upon the church books, and they had prophesied in
the name of Christ, and in his name cast out devils, and
done many wonderful works. Christ answers, Your
cases have been decided. Your names are not found
enrolled in the book of life. You professed to believe in
my name, but you trampled upon the law of God. I
know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
Satan and his angels try to encourage the wicked
multitude to action; but fire descends from Heaven,
and unites with the fire in the earth, and aids in the
general conflagration.
“Those majestic trees which God had caused to
grow upon the earth, for the benefit of the inhabitants of
the old world, and which they had used to form into
idols, and to corrupt themselves with, God has reserved
in the earth, in the shape of coal and oil to use as
agencies in their final destruction. As he called forth
the waters in the earth at the time of the flood, as
weapons from his arsenal to accomplish the destruction
of the antediluvian race, so at the end of the one
thousand years he will call forth the fires in the earth
as his weapons which he has reserved for the final
destruction, not only of successive generations since
the flood, but the antediluvian race who perished by
the flood.
“When the flood of waters was at its height upon
the earth, it had the appearance of a boundless lake of
water. When God finally purifies the earth, it will
appear like a boundless lake of fire. As God
preserved the ark amid the commotions of the flood,
because it contained eight righteous persons, he will
preserve the New Jerusalem, containing the faithful of
all ages, from righteous Abel down to the last saint
which lived. Although the whole earth, with the
exception of that portion where the city rests, will be
wrapped in a sea of liquid fire, yet the city is preserved as was the ark, by a miracle of Almighty
power.
It stands unharmed amid the devouring
elements. ‘But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that

“Notwithstanding that Satan has been con-strained
to acknowledge God’s justice and to bow to the
supremacy of Christ, his character remains un-changed.
The spirit of rebellion, like a mighty torrent, again
bursts forth. Filled with frenzy, he determines not to
yield the great controversy. The time has come for a
last desperate struggle against the King of heaven. He
rushes into the midst of his subjects and endeavors to
inspire them with his own fury and arouse them to
instant battle. But of all the countless millions whom
he has allured into rebellion, there are none now to
acknowledge his supremacy. His power is at an end.
The wicked are filled with the same hatred of God that
inspires Satan; but they see that their case is hopeless,
that they cannot prevail against Jehovah. Their rage is
kindled against Satan and those who have been his
agents in deception, and with the fury of demons they
turn upon them.
“Saith the Lord: ‘Because thou hast set thine heart
as the heart of God; behold, therefore I will bring
strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they
shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy
wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness. They shall
bring thee down to the pit.’ ‘I will destroy thee, O
covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of
fire.... I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee
before kings, that they may behold thee.... I will bring
thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them
that behold thee.... Thou shalt be a terror, and never
shalt thou be any more.’ Ezekiel 28:6-8, 16-19.
“‘Every battle of the warrior is with confused
noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be
with burning and fuel of fire.’ ‘The indignation of
the Lord is upon all nations, and His fury upon all
their armies: He hath utterly destroyed them, He
hath delivered them to the slaughter.’ ‘Upon the
wicked He shall rain quick burning coals, fire and
brimstone and an horrible tempest: this shall be the
portion of their cup.’ Isaiah 9:5; 34:2; Psalm 11:6,
margin. Fire comes down from God out of heaven.
The earth is broken up. The weapons concealed in its
depths are drawn forth. Devouring flames burst from
every yawning chasm. The very rocks are on fire. The
day has come that shall burn as an oven. The elements
melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that
are therein are burned up. Malachi 4:1; 2 Peter 3:10.
The earth’s surface seems one molten mass—a vast,
seething lake of fire. It is the time of the judgment and
perdition of ungodly men—‘the day of the Lord’s
vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Zion.’ Isaiah 34:8.
“...While the earth was wrapped in the fire of
destruction, the righteous abode safely in the Holy City.
Upon those that had part in the first resurrection, the
second death has no power. While God is to the wicked
a consuming fire, He is to His people both a sun and a
shield. Rev. 20:6; Psalm 84:11.

569

GEMS FROM REVELATION
saw that God would not shut them up in hell to endure
endless misery, neither will He take them to heaven; for
to bring them into the company of the pure and holy
would make them exceedingly miserable. But He will
destroy them utterly and cause them to be as if they
had not been; then His justice will be satisfied. He
formed man out of the dust of the earth, and the
disobedient and unholy will be consumed by fire and
return to dust again. I saw that the benevolence and
compassion of God in this matter should lead all to
admire His character and to adore His holy name.
After the wicked are destroyed from off the earth, all the
heavenly host will say, ‘Amen!’” Early Writings, 221.

‘I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the
first heaven and the first earth were passed away.’
Revelation 21:1. The fire that consumes the wicked
purifies the earth. Every trace of the curse is swept
away. No eternally burning hell will keep before the
ransomed the fearful consequences of sin.
“One reminder alone remains: Our Redeemer will
ever bear the marks of His crucifixion.”
Great
Controversy, 671-674.
“Fire comes down from God out of heaven.
The works that are in the world are burned up, and the
wicked are destroyed. This is the fire of Gehenna,
which contains all the elements necessary to consume
utterly every mortal being that comes under its power.
(Mark 9:43-48.) Then will be fulfilled Isaiah 66:24:
‘They [the righteous] shall go forth, and look upon
the carcasses of the men that have transgressed
against Me: for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an
abhorring unto all flesh.’
“Then also will be fulfilled Isaiah 33:14: ‘Who
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who
among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?’
The answer in the following verses shows it to be the
righteous. This must be the time to which Isaiah’s
questions and answers apply.
“In all this conflagration the elements are not
destroyed. They are only melted and purged from the
taint of sin and every token of the curse. The almighty
fiat then goes forth, ‘Behold, I make all things new....
It is done.’ Rev. 21:5,6. At the first creation, ‘the
morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy.’ Job 38:7. At this new creation, that
song and shout will be augmented by the glad voices of
the redeemed. So will this earth, wrenched for a time
by sin from its intended orbit of joy and peace, be
brought back renewed into harmony with a loyal
universe, to be the everlasting home of the saved.”
Smith, DR, 752.

“The wicked receive their recompense in the earth.
Proverbs 11:31. They ‘shall be stubble: and the day
that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of
hosts.’ Malachi 4:1. Some are destroyed as in a
moment, while others suffer many days. All are
punished ‘according to their deeds.’ The sins of the
righteous having been transferred to Satan, he is made
to suffer not only for his own rebellion, but for all the
sins which he has caused God’s people to commit. His
punishment is to be far greater than that of those whom
he has deceived. After all have perished who fell by his
deceptions, he is still to live and suffer on. In the
cleansing flames the wicked are at last destroyed,
root and branch—Satan the root, his followers the
branches. The full penalty of the law has been visited;
the demands of justice have been met; and heaven and
earth, beholding, declare the righteousness of Jehovah.
Satan’s work of ruin is forever ended.” Great
Controversy, 673.
“Satan and all who have joined him in rebellion
will be cut off. Sin and sinners will perish, root and
branch, (Mal. 4:1)—Satan the root, and his followers
the branches. The word will be fulfilled to the prince of
evil, ‘Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart
of God; ...I will destroy thee, O covering cherub,
from the midst of the stones of fire.... Thou shalt be
a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.’ Then
‘the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently
consider his place, and it shall not be;’ ‘they shall be
as though they had not been.’ Ezek. 28:6-19; Ps.
37:10; Obadiah 16.
“This is not an act of arbitrary power on the part of
God. The rejectors of His mercy reap that which they
have sown. God is the fountain of life; and when one
chooses the service of sin, he separates from God, and
thus cuts himself off from life. He is ‘alienated from the
life of God.’ Christ says, ‘All they that hate Me love
death.’ Eph. 4:18; Prov. 8:36. God gives them
existence for a time that they may develop their
character and reveal their principles.
This
accomplished, they receive the results of their own
choice. By a life of rebellion, Satan and all who unite
with him place themselves so out of harmony with God
that His very presence is to them a consuming fire. The
glory of Him who is love will destroy them.

(See additional comments under Rev. 20:14,15.)
Devours Them.—
“The word here rendered ‘devoured’, Professor
Stuart admits is ‘intensive,’ and signifies ‘to eat up,
devour, so that it denotes utter excision.’ (Moses Stuart,
A Commentary on the Apocalypse, Vol. II, p. 369.) This
is the time of the perdition of ungodly men, the time
when ‘the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the
earth also,’ and when the works that are in the earth
shall be burned up. (2 Pet.3:7,10.) In the light of these
scriptures we can see how the wicked are to receive
their recompense in the earth. (Prov.11:31.) We can
see also that this recompense is not eternal life in
misery, but an ‘utter excision,’ entire and complete
destruction.” Smith, DR, 748,749.
“Those who do not choose to accept of the
salvation so dearly purchased, must be punished. But I

570

REVELATION 20
“At the beginning of the great controversy, the
angels did not understand this. Had Satan and his
host then been left to reap the full result of their sin,
they would have perished; but it would not have been
apparent to heavenly beings that this was the inevitable
result of sin. A doubt of God’s goodness would have
remained in their minds as evil seed, to produce its
deadly fruit of sin and woe.
“But not so when the great controversy shall be
ended. Then, the plan of redemption having been
completed, the character of God is revealed to all
created intelligences. The precepts of His law are seen
to be perfect and immutable. Then sin has made
manifest its nature, Satan his character. Then the
extermination of sin will vindicate God’s love and
establish His honor before a universe of beings who
delight to do His will, and in whose heart is His law.
“Well, then, might the angels rejoice as they
looked upon the Saviour’s cross; for though they did not
then understand all, they knew that the destruction of sin
and Satan was forever made certain, that the redemption
of man was assured, and that the universe was made
eternally secure. Christ Himself fully comprehended
the results of the sacrifice made upon Calvary. To
all these He looked forward when upon the cross He
cried out, ‘It is finished.’” Desire of Ages, 764.

30:33.
“Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels.” Mt. 25:41.
“Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, He [Jesus] took part of the same;
that through death He might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil.” Hebrews 2:14.
“Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude
of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffic;
therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of
thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to
ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that
behold thee. All they that know thee among the people
shall be astonished at thee: thou shalt be a terror, and
never shalt thou be any more. Eze 28:18,19.
Lake of Fire.—
“At the second coming of Christ, it is the flaming
fire in which the Lord Jesus is revealed, the spirit of his
mouth and brightness of his coming, by which the man
of sin is to be consumed, the fire in which great Babylon
shall be utterly burned. (Rev.18:8.) At the end of the
thousand years, it is the day that shall burn as an oven
(Mal.4:1); it is the fervent heat that shall melt the
elements and the earth, and burn up the works that are
therein; it is the fire of Tophet ‘prepared for the king’
(the devil and his angels, Matt.25:41), the pile whereof
is deep and large, and which ‘the breath of the Lord,
like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle.’ Isa.30:33.
In short, it is the fire that comes down from God out of
heaven.” Smith, DR, 751.

“And fear not them which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is
able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” Matt.
10:28.

REVELATION 20:10
And the devil that deceived them was
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
where the beast and the false prophet are,
and shall be tormented day and night for
ever and ever.

“When the flood of waters was at its height upon
the earth, it had the appearance of a boundless lake of
water. When God finally purifies the earth, it will
appear like a boundless lake of fire. …Although the
whole earth, with the exception of that portion where
the city rests, will be wrapped in a sea of liquid fire, yet
the city is preserved as was the ark, by a miracle of
Almighty power. It stands unharmed amid the
devouring elements.” (3Spiritual Gifts, 87). 7BC, 986.

The Devil …Was Cast Into the Lake of Fire.—
“And I will send a fire on Magog, and among
them that dwell carelessly in the isles: and they shall
know that I am the LORD. So will I make my holy
name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I will
not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the
heathen shall know that I am the LORD, the Holy One
in Israel.” Ezekiel 39:6,7.

“John was well acquainted with rivers in Palestine
that ran seasonally and were dry the rest of the year.
People who live in arid climates today are similarly
acquainted with rivers—and lakes—that fill up in the
rainy season but otherwise are perfectly dry. The lake
of fire seems to be similarly seasonal. It exists as a
‘lake’ only when freshly kindled. Jesus sets it aflame
at His second coming. Fire from heaven relights it
briefly at the end of the thousand years.” Maxwell, God
Cares, 505.

“Satan and his angels shall share this furnace of
fire with wicked men; for, indeed, it was originally
prepared for them.
Matt. 25:41; Isa. 30:33.”
Andrews, JEO, 133.
“For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it
is prepared; he hath made it deep and large: the pile
thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the LORD,
like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.” Isaiah

Where the Beast and False Prophet [Were Cast].—
“It will be noticed that in the expression, ‘where
the beast and the false prophet are,’ are is a supplied

571

GEMS FROM REVELATION
word. It would be more proper to supply the words
were cast, answering to what was spoken of the devil
just before. The sentence would then read, ‘The devil
was cast into the lake of fire, where the beast and
false prophet were cast.’ The beast and false prophet
were cast in there, and destroyed, at the
commencement of the thousand years. Rev.19:20.
The individuals of whom those organizations were then
composed, now come up in the second resurrection, and
a similar and final destruction is visited upon them,
under the names of Gog and Magog.” Smith, DR, 750.

TR, 209.
“But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of
the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall
consume; into smoke shall they consume away.
“For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not
be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and
it shall not be.” Psalm 37:20,10.

GREAT WHITE THRONE
JUDGMENT

Shall Be Tormented.—
“From verse 10, some have argued that the devil
alone was to be tormented day and night; but the
testimony of this verse is more extensive than that. The
verb ‘shall be tormented’ is in the plural, and agrees
with the beast and false prophet; whereas it would be in
the singular number if it referred to the devil alone.”
Smith, DR, 750.

REVELATION 20:11
And I saw a great white throne, and
him that sat on it, from whose face the earth
and the heaven fled away; and there was
found no place for them.

“The Greek verb is in the plural. The subject of
the verb is the devil, the beast, and the false prophet. It
should be noted that the beast and the false prophet
are not literal but symbolic creatures.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 882.

And I saw.—
“With verse 11, John introduces another scene to
take place in connection with the final doom of the
ungodly. It is the great white throne of judgment,
before which they are assembled to receive their awful
sentence of condemnation and death.” Smith, DR, 751.

Forever and Ever.—
“The meaning of ‘forever’ and kindred terms as
used in the Scriptures shows clearly that their meaning
must be determined by the duration of life. When
applied to God and the future life of the redeemed,
‘forever’ means eternity because with them life will
never end. But with the wicked forever can only mean
as long as they live, or until their lives are extinct in the
lake of fire after they have received the punishment due
them ‘according to their works.’
“In Ex. 21:6 a servant is said to serve his master
‘for ever’ which can only mean as long as he lives.
“Hannah declared that when the boy Samuel was
weaned she would ‘bring him, that he may appear
before the Lord, and there abide for ever.’ After she
had fulfilled this vow which she had made because
Samuel had been given in answer to prayer, she said:
‘Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord; as long
as he liveth he shall be lent to the Lord.’ See 1
Samuel 1:22,28.
“Jonah declared that he was in the belly of the fish
‘for ever’ and yet the period of his submarine journey
was only three days. See Jonah 2:6.
“In Jude 7 we are told that Sodom and Gomorrah
suffered ‘the vengeance of eternal fire’ and ‘are set
forth for an example’ of the final destruction of the
wicked. We are told that the fire that destroyed these
two wicked cities turned them ‘in ashes …making
them an example unto those that after should live
ungodly’ (2 Peter 2:6).
“Thus the Bible interprets the meaning of its own
language. How beautifully harmonious are its teachings
when Scripture is compared with Scripture.” Bunch,

White.—
“White is the symbol of perfect righteousness
and justice.” Bunch, TR, 278.
A Great White Throne, and Him That Sat On It.—
“Now in the fourth and ultimate phase of the final
judgment, every human who has ever lived gathers
around God’s great white throne. …Now is to be
fulfilled the prediction of Phil. 2:10,11 that ‘at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and
on earth and under the earth, and every tongue
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father.’” Maxwell, God Cares, 503.
“Far above the city, upon a foundation of
burnished gold, is a throne, high and lifted up. Upon
this throne sits the Son of God, and around Him are
the subjects of His kingdom. The power and majesty
of Christ no language can describe, no pen portray. The
glory of the Eternal Father is enshrouding His Son. The
brightness of His presence fills the City of God, and
flows out beyond the gates, flooding the whole earth
with its radiance.
“…In the presence of the assembled inhabitants of
earth and heaven the final coronation of the Son of God
takes place. And now, invested with supreme majesty
and power, the King of kings pronounces sentence
upon the rebels against His government and executes
justice upon those who have transgressed His law
and oppressed His people. Says the prophet of God:
[Rev. 20:11, 12 quoted].” Great Controversy, 665,666.

572

REVELATION 20
it be evil.” Ecc. 12:14.
From Whose Face Earth and Heaven Fled Away.—
“An indication of the absolute power of the One
sitting upon the throne and of the transitory existence
of this present world (Ps. 102:25,26; 104:29,30; Isa.
51:6; Mark 13:31; 2 Peter 3:10). The eternal order of
things is to be of an entirely new kind (Rev. 21:1-5).”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 883.

“As soon as the books of record are opened, and
the eye of Jesus looks upon the wicked, they are
conscious of every sin which they have ever
committed. They see just where their feet diverged
from the path of purity and holiness, just how far pride
and rebellion have carried them in the violation of the
law of God. The seductive temptations which they
encouraged by indulgence in sin, the blessings
perverted, the messengers of God despised, the
warnings rejected, the waves of mercy beaten back by
the stubborn, unrepentant heart—all appear as if written
in letters of fire.” Great Controversy, 666.

“Before this throne the heavens and the earth flee
away, so that no place is found for them. A moment’s
reflection on the changes which must then take place in
the earth will bring out the great force of this
language. The scene is that of Peter’s burning day,
which is the ‘perdition of ungodly men,’ and in which
even the ‘elements’ melt with fervent hear. (2 Peter
3:7-13.)” Smith, DR, 751.

“Sins that have not been repented of and forsaken
will not be pardoned and blotted out of the books of
record, but will stand to witness against the sinner in the
day of God. He may have committed his evil deeds in
the light of day or in the darkness of night; but they
were open and manifest before Him with whom we
have to do. Angels of God witnessed each sin and
registered it in the unerring records. Sin may be
concealed, denied, covered up from father, mother,
wife, children, and associates; no one but the guilty
actors may cherish the least suspicion of the wrong; but
it is laid bare before the intelligences of heaven. The
darkness of the darkest night, the secrecy of all
deceptive arts, is not sufficient to veil one thought from
the knowledge of the Eternal. God has an exact
record of every unjust account and every unfair
dealing. He is not deceived by appearances of piety.
He makes no mistakes in His estimation of character.
Men may be deceived by those who are corrupt in heart,
but God pierces all disguises and reads the inner life.”
Great Controversy, 486.

REVELATION 20:12,13
And I saw the dead, small and great,
stand before God; and the books were
opened: and another book was opened,
which is the book of life: and the dead were
judged out of those things which were
written in the books, according to their
works.
And the sea gave up the dead which
were in it; and death and hell delivered up
the dead which were in them: and they were
judged every man according to their works.
I Saw the Dead, Small & Great, Stand Before God.—
“Though all nations are to pass in judgment before
Him, yet He will examine the case of each individual
with as close and searching scrutiny as if there were
not another being on earth.” (Review & Herald,
1/19/1886). 7BC, 986.

“On the morning of October 23, 1879, about two
o’clock, the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I
beheld scenes in the coming judgment. Language fails
me in which to give an adequate description of the
things which passed before me and of the effect they
had upon my mind.
“The great day of the execution of God’s judgment
seemed to have come. Ten thousand times ten thousand
were assembled before a large throne, upon which was
seated a person of majestic appearance. Several books
were before Him, and upon the covers of each was
written in letters of gold, which seemed like a burning
flame of fire: ‘Ledger of Heaven.’ One of these books,
containing the names of those who claim to believe the
truth, was then opened. Immediately I lost sight of the
countless millions about the throne, and only those who
were professedly children of the light and of the truth
engaged my attention. As these persons were named,
one by one, and their good deeds mentioned, their
countenances would light up with a holy joy that was
reflected in every direction. But this did not seem to
rest upon my mind with the greatest force.
“Another book was opened, wherein were

“Many are incapacitated for labor both mentally
and physically by overeating and the gratification of the
lustful passions.
The animal propensities are
strengthened, while the moral and spiritual nature is
enfeebled. When we shall stand around the great white
throne, what a record will the lives of many then
present. Then will they see what they might have
done had they not debased their God-given powers.
Then will they realize what height of intellectual
greatness they might have attained had they given to
God all the physical and mental strength He had
entrusted to them. In their agony of remorse they will
long to have their lives to live over again.” 5
Testimonies, 135.
The Books Were Opened.—
“For God shall bring every work into judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether

573

GEMS FROM REVELATION
recorded the sins of those who profess the truth. Under
the general heading of selfishness came every other sin.
There were also headings over every column, and
underneath these, opposite each name, were recorded, in
their respective columns, the lesser sins.
“Under covetousness came falsehood, theft,
robbery, fraud, and avarice; under ambition came pride
and extravagance; jealousy stood at the head of malice,
envy, and hatred; and intemperance headed a long list of
fearful crimes, such as lasciviousness, adultery,
indulgence of animal passions, etc. As I beheld I was
filled with inexpressible anguish and exclaimed:
‘Who can be saved? who will stand justified before
God? whose robes are spotless? who are faultless in
the sight of a pure and holy God?’” 4 Testimonies,
384,385.

suffering and sorrow endured for Christ's sake, is
recorded.
Says the psalmist: ‘Thou tellest my
wanderings: put Thou my tears into Thy bottle: are
they not in Thy book?’ Psalm 56:8.”
Great
Controversy, 481.
The Book of Life.—
“Why, it may be asked, is the book of life brought
forth on this occasion, when all who have part in the
second resurrection, beyond which this scene is located,
are already forejudged to the second death? At least one
apparent reason is, that it may be seen that none of the
names of all the multitude who die the second death
are in the book of life, and why they are not there;
and if the names have even been there, why they were
not retained; that all the intelligences of the universe
may see that God acts with strict justice and
impartiality.” Smith, DR, 753.

“As the Holy One upon the throne slowly turned
the leaves of the ledger, and His eyes rested for a
moment upon individuals, His glance seemed to burn
into their very souls, and at the same moment every
word and action of their lives passed before their
minds as clearly as though traced before their vision
in letters of fire. Trembling seized them, and their
faces turned pale. Their first appearance when around
the throne was that of careless indifference. But how
changed their appearance now! The feeling of security
is gone, and in its place is a nameless terror. A dread
is upon every soul, lest he shall be found among
those who are wanting. Every eye is riveted upon the
face of the One upon the throne; and as His solemn,
searching eye sweeps over that company, there is a
quaking of heart; for they are self-condemned without
one word being uttered. In anguish of soul each
declares his own guilt and with terrible vividness sees
that by sinning he has thrown away the precious boon of
eternal life.” 4 Testimonies, 385.

Record of Sins.—
“There is a record also of the sins of men. ‘For
God shall bring every work into judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil.’ ‘Every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.’
Says the Saviour: ‘By thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be
condemned.’ Ecclesiastes 12:14; Matt. 12:36, 37. The
secret purposes and motives appear in the unerring
register; for God ‘will bring to light the hidden things
of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the hearts.’ I Corinthians 4:5. ‘Behold, it is written
before Me, ...your iniquities, and the iniquities of
your fathers together, saith the Lord.’ Isaiah 65:6,
7.” Great Controversy, 481.
Dead Were Judged.—
“Invested with supreme majesty and power, the
King of kings pronounces sentence upon the rebels
against His government and executes justice upon
those who have transgressed His law and oppressed
His people. Says the prophet of God: [Rev. 20:11, 12
quoted].”
“As soon as the books of record are opened, and
the eye of Jesus looks upon the wicked, they are
conscious of every sin which they have ever
committed. They see just where their feet diverged
from the path of purity and holiness, just how far pride
and rebellion have carried them in the violation of the
law of God. The seductive temptations which they
encouraged by indulgence in sin, the blessings
perverted, the messengers of God despised, the
warnings rejected, the waves of mercy beaten back by
the stubborn, unrepentant heart—all appear as if written
in letters of fire.
“Above the throne is revealed the cross; and like a
panoramic view appear the scenes of Adam’s
temptation and fall, and the successive steps in the
great plan of redemption. The Saviour's lowly birth;
His early life of simplicity and obedience; His baptism

“In the books of heaven are accurately recorded
the sneers and the trivial remarks of sinners who pay no
heed to the call of mercy made, as Christ is presented to
them by His ministering servants. As the artist takes on
the polished glass a true picture of the human face, so
the angels of God daily place upon the books of
heaven an exact representation of the character of
every human being.” (Signs, 2/11/1903). 7BC, 987.
The Book of Remembrance.—
“ ‘A book of remembrance’ is written before
God, in which are recorded the good deeds of ‘them
that feared the Lord, and that thought upon His
name.’ Malachi 3:16. Their words of faith, their acts
of love, are registered in heaven. Nehemiah refers to
this when he says: ‘Remember me, O my God,... and
wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the
house of my God.’ Nehemiah 13:14. In the book of
God’s remembrance every deed of righteousness is
immortalized. There every temptation resisted, every
evil overcome, every word of tender pity expressed, is
faithfully chronicled. And every act of sacrifice, every

574

REVELATION 20
in Jordan; the fast and temptation in the wilderness; His
public ministry, unfolding to men heaven’s most
precious blessings; the days crowded with deeds of love
and mercy, the nights of prayer and watching in the
solitude of the mountains; the plottings of envy, hate,
and malice which repaid His benefits; the awful,
mysterious agony in Gethsemane beneath the crushing
weight of the sins of the whole world; His betrayal into
the hands of the murderous mob; the fearful events of
that night of horror—the unresisting prisoner, forsaken
by His best-loved disciples, rudely hurried through the
streets of Jerusalem; the Son of God exultingly
displayed before Annas, arraigned in the high priest’s
palace, in the judgment hall of Pilate, before the
cowardly and cruel Herod, mocked, insulted, tortured,
and condemned to die—all are vividly portrayed.
“And now before the swaying multitude are
revealed the final scenes—the patient Sufferer treading
the path to Calvary; the Prince of heaven hanging upon
the cross; the haughty priests and the jeering rabble
deriding His expiring agony; the supernatural darkness;
the heaving earth, the rent rocks, the open graves,
marking the moment when the world’s Redeemer
yielded up His life.
“The awful spectacle appears just as it was.
Satan, his angels, and his subjects have no power to turn
from the picture of their own work. Each actor recalls
the part which he performed. Herod, who slew the
innocent children of Bethlehem that he might destroy
the King of Israel; the base Herodias, upon whose guilty
soul rests the blood of John the Baptist; the weak,
timeserving Pilate; the mocking soldiers; the priests and
rulers and the maddened throng who cried, ‘His blood
be on us, and on our children!’—all behold the
enormity of their guilt. They vainly seek to hide from
the divine majesty of His countenance, outshining the
glory of the sun, while the redeemed cast their crowns at
the Saviour’s feet, exclaiming: ‘He died for me!’
“Amid the ransomed throng are the apostles of
Christ, the heroic Paul, the ardent Peter, the loved and
loving John, and their truehearted brethren, and with
them the vast host of martyrs; while outside the walls,
with every vile and abominable thing, are those by
whom they were persecuted, imprisoned, and slain.
There is Nero, that monster of cruelty and vice,
beholding the joy and exaltation of those whom he once
tortured, and in whose extremest anguish he found
satanic delight. His mother is there to witness the result
of her own work; to see how the evil stamp of character
transmitted to her son, the passions encouraged and
developed by her influence and example, have borne
fruit in crimes that caused the world to shudder.
“There are papist priests and prelates, who
claimed to be Christ’s ambassadors, yet employed
the rack, the dungeon, and the stake to control the
consciences of His people. There are the proud
pontiffs who exalted themselves above God and
presumed to change the law of the Most High. Those
pretended fathers of the church have an account to
render to God from which they would fain be excused.

Too late they are made to see that the Omniscient One is
jealous of His law and that He will in no wise clear the
guilty. They learn now that Christ identifies His
interest with that of His suffering people; and they
feel the force of His own words: ‘Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these My brethren, ye
have done it unto Me.’ Matthew 25:40.
“The whole wicked world stand arraigned at the
bar of God on the charge of high treason against the
government of heaven. They have none to plead their
cause; they are without excuse; and the sentence of
eternal death is pronounced against them.
“It is now evident to all that the wages of sin is not
noble independence and eternal life, but slavery, ruin,
and death. The wicked see what they have forfeited by
their life of rebellion. The far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory was despised when offered
them; but how desirable it now appears. ‘All this,’
cries the lost soul, ‘I might have had; but I chose to
put these things far from me. Oh, strange infatuation!
I have exchanged peace, happiness, and honor for
wretchedness, infamy, and despair.’ All see that their
exclusion from heaven is just. By their lives they have
declared: ‘We will not have this Man [Jesus] to reign
over us.’
“As if entranced, the wicked have looked upon the
coronation of the Son of God. They see in His hands
the tables of the divine law, the statutes which they have
despised and transgressed. They witness the outburst of
wonder, rapture, and adoration from the saved; and as
the wave of melody sweeps over the multitudes without
the city, all with one voice exclaim, ‘Great and
marvelous are Thy works, Lord God Almighty; just
and true are Thy ways, Thou King of saints’
(Revelation 15:3); and, falling prostrate, they worship
the Prince of life.
“Satan seems paralyzed as he beholds the glory
and majesty of Christ. He who was once a covering
cherub remembers whence he has fallen. A shining
seraph, ‘son of the morning;’ how changed, how
degraded! From the council where once he was
honored, he is forever excluded. He sees another now
standing near to the Father, veiling His glory. He has
seen the crown placed upon the head of Christ by an
angel of lofty stature and majestic presence, and he
knows that the exalted position of this angel might
have been his.
“Memory recalls the home of his innocence and
purity, the peace and content that were his until he
indulged in murmuring against God, and envy of Christ.
His accusations, his rebellion, his deceptions to gain the
sympathy and support of the angels, his stubborn
persistence in making no effort for self-recovery when
God would have granted him forgiveness—all come
vividly before him. He reviews his work among men
and its results—the enmity of man toward his fellow
man, the terrible destruction of life, the rise and fall of
kingdoms, the overturning of thrones, the long
succession of tumults, conflicts, and revolutions. He
recalls his constant efforts to oppose the work of Christ

575

GEMS FROM REVELATION
and to sink man lower and lower. He sees that his
hellish plots have been powerless to destroy those who
have put their trust in Jesus. As Satan looks upon his
kingdom, the fruit of his toil, he sees only failure and
ruin. He has led the multitudes to believe that the City
of God would be an easy prey; but he knows that this is
false. Again and again, in the progress of the great
controversy, he has been defeated and compelled to
yield. He knows too well the power and majesty of the
Eternal.
“The aim of the great rebel has ever been to justify
himself and to prove the divine government responsible
for the rebellion. To this end he has bent all the power
of his giant intellect. He has worked deliberately and
systematically, and with marvelous success, leading vast
multitudes to accept his version of the great controversy
which has been so long in progress. For thousands of
years this chief of conspiracy has palmed off
falsehood for truth. But the time has now come when
the rebellion is to be finally defeated and the history and
character of Satan disclosed. In his last great effort to
dethrone Christ, destroy His people, and take possession
of the City of God, the archdeceiver has been fully
unmasked. Those who have united with him see the
total failure of his cause. Christ’s followers and the
loyal angels behold the full extent of his machinations
against the government of God. He is the object of
universal abhorrence.
“Satan sees that his voluntary rebellion has
unfitted him for heaven. He has trained his powers to
war against God; the purity, peace, and harmony of
heaven would be to him supreme torture.
His
accusations against the mercy and justice of God are
now silenced. The reproach which he has endeavored to
cast upon Jehovah rests wholly upon himself. And now
Satan bows down and confesses the justice of his
sentence.
“‘Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify
Thy name? for Thou only art holy: for all nations shall
come and worship before Thee; for Thy judgments are
made manifest.’ Rev. 15:4. Every question of truth
and error in the longstanding controversy has now
been made plain. The results of rebellion, the fruits of
setting aside the divine statutes, have been laid open to
the view of all created intelligences. The working out
of Satan’s rule in contrast with the government of God
has been presented to the whole universe. Satan’s own
works have condemned him. God's wisdom, His
justice, and His goodness stand fully vindicated. It is
seen that all His dealings in the great controversy have
been conducted with respect to the eternal good of His
people and the good of all the worlds that He has
created. ‘All Thy works shall praise Thee, O Lord;
and Thy saints shall bless Thee.’ Psalm 145:10. The
history of sin will stand to all eternity as a witness that
with the existence of God's law is bound up the
happiness of all the beings He has created. With all the
facts of the great controversy in view, the whole
universe, both loyal and rebellious, with one accord
declare: ‘Just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of

saints.’” Great Controversy, 665-671
“When the judgment shall sit, and everyone shall
be judged by the things written in the books, the
authority of God’s law will be looked upon in a light
altogether different from that in which it is now
regarded by the Christian world. Satan has blinded
their eyes and confused their understanding, as he
blinded and confused Adam and Eve, and led them into
transgression. The law of Jehovah is great, even as its
Author is great. In the judgment it will be recognized
as holy, just, and good in all its requirements. Those
who transgress this law will find that they have a serious
account to settle with God; for His claims are decisive.”
(Review & Herald, 5/7/1901). 7BC, 986.
Every Man According to Their Works.—
“[Rev. 20:12 quoted.] Then men will have a clear,
sharp remembrance of all their transactions in this life.
Not a word or a deed will escape their memory. Those
will be trying times. And while we are not to mourn
over the time of trouble to come, let us, as Christ’s
followers, search our hearts as with a lighted candle
to see what manner of spirit we are of. For our
present and eternal good, let us criticize our actions,
to see how they stand in the light of the law of God.
For this law is our standard. Let every soul search his
own heart.” (Letter 22, 1901). 7BC, 986.
“The wicked are to be punished according to their
works. The Scriptures declare that they shall be
rewarded according to their deeds. That the degree of
suffering which each one is to endure is taken into the
account as a part of the punishment for his sins, is
evident: ‘That servant, which knew his lord’s will,
and prepared not himself, neither did according to
his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he
that knew not, and did not commit things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto
whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required.’ Luke 12:47,48.” Smith, DR, 752,753.
“Because there are degrees of guilt, there must
of necessity be degrees of punishment.
The
seriousness of a crime can always be judged by the
punishment administered. A petty crime is punished
with a light sentence and a major crime with a heavy
sentence. The death sentence for sin indicates the
awful nature of transgression against the divine
law.” Bunch, TR, 279,280.
“There is a very real sense in which all mankind is
judged on the basis of their ‘deeds.’ And there is no
tension between this and the concept of being saved by
faith. Faith has no other way of expressing itself
except by ‘deeds.’” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR,
288.
“But after thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath

576

REVELATION 20
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; Who
will render to every man according to his deeds:
“To them who by patient continuance in well
doing seek for glory and honour and immortality,
eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, Tribulation and anguish,
upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile; But glory, honour, and
peace, to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile:
“For there is no respect of persons with God.”
Romans 2:5-11.

an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do
wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh
shall burn them up, saith the LORD of hosts, that it shall
leave them neither root nor branch.
“… And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they
shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day
that I shall do this, saith the LORD of hosts.” Malachi
4:1,3.

Sea, Death, and Hell.—
“These words set forth the universality of the
second resurrection implied in v. 12. No man can
avoid appearing in person before God on His throne.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 883.

“For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be:
yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it
shall not be. ...But the wicked shall perish, and the
enemies of the LORD shall be as the fat of lambs: they
shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away.”
Psalm 37:10,20.

“And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha
into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making
them an ensample unto those that after should live
ungodly.” 2 Peter 2:6.

Dead Given Up.—
“Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,
…they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation.” John 5:28,29.

This Is The Second Death.—
“The rewards of the righteous and the wicked will
be just the opposite: one life, and the other death, and
both will be eternal. The punishment of the wicked
will be just as eternal and everlasting as the rewards of
the righteous. But it will not be eternal conscious
torment. Union with God is life, and separation from
God is death. See 1 Jn. 5:11,12. This text would be
untrue if the wicked also have eternal life, even
though it were to be spent in torment.
“The wicked are to be ‘devoured’ or ‘consumed.’
They are to suffer ‘death’ which means ‘cessation of
life, total extinction.’ It cannot by any reasoning
whatsoever mean endless life in the fires of hell. The
wicked will be utterly annihilated. See. Ps. 37:9,10,20;
Obadiah 15,16; Mal. 4:1,2; 2 Thess. 1:7-9. We are
definitely told that Satan and all the wicked will be
brought to ‘ashes on the earth’ and will be trodden
under the feet of the righteous as they roam the new
earth. See Eze. 28:18,19; Mal. 4:3. There is to be a
‘perpetual end’ of sin and sinners so that ‘affliction
shall not rise up the second time.’ See Ps. 9:6; Nah.
1:9,10; Rev. 5:13. The songs of praise to God will be
universal and unbroken by groans and screams of
torment from an ever-burning hell. The fearful lesson
will have been forever learned and sin will never enter
the universe again. With the nail-prints in the hands of
Christ and the song of the Lamb as constant reminders
of the cost of redemption, the experiment of sin will
never be repeated. God’s original and eternal purpose
will be carried out ‘as if man had never fallen.’” Bunch,
TR, 280,281.

REVELATION 20:14,15
And death and hell were cast into the
lake of fire. This is the second death.
And whosoever was not found written
in the book of life was cast into the lake of
fire.
Hell.—
“ ‘Hell’ or ‘Hades’ as used in our text means ‘the
grave,’ or ‘the place of the dead.’” Bunch, TR, 279.
Death and Hell Were Cast Into the Lake of Fire.—
“The apostle Paul referred to the same event when
he declared that ‘the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death,’ at which time ‘shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up
in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory?’ 1Cor. 15:54,55.” Bunch, TR,
279.
“How is this fulfilled? The graves exist in the
earth and when the purifying fires of God melt and
dissolve the crust of the earth, all the graveyards, the
realm of death, will be destroyed forever.” Cooke,
#32-UR, 28.

“Satan originated and led out in this nefarious
work. A portion of heaven’s angels joined him in his
false position and murderous work; and for him and
them the everlasting fire was prepared. Matt.25:41.
Men become involved therein only because they join
him in his rebellion. But here the controversy closes.

Cast Into the Lake of Fire.—
(See comments under Revelation 20:9,10 for a
more full description of the lake of fire.)
“For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as

577

GEMS FROM REVELATION
The fire is to them everlasting because it allows of no
escape. The second death is their punishment, and it
is ‘everlasting punishment’ (Mt.25:46) be-cause they
never find release from its dread embrace. ‘The wages
of sin is death.’” Smith, DR, 753.

consumed the wicked, burning up the rubbish and
purifying the earth. Again I looked and saw the earth
purified. There was not a single sign of the curse.”
Early Writings, 295.
“What do ye imagine against the Lord? He will
make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the
second time.” Nahum 1:9.

“ ‘The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God
is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.’
Romans 6:23. While life is the inheritance of the
righteous, death is the portion of the wicked. Moses
declared to Israel: ‘I have set before thee this day life
and good, and death and evil.’ Deut. 30:15. The
death referred to in these scriptures is not that
pronounced upon Adam, for all mankind suffer the
penalty of his transgression. It is ‘the second death’
that is placed in contrast with everlasting life.
“…Those who have not, through repentance and
faith, secured pardon, must receive the penalty of
transgression—‘the wages of sin.’
They suffer
punishment varying in duration and intensity,
‘according to their works,’ but finally ending in the
second death.
Since it is impossible for God,
consistently with His justice and mercy, to save the
sinner in his sins, He deprives him of the existence
which his transgressions have forfeited and of which he
has proved himself unworthy. Says an inspired writer:
‘Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be: yea,
thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall
not be.’ And another declares: ‘They shall be as
though they had not been.’ Psalm 37:10; Obadiah 16.
Covered with infamy, they sink into hopeless, eternal
oblivion.” Great Controversy, 544,545.

Whosoever Not Found Written in Book of Life.—
“Reader, is your name written in the book of life?
Are you striving to avert in your own case the fearful
doom that awaits the ungodly? Rest not till you have
reason to believe that your name is registered in the
list of those who are to share at last in the blessings of
eternal life.” Smith, DR, 753.
“Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits
are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your
names are written in heaven.” Luke 10:20.
COMPARISON OF
REVELATION 12 AND 20
REVELATION 12
REVELATION 20
Satan is thrown from
Satan is bound and
heaven to earth.
thrown into the abyss
Satan is “the deceiver of
Satan can “deceive the
the whole world”
nations no more.”
Christians portrayed as
Time of resurrection for
martyrs put to death.
Christians.
A time of curse (12:12)
A time of blessing (20:6)
“It is evident thaerefore, that chapters 12 and 20 do not
describe the same period of time, and 20:1 does not go
back to the first century AD, as 12:1 does. Rather, 20:110 is to be located immediately subsequent to the
Christian era.” LaRondelle, LFTLD, 131.

“Said the angel, ‘Satan is the root, his children are
the branches. They are now consumed root and branch.
They have died an everlasting death. They are never to
have a resurrection, and God will have a clean
universe.’ I then looked and saw the fire which had

578

REVELATION 20

579

GEMS FROM REVELATION

REVELATION 21
25 And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there
shall be no night there.
26 And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations
into it.
27 And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie:
but they which are written in the Lamb’s book of life.

REVELATION 21: 1-27
1 And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven
and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.
2 And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down
from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband.
3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and
be their God.
4 And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.
5 And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all
things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true
and faithful.
6 And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the
fountain of the water of life freely.
7 He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his
God, and he shall be my son.
8 But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and
all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire
and brimstone: which is the second death.
9 And there came unto me one of the seven angels which had
the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me,
saying, Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife.
10 And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high
mountain, and shewed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from God,
11 Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone
most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal;
12 And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at
the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are the
names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel:
13 On the east three gates; on the north three gates; on the
south three gates; and on the west three gates.
14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them
the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
15 And he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure
the city, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.
16 And the city lieth foursquare, and the length is as large as
the breadth: and he measured the city with the reed, twelve
thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth and the height of
it are equal.
17 And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and
four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is, of the
angel.
18 And the building of the wall of it was of jasper: and the city
was pure gold, like unto clear glass.
19 And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished
with all manner of precious stones. The first foundation was
jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth,
an emerald;
20 The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh,
chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a
chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.
21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls: every several gate
was of one pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, as it
were transparent glass.
22 And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty
and the Lamb are the temple of it.
23 And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to
shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the
light thereof.
24 And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the
light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and
honour into it.

INTRODUCTION.—
“The Bible begins and ends with a vision of
Paradise. The first two chapters picture the paradise
that was lost through the disobedience of the first Adam,
and the last two chapters describe the paradise restored
through the obedience of the second Adam.” Bunch,
TR, 282.
“The description of the holy city seems to be set at
this point of the narrative, to contrast deliberately with
two of the basic themes of the book: (1) Babylon, and
(2) the persecuted people of God.” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 244.

REVELATION 21:1
And I saw a new heaven and a new
earth: for the first heaven and the first
earth were passed away; and there was no
more sea.
New Heaven and a New Earth.—
“For, behold, I create new heavens and a new
earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor
come into mind.” Isaiah 65:17.
“In the earth made new, the redeemed will engage
in the occupations and pleasures that brought happiness
to Adam and Eve in the beginning. The Eden life will
be lived, the life in garden and field. ‘They shall build
houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant
vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not
build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and
another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of
My people, and Mine elect shall long enjoy the work
of their hands.’ Isaiah 65:21, 22.” Prophets & Kings,
730-731.
“A fear of making the future inheritance seem too
material has led many to spiritualize away the very
truths which lead us to look upon it as our home. Christ
assured His disciples that He went to prepare mansions
for them in the Father’s house. Those who accept the
teachings of God’s word will not be wholly ignorant
concerning the heavenly abode. And yet, ‘eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the

580

REVELATION 21
heart of man, the things which God hath prepared
for them that love Him.’ 1 Cor. 2:9. Human language
is inadequate to describe the reward of the righteous. It
will be known only to those who behold it. No finite
mind can comprehend the glory of the Paradise of God.
“In the Bible the inheritance of the saved is called
‘a country.’ Heb. 11:14-16. There the heavenly
Shepherd leads His flock to fountains of living waters.
The tree of life yields its fruit every month, and the
leaves of the tree are for the service of the nations.
There are ever-flowing streams, clear as crystal, and
beside them waving trees cast their shadows upon the
paths prepared for the ransomed of the Lord. There the
wide-spreading plains swell into hills of beauty, and the
mountains of God rear their lofty summits. On those
peaceful plains, beside those living streams, God’s
people, so long pilgrims and wanderers, shall find a
home.
“‘My people shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet
resting places.’ ‘Violence shall no more be heard in
thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders;
but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates
Praise.’ Isaiah 32:18; 60:18.
“…There, ‘the wilderness and the solitary place
shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice,
and blossom as the rose.’ ‘Instead of the thorn shall
come up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall
come up the myrtle tree.’ ‘The wolf also shall dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with
the kid; . . . and a little child shall lead them.’ ‘They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain,’
saith the Lord. Isaiah 35:1; 55:13; 11:6, 9.” Great
Controversy, 674,676.

Adam and his sons to worship God. Here they renewed
their vows of obedience to that law the transgression of
which had banished them from Eden. When the tide of
iniquity overspread the world, and the wickedness of
men determined their destruction by a flood of waters,
the hand that had planted Eden withdrew it from the
earth. But in the final restitution, when there shall
be ‘a new heaven and a new earth’ (Revelation 21:1),
it is to be restored more gloriously adorned than at
the beginning.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 62.

Eden Restored.—
“As the earth came forth from the hand of its
Maker, it was exceedingly beautiful. Its surface was
diversified with mountains, hills, and plains,
interspersed with noble rivers and lovely lakes; but
the hills and mountains were not abrupt and rugged,
abounding in terrific steeps and frightful chasms, as
they now do; the sharp, ragged edges of earth’s rocky
framework were buried beneath the fruitful soil, which
everywhere produced a luxuriant growth of verdure.
There were no loathsome swamps or barren deserts.
Graceful shrubs and delicate flowers greeted the eye at
every turn. The heights were crowned with trees
more majestic than any that now exist. The air,
untainted by foul miasma, was clear and healthful. The
entire landscape outvied in beauty the decorated
grounds of the proudest palace.”
Patriarchs &
Prophets, 44.

“Then the wicked saw what they had lost; and fire
was breathed from God upon them and consumed them.
This was the execution of the judgment. The wicked
then received according as the saints, in unison with
Jesus, had meted out to them during the one thousand
years. The same fire from God that consumed the
wicked purified the whole earth. The broken,
ragged mountains melted with fervent heat, the
atmosphere also, and all the stubble was consumed.
Then our inheritance opened before us, glorious and
beautiful, and we inherited the whole earth made new.
We all shouted with a loud voice, ‘Glory; Alleluia!’”
Early Writings, 54.

“Transported with joy, he [Adam] beholds the
trees that were once his delight—the very trees whose
fruit he himself had gathered in the days of his
innocence and joy. He sees the vines that his own
hands have trained, the very flowers that he once loved
to care for. His mind grasps the reality of the scene; he
comprehends that this is indeed Eden restored, more
lovely now than when he was banished from it. The
Saviour leads him to the tree of life and plucks the
glorious fruit and bids him eat.” Great Controversy,
647,648.
First Heaven and First Earth Were Passed Away.—
“By the first heaven and first earth, John
unquestionably means the present heaven and earth,
‘the heavens and the earth which are now.’ 2Peter
3:7.” Smith, DR, 755.
“That which was perfect as it came from the hand
of the Creator, which He pronounced as ‘very good’
(Gen. 1:31), had become terribly marred by sin and
could not be allowed to continue throughout eternity.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 889.

“(Rev. 21:1 quoted.) The fire that consumes the
wicked purifies the earth. Every trace of the curse is
swept away. No eternally burning hell will keep
before the ransomed the fearful consequences of sin.
One reminder alone remains: Our Redeemer will
ever bear the marks of His crucifixion. Upon His
wounded head, upon His side, His hands and feet, are
the only traces of the cruel work that sin has wrought.”
Great Controversy, 674.

“The Garden of Eden remained upon the earth
long after man had become an outcast from its pleasant
paths. The fallen race were long permitted to gaze upon
the home of innocence, their entrance barred only by the
watching angels. At the cherubim-guarded gate of
Paradise the divine glory was revealed. Hither came

581

GEMS FROM REVELATION
There Was No More Sea.—
“Because John says, ‘And there was no more
sea,’ the question is sometimes asked, ‘Is there, then, to
be no sea in the new earth?’ It does not certainly follow
from this text that there will be none; for John is
speaking only of the present heaven and earth and sea.
It might be translated thus: For the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away, and the sea [ouk estin eti,
is no more] also passed away;’ that is, the old sea no
longer appeared, any more than the old heaven and
old earth. Yet there may be a new sea as there is a new
earth.
“…The river of life, of which we read in the
following chapter, proceeding from the throne of God,
and flowing through the broad street of the city. It
must find some place into which to discharge its
waters, and what could that be but the new-earth
sea? That there will be a sea or seas, in the new earth,
may be inferred from the prophecy which speaks of
Christ’s future reign as follows: ‘His dominion shall
be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to
the ends of the earth.’ Zech.9:10. But that three
quarters of the globe will then, as now, be abandoned to
a waste of waters, cannot be expected. The new world,
where God’s faithful people are to dwell, will have
everything which will contribute to proportion, utility
and beauty.” Smith, DR, 756,757.

And I John saw the holy city, new
Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband.
The Holy City, New Jerusalem.—
“Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised in
the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness.
“Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city
of the great King.” Psalm 48:1,2.
Coming Down From God Out of Heaven..—
“Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and the name
of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which
cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will
write upon him my new name.” Revelation 3:12.
“Every good gift and every perfect gift is from
above, and cometh down from the Father of lights,
with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.” James 1:17
(See additional comments under vs. 10)
From God.—
“For he looked for a city which hath foundations,
whose builder and maker is God.” Hebrews 11:10.
“It is God’s city. The world will never evolve a
golden age. The New Jerusalem must come down
from God, its Divine Architect and Maker.” Burnside,
RWU, 226.
“Rather than being the culmination of the
historical process or the result of human progress, the
New Jerusalem is the product of God’s supernatural
workmanship. It is a creation coming from God, an
absolute gift of God to man. The result of man’s work
is Babylon: a system that comes up from the earth
against God, characterized by suffering, death, and
separation from God. New Jerusalem is the opposite of
Babylon. It comes down from heaven and represents
the absolute triumph of life, joy, and communion
with God.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 270.

And There Was No More Sea.
“The sea divides friends. It is a barrier between us
and those whom we love. Our associations are broken
up by the broad, fathomless ocean. In the new earth
there will be no more sea, and there shall pass there
‘no galley with oars.’ In the past many who have loved
and served God have been bound by chains to their seats
in galleys, compelled to serve the purpose of cruel,
hardhearted men. The Lord has looked upon their
suffering in sympathy and compassion. Thank God, in
the earth made new there will be no fierce torrents,
no engulfing ocean, no restless, murmuring waves.”
(Manuscript 33, 1911). 7BC, 988.

Prepared As a Bride Adorned.—
“Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all
these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As
I live, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thee
with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on
thee, as a bride doeth.” Isaiah 49:18.
“Although only two explicit references are made
to Jerusalem as a bride (21:2,9), the marriage motif
permeates the vision. For example, the wed-ding of the
Lamb is already implied in the previously announced
marriage supper. ‘Blessed are those who are invited

REVELATION 21:2
582

REVELATION 21
to the marriage supper of the Lamb’ (19:9). The
importance of the invitation is underlined by the words,
‘Write …These are true words of God’ (19:9). Now
these same words are repeated just after the presentation
of the New Jerusalem as the bride of the Lamb: ‘Write
this, for these words are trustworthy and true’
(21:5), and will be repeated again just after the
description of the bride-city is completed (22:6).
“…The main point is that as bride, the city
belongs now only to Christ. …The wording of chapter
21, compared with that of chapters 17-18, clearly shows
that John is setting the New Jerusalem-bride/wife over
against the Babylonian prostitute.” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 254,255.
Husband.—
“That is, the Lamb, Christ.”
Commentary, 889.

one dark blot in His glorious creation, will be
honored above all other worlds in the universe of
God. Here, where the Son of God tabernacled in
humanity; where the King of glory lived and suffered
and died—here, when He shall make all things new, the
tabernacle of God shall be with men, ‘and He will
dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and
God Himself shall be with them, and be their God.’
And through endless ages as the redeemed walk in the
light of the Lord, they will praise Him for His
unspeakable Gift—Immanuel, ‘God with us.’” Desire
of Ages, 26.
With Men.—
“Later in the verse the phrase ‘with them’ appears
twice. Three times in this verse the apostle uses the
preposition ‘with,’ thereby stressing the amazing fact of
God keeping company with men throughout
eternity, making His home with them.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 890.

7SDA Bible

“Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to
him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife
hath made herself ready.” Rev. 19:7.

He Will Dwell With Them, and They Shall Be His
People.—
“And I set my tabernacle among you: and my
soul shall not abhor you. And I will walk among you,
and will be your God, and ye shall be my people.”
Leviticus 26:11,12.

“As the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so
shall thy God rejoice over thee.” Isaiah 62:5.

REVELATION 21:3
And I heard a great voice out of heaven
saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God.

“My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I
will be their God, and they shall be my people.”
Ezekiel 37:27.
“Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love
me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode
with him.” John 14:23.

The Tabernacle of God Is With Men.—
“In connection with the view which John has of
the holy city coming down from God out of heaven, a
voice is heard, saying, ‘The tabernacle of God is with
him, and he will dwell with them.’ The great God
takes up his abode on this earth; but we do not
suppose that God is confined to this, or any other one of
the worlds of His creation. He here has a throne, and
the earth enjoys so much of his presence that it may
be said that he dwells among men and dwells there in
a different sense from ever before. Why should this
be thought a strange thing? God’s only begotten Son is
here as ruler of his special kingdom. The holy city will
be here. The heavenly hosts take an interest in this
world probably above what they feel in any other; yea,
reasoning from one of the Saviour’s parables, there will
be more joy in heaven over one world redeemed than
over ninety and nine which have needed no
redemption.” Smith, DR, 757.

God Himself With Them, and Their God.—
“And the name of the city from that day shall be,
The LORD is there.” Ezekiel 48:35.
“The Greek wording of 21:3 is almost an exact
translation Immanu-El: ‘And He—God-with-them—
will be their God.’ The city name is truly ‘The Lord is
there’ (Ezek. 48:35).” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR,
254.

REVELATION 21:4
And God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes; and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain: for the former
things are passed away.

“In the place where sin abounded, God’s grace
much more abounds. The earth itself, the very field
that Satan claims as his, is to be not only ransomed but
exalted. Our little world, under the curse of sin the

God Shall Wipe Away All Tears From Their Eyes.—
“For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living

583

GEMS FROM REVELATION
fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes.” Rev. 7:17.

“The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.”
1Cor. 15:26.
“So when this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory?” 1Cor. 15:54,55.

“The Lord God will wipe away tears from off
all faces.” Isaiah 25:8.
“He does not literally wipe away tears from the
eyes of His people, for there will be no tears in that
kingdom to be wiped away. He wipes away tears by
removing all causes of tears.” Smith, DR, 759.

“They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain, saith the Lord.” Isaiah 65:25.

“As we review the record books, God will have
1000 years to wipe away all our tears.” PJ

“Death will die when its author dies, for the
first to sin will be the last to die. See Heb. 2:14,15.
The last funeral will be that of Satan and the end of
Satan will also be the end of death, and the roaring of
the flames of the lake of fire will be his funeral dirge.
His death will be followed by a deathless world and
universe.” Bunch, TR, 293.

“Pain cannot exist in the atmosphere of heaven.
There will be no more tears, no funeral trains, no
badges of mourning. ‘There shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying: ...for the former things
are passed away.’ ‘The inhabitant shall not say, I
am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquity.’ Revelation 21:4; Isaiah
33:24.” Great Controversy, 676.

No More Sorrow, No More Crying.—
“For, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and
her people a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and
joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no
more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.” Isaiah
65:19. “There we shall know even as also we are
known. There the loves and sympathies that God has
planted in the soul will find truest and sweetest exercise.
The pure communion with holy beings, the harmonious
social life with the blessed angels and with the faithful
ones of all ages, the sacred fellowship that binds
together ‘the whole family in heaven and earth’—all
are among the experiences of the hereafter.
“There will be music there, and song, such music
and song as, save in the visions of God, no mortal ear
has heard or mind conceived. ‘As well the singers as
the players on instruments shall be there.’ Psalm
87:7. ‘They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing
for the majesty of the Lord.’ Isaiah 24:14. For the
Lord shall comfort Zion: He will comfort all her waste
places; and He will make her wilderness like Eden, and
her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness
shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of
melody.’ Isaiah 51:3.” Education, 306,307.

No More Sea, Tears, Death, Sorrow, Crying, Pain.—
“Note the splendid array of negatives. …With the
old ‘order,’ these six shadows flee away.” Burnside,
RWU, 226.
“It is impossible for human beings accustomed to
the environments made by sin to comprehend the glories
of the restored kingdom and celestial city. There are no
means of comparison because we have never seen or
experienced these heavenly realities. We cannot even
imagine how wonderful the new earth state will be for
‘eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God
hath prepared for them that love Him’ (1 Cor. 2:9).
For this reason the conditions of the future life are
described in negative terms. The enumeration of the
things that annoy us here and that will not be in the
restores state makes a greater appeal to us than an
attempted description of things beyond our
comprehension.” Bunch, TR, 291.

“And the ransomed of the LORD shall return, and
come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their
heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall flee away.” Isaiah 35:10.
“The Lord is gracious, merciful, and true. He has
permitted the one of your household band who was the
most innocent and the best prepared to rest through the
perils of the last days. Oh! do not shut up your souls
against melody and joy, mourning as though there were
to be no resurrection of the dead, but praise God that
for her there is no more death, no more trial, no
more sorrow. She rests in Jesus until the Life-giver
shall call forth His sleeping saints to a glorious
immortality.” 5 Testimonies, 313.

No More Death.—

584

REVELATION 21
that is mentioned in verses 11,12 of the preceding
chapter.” Smith, DR, 759.
Behold, I Make All Things New.—
“He says, ‘I make all things new;’ not, I make all
new things. The earth is not destroyed, annihilated, and
a new one created, but all things are made over new.”
Smith, DR, 759.
“When the earth is restored, it will not be as it was
in the beginning, but far more beautiful. It will be as
it would have been in the same length of time, if sin had
never entered. All the works of the devil will be
destroyed. The work that man would have done, if
sin had not entered, Christ will do. Instead of their
home being simply a garden, there will be the
beautiful city enclosing the garden.” Haskell, SSP,
348.

God will turn the sorrow into joy.
Neither Shall There Be Any More Pain.—
“Pain cannot exist in the atmosphere of heaven.
In the home of the redeemed there will be no tears, no
funeral trains, no badges of mourning.” 9 Testimonies,
286.
“Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and
the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall
the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the
dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out,
and streams in the desert.” Isaiah 35:5,6.

“There is to be a restoration of this planet to its
original pristine condition. ‘He shall send Jesus Christ
…when the heaven must receive until the time of
restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the
mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.”
Acts 3:20,21.” Cooke, #33-UR, 6.

“It cannot be said that there will be no more pain
till after the earth is restored and sin and sinner are no
more. The greatest physical pain and mental anguish
will be experienced by the wicked when they realize
that they are forever lost and as they suffer the eternal
death in the lake of fire. This text cannot be true if the
doctrine of eternal torment is true, for then there
would be more pain than ever before and it would
never end.” Bunch, TR, 292.

“Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things
are become new.” 2Cor. 5:17.
“There every power will be developed, every
capability increased. The grandest enterprises will be
carried forward, the loftiest aspirations will be reached,
the highest ambitions realized. And still there will
arise new heights to surmount, new wonders to
admire, new truths to comprehend, fresh objects to
call forth the powers of body and mind and soul.
“All the treasures of the universe will be open to
the study of God’s children. With unutterable delight
we shall enter into the joy and the wisdom of unfallen
beings. We shall share the treasures gained through
ages upon ages spent in contemplation of God’s
handiwork. And the years of eternity, as they roll, will
continue to bring more glorious revelations.
‘Exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think’ (Eph. 3:20) will be, forever and forever, the
impartation of the gifts of God.” Education, 307.

For the Former Things Are Passed Away.—
“For, behold, I create new heavens and a new
earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor
come into mind.” Isaiah 65:17
“The fire that consumes the wicked purifies the
earth. Every trace of the curse is swept away. No
eternally burning hell will keep before the ransomed the
fearful consequences of sin. One reminder alone
remains: Our Redeemer will ever bear the marks of His
crucifixion.” Great Controversy, 674.

REVELATION 21:5
And he that sat upon the throne said,
Behold, I make all things new. And he said
unto me, Write: for these words are true
and faithful.

And He Said Unto Me, Write.—
“The importance of this vision is strengthened
by a divine order to write it out: ‘He who sits on the
throne said, …“Write,…”’ (21:5, NASB). This order
had been given four times previously, either by Jesus,
an anonymous voice, or by angels at crucial moments in
the prophecy. (cf. Rev. 1:11,19; 14:13; 19:9). Now, as
we approach the end, the order to write comes for the
last time, directly from God’s throne.”
Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 245.

He That Sat Upon the Throne.—
“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me
in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne.” Rev. 3:21.
“He that sits upon the throne is the same Being

These Words Are True and Faithful.—

585

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“It is God Himself who authenticates the veracity
of what John is shown. The injunction at the beginning
of the vision to write, insisting that ‘these words are
trustworthy and true’ (21:5), is repeated again,
almost verbatim, at its end (22:6).” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 245.

Christ means a victory. Of ourselves we have no
power to repent of sin. Unless we accept divine aid we
cannot take the first step toward the Saviour. He says,
‘I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end’
(Rev. 21:6) in the salvation of every soul.” Selected
Messages, Vol. 1, 381.

“O Lord, thou art my God. I will exalt thee, I will
praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things;
thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth.” Isaiah
25:1.

The Fountain of the Water of Life.—
“If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and
drink. He that believeth on Me, as the scripture hath
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.”
John 7:37.38.

“And unto the angel of the church of the
Laodiceans write; These things saith the Amen, the
faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation
of God.” Rev. 3:14.

“When you study the precious truths of the
Bible, you will drink from the fountain of living
water to which Jesus invited every thirsty soul with the
same unchanging words of welcome, ‘If any man
thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink.’ ‘The Spirit
and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth
say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.’
“Will you listen to the voice of Christ? Will you
break away from self and respond, ‘We come, Lord, we
come. With joy shall we draw water out of the wells of
salvation’?” Manuscript Releases, Vol. 18, 270.

REVELATION 21:6
And he said unto me, It is done. I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end. I will give unto him that is athirst of
the fountain of the water of life freely.
It is Done.—
“This is the fourth and last time this is pronounced.
“1. On Calvary when Christ’s atoning sacrifice
was made.
“2. When probation closes.
“3. When the seventh plague is poured and the
wrath of God is ‘filled up’ or finished.
“4. When every trace of sin gives place to a
renewed heaven and earth.” Burnside, RWU, 227.

“Christ’s words were the water of life. There in
the presence of the assembled multitude He set Himself
apart to be smitten, that the water of life might flow to
the world. In smiting Christ, Satan thought to destroy
the Prince of life; but from the smitten rock there flowed
living water. As Jesus thus spoke to the people, their
hearts thrilled with a strange awe, and many were
ready to exclaim, with the woman of Samaria, ‘Give
me this water, that I thirst not.’ John 4:15.” Desire of
Ages, 454.

“The phrase ‘It is done!’ (21:6), underlines the
fact that for God this new creation is not a possibility
but a reality.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 250.

“(Rev. 1:17,18 and 21:6 quoted.) In the presence
of such a Teacher, of such opportunity for divine
education, what worse than folly is it to seek an
education apart from Him—to seek to be wise apart
from Wisdom; to be true while rejecting Truth; to seek
illumination apart from the Light, and existence without
the Life; to turn from the Fountain of living waters,
and hew out broken cisterns, that can hold no
water.” Education, 83.

“Being confident of this very thing, that he which
hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the
day of Jesus Christ.” Philippians 1:6.
“Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith.” Hebrews 12:3.
I Am Alpha and Omega.—
“I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, the Almighty.” Rev. 1:8.

“For my people have committed two evils; they
have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and
hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold
no water.” Jeremiah 2:13.

“Let no man present the idea that man has little or
nothing to do in the great work of overcoming; for God
does nothing for man without his cooperation. Neither
say that after you have done all you can on your part,
Jesus will help you. Christ has said, ‘Without me ye
can do nothing’ (John 15:5). From first to last man is
to be a laborer together with God. Unless the Holy
Spirit works upon the human heart, at every step we
shall stumble and fall. Man’s efforts alone are
nothing but worthlessness; but co-operation with

I Will Give to Him That Is Athirst of the Fountain.—
“The speaker who has not a thorough education
may sometimes fall into errors of grammar or
pronunciation; he may not employ the most eloquent
expressions or the most beautiful imagery, but if he has
himself eaten of the Bread of Life; if he has drunk of
the Fountain of Life, he can feed the hungry souls; he
can give of the Water of Life to him that is athirst.

586

REVELATION 21
His defects will be forgiven and forgotten. His hearers
will not become weary or disgusted, but will thank God
for the message of grace sent them through His
servant.” Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students,
509,510.

things; and I will be his God, and he shall
be my son.
He That Overcometh.—
“(Rev. 21:7 quoted.) Here, also, conditions are
specified. In order to inherit all things, we must
resist and overcome sin.” Great Controversy, 540.

“Formal, set phrases, the presentation of merely
argumentative subjects, is not productive of good. The
melting love of God in the hearts of the workers will be
recognized by those for whom they labor. Souls are
thirsting for the waters of life. Do not be empty
cisterns. If you reveal the love of Christ to them, you
may lead the hungering, thirsting ones to Jesus, and He
will give them the bread of life and the waters of
salvation.” (Letter 77, 1895) Evangelism, 485.

He that Overcometh Shall Inherit All Things.—
“The overcomers are Abraham’s seed, and heirs
according to the promise. Gal.3:29. The promise
embraces the world (Rom.4:13); and the saints will go
forth upon the new earth, not as servants or aliens, but
as lawful heirs to the heavenly estate and proprietors of
the soil.” Smith, DR, 759.

“‘I will give unto him that is athirst of the
fountain of the water of life freely.’ Revelation 21:6.
This promise is only to those that thirst. None but
those who feel their need of the water of life, and seek it
at the loss of all things else, will be supplied.” Great
Controversy, 540.

“Jesus came to our world to dispute the authority
of Satan, who claimed supremacy over the earth. He
came to restore in man the defaced image of God, to
impart to the repentant soul divine power by which he
might be raised from corruption and degradation, and be
elevated and ennobled and made fit for companionship
with the angels of heaven, to take the position in the
courts of God which Satan and his angels lost
through their rebellion.” Review & Herald, 5/8/1894.

“For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty,
and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring.”
Isaiah 44:3.

“The LORD is the portion of mine inheritance
and of my cup.” Psalms 16:5.

“Christ presents to us who are athirst the water of
life, that we may drink freely; when we do this we have
Christ within us as a well of water springing up into
everlasting life. Then our words are full of moisture.
We are prepared to water others.” 6 Testimonies, 51.

“Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the
earth.” Matt. 5:5.
“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath
begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead, To an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not
away, reserved in heaven for you.” 1Peter 1:3,4

“For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes.” Rev. 7:17.
“The true believer is not eager to amass the things
of this world, to be rich in worldly goods. Rather, he is
eager to drink deeply of the spiritual riches from God.
“…This passage may be translated, ‘out of the
spring of that water which is life itself.’ This is the
promise of immortality.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
890.

“Then shall the King say unto them on his right
hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.” Matt. 25:34.
I Will Be His God, He Shall Be My Son.—
“Jesus, the Alpha and Omega, is speaking. He will
be our God and we will be His sons and daughters if we
overcome by His grace.” PJ

Freely.—
“Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the
waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy,
and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money
and without price.” Isaiah 55:1.

“And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or
what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? And
what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for
ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing: and I will receive you. And will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and

“And whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely.” Rev. 22:17.

REVELATION 21:7
He that overcometh shall inherit all
587

GEMS FROM REVELATION
daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” 2 Cor. 6:15-18.

are engaged, as to make it a special virtue to be found
on the side of the doubting. At times they seem to
really enjoy hovering about the infidel’s position and
strengthening their unbelief with every circumstance
they can gather as an excuse for their darkness. To
such we would say: You would better come down at
once and leave the walls of Zion until you become
converted men and good Christians. Before you take
the responsibility of becoming ministers you are
required of God to separate yourselves from the love of
this world. The reward of those who continue in this
doubting position will be that given to the fearful
and unbelieving.” 2 Testimonies, 513.

REVELATION 21:8
But the fearful, and unbelieving, and
the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers,
and
sorcerers,
and
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part
in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death.
The Fearful.—
“The word ‘fearful’ has been a trouble to some
conscientious ones, who have had fears more or less in
all their Christian experience. It may be well, therefore,
to inquire what kind of fear is here meant. It is not fear
of our own weakness, or of the power of the tempter. It
is not fear of sinning, or of falling out by the way, or of
coming short at last. Such fear drives us to the Lord for
help. But the fear mentioned here is connected with
unbelief; a fear of the ridicule and opposition of the
world, a fear to trust God, and venture out upon His
promises, a fear that he will not fulfill what He has
declared, and that consequently one will be left to
shame and loss for believing on him. Cherishing such
fear, one can be only half-hearted in His service. This is
most dishonoring to God. This is the fear which we are
commanded not to have. Isa.51:7. This is the fear
which brings into condemnation here, and will finally
bring all who are controlled by it into the lake of fire,
which is the second death.” Smith, DR, 760.

[The unbelieving are] “those who think it a mark
of scholarship to doubt the word of God.” Anderson,
UR, 202.
“Today there is a class in our world who are selfrighteous.
They are not gluttons, they are not
drunkards, they are not infidels; but they desire to live
for themselves, not for God. He is not in their
thoughts; therefore they are classed with
unbelievers. Were it possible for them to enter the
gates of the city of God, they could have no right to the
tree of life, for when God’s commandments were laid
before them with all their binding claims they said, No.
They have not served God here; therefore they
would not serve Him hereafter. They could not live in
His presence, and they would feel that any place was
preferable to heaven.”
Christ’s Object Lessons,
270,271.
The Abominable.—
“ ‘The abominable’ are the hateful, foul, and
loathsome; those who have gone so deep into sin that
they are odious to God and the righteous. They think
and talk and do evil until they are filthy.” Bunch, TR,
293.

“Those outside of the city are among the most
confident, boastful, and apparently zealous ones who
love in word, but not in deed and in truth. Their hearts
are not right with God. His fear is not before them. The
fearful and unbelieving, who are punished with the
second death, are of that class who are ashamed of
Christ in this world. They are afraid to do right and
follow Christ, lest they should meet with pecuniary
loss. They neglect their duty, to avoid reproach and
trials, and to escape dangers. Those who dare not do
right because they will thus expose themselves to trials,
persecution, loss, and suffering are cowards, and, with
idolaters, liars, and all sinners, they are ripening for the
second death.” 2 Testimonies, 630.

Murderers.—
“If ‘murderers’ include all who ‘hate’ and
become ‘angry without a cause,’ there will be a large
class in this group who are outside the city.” Bunch,
TR, 293.
“A wrong course of eating or drinking destroys
health, and with it the sweetness of life. Oh, how many
times have you purchased what you called a good meal
at the expense of a fevered system, loss of appetite, and
loss of sleep! Inability to enjoy food, a sleepless night,
hours of suffering —all for a meal in which taste was
gratified! Thousands have indulged their perverted
appetites, have eaten a good meal, as they called it,
and as the result, have brought on a fever, or some
other acute disease, and certain death. That was
enjoyment purchased at immense cost. Yet many have
done this, and these self-murderers have been
eulogized by their friends and the minister, and carried
directly to heaven at their death. What a thought!

And Unbelieving.—
“Some are not naturally devotional, and therefore
should encourage and cultivate a habit of close
examination of their own lives and motives, and should
especially cherish a love for religious exercises and for
secret prayer. They are often heard talking of doubts
and unbelief, and dwelling upon the wonderful
struggles they have had with infidel feelings. They
dwell upon discouraging influences as so affecting
their faith, hope, and courage in the truth and in the
ultimate success of the work and cause in which they

588

REVELATION 21
Gluttons in heaven! No, no; such will never enter the
pearly gates of the golden city of God. Such will never
be exalted to the right hand of Jesus the precious
Saviour, the suffering Man of Calvary, whose life was
one of constant self-denial and sacrifice. There is a
place appointed for all such among the unworthy, who
can have no part in the better life, the immortal
inheritance.” 2 Testimonies, 69,70.

contact. Could the veil be lifted, we would see evil
angels employing all their arts to deceive and destroy.
Wherever an influence is exerted to cause men to forget
God, there Satan is exercising his bewitching power.
All who venture into scenes of dissipation or
irreligious pleasure, or seek the society of the
sensualist, the skeptic, or the blasphemer, by
personal intercourse or through the medium of the
press, are tampering with sorcery. Ere they are
aware, the mind is bewildered and the soul polluted.
The apostle’s admonition to the Ephesian church should
be heeded by the people of God today: ‘Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them.’” Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 3,
427.

Whoremongers.—
“The ‘whoremongers’ take in the large class who
are guilty of immorality; those who are con-trolled by
the lusts of the flesh.” Bunch, TR, 293.
“For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor
unclean person, …hath any inheritance in the kingdom
of Christ and of God.” Ephesians 5:5.

“As one of the signs of Jerusalem’s destruction,
Christ had said, ‘Many false prophets shall rise, and
shall deceive many.’ False prophets did rise, deceiving
the people, and leading great numbers into the desert.
Magicians and sorcerers, claiming miraculous
power, drew the people after them into the mountain
solitudes. But this prophecy was spoken also for the
last days. This sign is given as a sign of the second
advent. Even now false christs and false prophets are
showing signs and wonders to seduce His disciples.”
Desire of Ages, 631.

Sorcerers.—
“Gr. pharmakoi, ‘practicers of magical arts.’
Basically, the root refers to magic, enchantment,
sorcery, and to the use of drugs to produce a stupefied
condition. A modern counterpart of the ancient practice
of sorcery is spiritism.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 891.
“In accepting Christianity, some of the believers
[of Ephesus] had not fully renounced their superstitions.
To some extent they still continued the practice of
magic. Now, convinced of their error, ‘many that
believed came, and confessed, and showed their
deeds.’ Even to some of the sorcerers themselves the
good work extended; and ‘many of them also which
used curious arts brought their books together, and
burned them before all men: and they counted the
price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of
silver. So mightily grew the word of God and
prevailed.’
“By burning their books on magic, the Ephesian
converts showed that the things in which they had once
delighted they now abhorred. It was by and through
magic that they had especially offended God and
imperiled their souls; and it was against magic that they
showed such indignation. Thus they gave evidence of
true conversion.” Acts of the Apostles, 288.

“And I will come near to you to judgment; and I
will be a swift witness against the sorcerers….”
Malachi 3:5.
“For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and
whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.” Rev. 22:15.
Idolaters.—
“It is as easy to make an idol of false doctrines
and theories as to fashion an idol of wood or stone.
By misrepresenting the attributes of God, Satan leads
men to conceive of Him in a false character. With
many, a philosophical idol is enthroned in the place
of Jehovah; while the living God, as He is revealed in
His word, in Christ, and in the works of creation, is
worshiped by but few. Thousands deify nature while
they deny the God of nature. Though in a different form,
idolatry exists in the Christian world today as verily
as it existed among ancient Israel in the days of
Elijah. The god of many professedly wise men, of
philosophers, poets, politicians, journalists--the god of
polished fashionable circles, of many colleges and
universities, even of some theological institutions—is
little better than Baal, the sun-god of Phoenicia.”
Great Controversy, 583.

“The sorcerers of our time are taking
advantage of the freedom of the press to spread
abroad their baleful literature.
Could all the
productions of modern Spiritualism be treated as were
the magical books of the Ephesians, one of Satan’s most
successful avenues to destroy the souls of men would be
cut off. Witchcraft and sorcery are practiced in this
Christian age and Christian nation, even more
boldly than by the old-time magicians. Satan is
finding access to thousands of minds by presenting
himself under the guise of departed friends.” Signs,
5/18/1882.

“For this ye know, that no …idolater hath any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.”
Ephesians 5:5.

“The visible and the invisible world are in close

All Liars.—

589

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Falsehood and deception of every cast is sin
against the God of truth and verity. The word of God is
plain upon these points. Ye shall not ‘deal falsely,
neither lie one to another.’ ‘All liars shall have their
part in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death.’ God is a God
of sincerity and truth. The word of God is a book of
truth. Jesus is a faithful and true witness. The
church is the witness and ground of the truth. All the
precepts of the Most High are true and righteous
altogether. How, then, must prevarication and any
exaggeration or deception appear in His sight? For the
falsehood he uttered because he coveted the gifts which
the prophet refused, the servant of Elisha was struck
with leprosy, which ended only with death.” 4
Testimonies, 336.

falling at the feet of the angel and being reminded to
worship God instead.” Maxwell, God Cares, 523.

REVELATION 21:9,10
And there came unto me one of the
seven angels which had the seven vials full
of the seven last plagues, and talked with
me, saying, Come hither, I will shew thee
the bride, the Lamb’s wife.
And he carried me away in the spirit to
a great and high mountain, and shewed me
that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from God,
One of the Seven Angels Which Had Seven Vials.—
“The plague bearing angel had already shown John
the judgment of the great harlot (see ch. 17:1). Now the
same angel directs John’s attention to the New
Jerusalem, the center and seat of the eternal kingdom.
The same plague-bearing angel that presented
mystical Babylon to the prophet, now shows him the
New Jerusalem. This angel was Gabriel. See Desire of
Ages, 99, comment under Rev. 22:9.” PJ

The Second Death—The Lake of Fire.—
“The soul that sinneth, it shall die an everlasting
death—a death from which there will be no hope of
resurrection; and then the wrath of God will be
appeased.” Early Writings, 218.
“They [the wicked] were punished according to
the deeds done in the body. Some were many days
consuming, and just as long as there was a portion of
them unconsumed, all the sense of suffering remained.
Said the angel, ‘The worm of life shall not die; their fire
shall not be quenched as long as there is the least
particle for it to prey upon.’
“Satan and his angels suffered long. Satan bore
not only the weight and punishment of his own sins, but
also of the sins of the redeemed host, which had been
placed upon him; and he must also suffer for the ruin of
souls which he had caused. Then I saw that Satan and
all the wicked host were consumed, and the justice of
God was satisfied; and all the angelic host, and all the
redeemed saints, with a loud voice said, ‘Amen!’
“Said the angel, ‘Satan is the root, his children are
the branches. They are now consumed root and branch.
They have died an everlasting death. They are never
to have a resurrection, and God will have a clean
universe.’” Early Writings, 294,295.

The Bride, the Lamb’s Wife.—
“This testimony is positive that the New
Jerusalem is the bride, the Lamb’s wife. The angel
told John distinctly that he would show him the bride,
the Lamb’s wife. We may be sure that he did not
practice upon him a piece of deception, but fulfilled his
promise to the very letter. All that he did show him
was the New Jerusalem, which must therefore be the
Lamb’s wife. It would be unnecessary to offer a word
of proof that this city is not the church, were it not that
popular theology has so mystified the Scriptures as to
give it this application. This city cannot be the church,
because it would be absurd to talk of the church as lying
foursquare, and having a north side, a south side, an east
side, and a west side. It would be incongruous to speak
of the church as having a wall great and high, and
having twelve gates, three on each side toward the four
points of the compass. Indeed, the whole description of
the city which is given in this chapter would be more or
less obscure if applied to the church.
“In writing to the Galatians, Paul speaks of the
same city and says that it is the mother of us all,
referring to the church. The church, then, is not the
city itself, but the children of the city. Verse 24 of the
chapter under comment, speaks of the nations of the
saved, who walk in the light of this city. These nations
who are the saved, and on earth constitute the church,
are distinct from the city, in the light of which they
walk. It follows that the city is a literal city, built of
all the precious materials here described.
“But how can it then be the bride, the Lamb’s
wife? Inspiration has seen fit to speak of it under this
figure, and with every believer in the Bible that should

“He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the
second death.” Rev. 2:11

THE NEW JERUSALEM
INTRODUCTION TO REV. 21:9 to 22:9.—

“We [find] that the fall-of-Babylon division
(chapter 17:1 to 19:10) presents a striking contrast to
the New Jerusalem division (Ch. 21:9 to 22:9) and
that the two divisions begin and end in similar ways.
Each division begins with John’s being taken by a
plague angel to see something. Each ends with John’s

590

REVELATION 21
be sufficient. The figure is first introduced in Isaiah
54. The new-covenant city is there brought to view. It
is represented as being desolate while the old covenant
was in force, and the Jews and old Jerusalem were the
special objects of God’s care. It is said to her that ‘the
children of the desolate’ shall be many more than ‘the
children of the married wife.’ It is further said to her,
‘Thy Maker is thy husband,’ and the closing promise
of the Lord to this city contains a very similar
description to the one which we have here in
Revelation, namely, ‘I will lay thy stones with fair
colors, and lay thy foundations with sapphires; and I
will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of
carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.
And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord.’
Isa. 54:11-13.
“It is this very promise to which Paul refers, and
upon which he comments in his epistle to the Galatians,
when he says, ‘But Jerusalem which is above is free,
which is the mother of us all’ (Galatians 4:26), for he
in the next verse quotes this very prophecy from the
book of Isaiah to sustain his declaration. Here then
Paul makes an inspired application of Isaiah’s
prophecy which cannot be mistaken, and in this he
shows that under the figure of a ‘woman,’ a ‘wife’
whose ‘children’ were to be multiplied, the Lord by the
prophet speaks of the New Jerusalem, the city above, as
contrasted with the earthly Jerusalem in the land of
Palestine. Of that city the Lord calls himself the
‘husband.’ In addition to this, we have the positive
testimony to the same facts in Revelation 21.
“With this view, all is harmony. Christ is called
the Father of his people (Isa.9:6), the Jerusalem
above is called our mother, and we are called the
children. Carrying out the figure of a marriage, Christ
is represented as the Bridegroom, the city as the bride,
and we, the church, as the guests. There is no confusion
of parties here. But the popular view, which makes
the city the church, and the church the bride, makes
the church at the same time both mother and
children, both bride and guests.
“The view that the marriage of the Lamb is the
inauguration of Christ as King upon the throne of
David, and that the parables of Matt.22:1-14; 25:1-13;
Luke 12:35-37; 19:12-27, apply to that event, is further
confirmed by a well-known ancient custom. It is said
that when a person took his position as ruler over the
people, and was invested with that power, it was called
a marriage, and the usually accompanying feast was
called a marriage supper. Dr. Clarke, in his note on
Matt.22:2, thus speaks of it:
“ ‘A Marriage for His Son.— A marriage feast, so
the word [gamous] properly means. Or a feast of
inauguration, when his son was put in possession of
the government, and thus he and his new subjects
became married together. (See 1Kings1:5-9, 19, 25,
etc., where such a feast is mentioned.)’ Many eminent
critics so understand this parable as indicating the
Father’s induction of his Son into his Messianic
kingdom.” Smith, DR, 760-762.

“I saw that while Jesus was in the most holy
place He would be married to the New Jerusalem;
and after His work should be accomplished in the
holiest, He would descend to the earth in kingly power
and take to Himself the precious ones who had patiently
waited His return.” Early Writings, 251.
“The marriage represents the reception by
Christ of His kingdom. The Holy City, the New
Jerusalem, which is the capital and representative of the
kingdom, is called ‘the bride, the Lamb’s wife.’ Said
the angel to John: ‘Come hither, I will show thee the
bride, the Lamb's wife.’ ‘He carried me away in the
spirit,’ says the prophet, ‘and showed me that great
city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven
from God.’ Revelation 21:9, 10. Clearly, then, the
bride represents the Holy City, and the virgins that go
out to meet the bridegroom are a symbol of the church.
In the Revelation the people of God are said to be the
guests at the marriage supper. Revelation 19:9. If
guests, they cannot be represented also as the bride.
Christ, as stated by the prophet Daniel, will receive
from the Ancient of Days in heaven, ‘dominion, and
glory, and a kingdom;’ He will receive the New
Jerusalem, the capital of His kingdom, ‘prepared as a
bride adorned for her husband.’ Daniel 7:14;
Revelation 21:2. Having received the kingdom, He
will come in His glory, as King of kings and Lord of
lords, for the redemption of His people, who are to ‘sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,’ at His
table in His kingdom (Matthew 8:11; Luke 22:30), to
partake of the marriage supper of the Lamb.” Great
Controversy, 426,427.
He Carried Me Away in the Spirit to a Great and High
Mountain.—
“In the visions of God brought he me into the land
of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, by
which was as the frame of a city on the south.” Ezekiel
40:2.
Shewed Me That Great City.—
“John had watched the city’s descent only a few
moments earlier. See chapter 21:2. So why was he
being shown it again? …Evidently God wanted John
to notice things he hadn’t seen the first time.”
Maxwell, God Cares, 530.
Descending Out of Heaven From God.—
“The New Jerusalem contains the Tree of Life.
(See Rev. 2:7, 22:2,14). This same Tree of Life was
once on earth in the midst of the Garden of Eden. (See
Genesis 2:9). It represents Jesus. Because of sin
(partaking of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil—Satan’s tree) Adam and Eve were cast out of the
Garden lest they would partake of the Tree of Life and
be immortal sinners. But they would worship at its
eastern entrance, which was guarded by two cherubims
and a flaming sword. (See Genesis 3:24). Before the

591

GEMS FROM REVELATION
flood, the Garden of Eden and the Tree of Life were
taken up to heaven where we see them now in the book
of Revelation as being inside the New Jerusalem.
Second Advent pioneer, Joseph Bates, in 1846 wrote a
small booklet entitled, The Opening Heavens, in which
on page 6 he asks the question, ‘From what part of
heaven will the glorious city appear? We answer,
from where the flaming sword is ‘guarding the tree
of life.’ Bates saw that when the Tree of Life was taken
to heaven, God placed a ‘flaming sword’ (the Great
Nebula in the middle of Orion’s sword) to guard and
to show the way to the Tree of Life. This marks the
entry way to the New Jerusalem. This is why the New
Jerusalem will descend from that spot in the heavens.”
PJ.

enters the Holy City.” Great Controversy, 662.

REVELATION 21:11
Having the glory of God: and her light
was like unto a stone most precious, even
like a jasper stone, clear as crystal;
Having the Glory of God.—
“There is the New Jerusalem, the metropolis of the
glorified new earth, ‘a crown of glory in the hand of
the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy
God.’ ‘Her light was like unto a stone most precious,
even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal.’ ‘The
nations of them which are saved shall walk in the
light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their
glory and honor into it. Saith the Lord: ‘I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in My people.’ ‘The
tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell
with them, and they shall be His people, and God
Himself shall be with them, and be their God.’ Isaiah
62:3; Rev. 21:11, 24; Isaiah 65:19; Rev. 21:3. The
glory of God and the Lamb floods the Holy City with
unfading light. The redeemed walk in the sunless glory
of perpetual day.” Great Controversy, 676.

“The atmosphere parted and rolled back; then we
could look up through the open space in Orion,
whence came the voice of God. The Holy City will
come down through that open space.”
Early
Writings, 41.

“All faces will reflect the image of their
Redeemer. There will then be no anxious, troubled
countenances, but all will be bright, and smiling in
spotless purity. The angels will be there, also the
resurrected saints with the martyrs, and the best of all,
and what will cause us the most joy, our lovely Saviour,
who suffered and died that we might enjoy that
happiness and freedom, will be there. His glorious face
will shine brighter than the sun, and light up the
beautiful city and reflect glory all around.” My Life
Today, 357.
Her Light.—
“Gr. phoster, ‘a luminary,’ ‘a light-giving body.’
The word occurs in Phil. 2:15 in the clause, ‘among
whom ye shine as lights (luminaries) in the world.’
The ‘light’ of the city is the ‘glory’ of God.” 7SDA
Bible Commentary, 891.

The Great Nebula in the Flaming Sword of Orion
“Christ descends upon the Mount of Olives,
whence, after His resurrection, He ascended, and where
angels repeated the promise of His return. Says the
prophet: ‘The Lord my God shall come, and all the
saints with Thee.’ ‘And His feet shall stand in that
day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before
Jerusalem on the east, and the Mount of Olives shall
cleave in the midst thereof, . . . and there shall be a
very great valley.’ ‘And the Lord shall be king over
all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and
His name one.’ Zechariah 14:5, 4, 9. As the New
Jerusalem, in its dazzling splendor, comes down out of
heaven, it rests upon the place purified and made ready
to receive it, and Christ, with His people and the angels,

A Stone Most Precious.—
“Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I lay
in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that
believeth shall not make haste.” Isaiah 28:16.
“To whom coming, as unto a living stone,
disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and
precious. …Wherefore also it is contained in the
scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone,
elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not
be confounded. Unto you therefore which believe he is
precious: but unto them which be disobedient, the stone
which the builders disallowed, the same is made the

592

REVELATION 21
head of the corner.” 1Peter 2:4,6,7.

“The names of the twelve tribes on the gates, show
that all the saved from all ages, are reckoned as
belonging to some one of the twelve tribes, for all
must enter the city through some one of these twelve
gates.
This explains those instances in which
Christians are called Israel, and are addressed as the
twelve tribes, as in Rom.2:28,29; 9:6-8; Gal.3:29;
Eph.2:12,13; James1:1; Rev.7:4.” Smith, DR, 763.

Jasper, Clear as Crystal.—
“The passage reads literally, ‘having the glory of
God, her luminary, like a stone most precious, as
jasper, flashing forth.’” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
891,892.

REVELATION 21:12,13
And had a wall great and high, and had
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels,
and names written thereon, which are the
names of the twelve tribes of the children of
Israel: On the east three gates; on the north
three gates; on the south three gates; and on
the west three gates.

“And if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise.” Gal. 3:29.

Walls and Gates.—
“Why walls and gates in the city? Undoubtedly
for beauty. For design and order. Heaven is
perfectly organized. There is no confusion. With the
millions of spiritual Israelites who will belong to the
city, there will need to be order and organization, but
never will it impinge on the perfect freedom of any
individual.” Cooke, #33-UR, 20.

“(The names of 12 tribes on 12 gates are
mentioned in Eze. 48:31-34.) The names of the 12
tribes that will be on the 12 gates of the New Jerusalem
are listed in Rev. 7:4-8.” PJ.

Twelve Gates.—
“It is surprising to notice that the number 7,
predominant in the book of Revelation, has been
replaced by the number 12. [7 = 4 + 3, but 12 = 4 x 3.
We work with addition, God works with
multiplication.] All figures given are twelves or
multiples of 12. For example, 12 gates, 12 angels, 12
tribes of the sons of Israel (vs. 12), ‘twelve
foundations, and on them the twelve names of the
apostles of the Lamb’ (vs. 14); ‘twelve thousand
stadia’ (vs. 16); ‘a hundred and forty-four cubits’
(vs. 17); ‘twelve pearls’ (vs. 21); ‘twelve kinds of
fruit’ (22:2).” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 258.

“The city is oriented to all directions. It has three
gates open to each of the four cardinal points: (Rev.
21:13 quoted). …And these gates ‘shall never be shut’
(21:25). This recalls the words of Jesus: ‘Men will
come from east and west, and from north and south,
and sit at table in the kingdom of God’ (Luke 13:29).
There is unlimited access. The condition for entrance,
however, is clearly stated: (Rev. 22:14 and 21:27
quoted).” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 259.

“As the redeemed enter the city, they are arranged
according to the tribes of ancient Israel, character
forming the basis of division. The twelve taken
together reflect the fullness of Christ. The character
portrayed in the blessings pronounced upon the sons of
Jacob, reveals the many sides of the life of the Son of
God, as manifested in redemption.” Haskell, SSP, 346.

On The East, North, South, & West, Three Gates.—
“The distance between each gate would be 1000
furlongs or about 125 miles.” Bunch, TR, 285.

REVELATION 21:14
And the wall of the city had twelve
foundations, and in them the names of the
twelve apostles of the Lamb.

“Note the number 12, the number so often linked
with God’s kingdom.” Burnside, RWU, 227.
At the Gates Twelve Angels.—
“Angel sentinels or gatekeepers are stationed at
the twelve gates, as were watchmen or sentinels at the
gates of the ancient walled cities.” Bunch, TR, 284.
“Then my attending angel directed me to the city
again, where I saw four angels winging their way to the
gate of the city. They were just presenting the
golden card to the angel at the gate when I saw
another angel flying swiftly from the direction of the
most excellent glory, and crying with a loud voice to the
other angels, and waving something up and down in his
hand.” Early Writings, 37.

The Twelve Foundations.—
“The names of the twelve apostles indicate that the
city is a Christian city. What a reward for those
twelve brave humble men who pioneered the gospel.
It is a memorial that will speak its message throughout
eternity.” Cooke, #33-UR, 20..
“On these twelve foundations are written the
names of the twelve apostles, the pillars of the Christian
church. The prophet on Patmos had been condemned,
his name recorded on the books of Rome as a criminal
and an exile; what joy, then, must have come to him,
when he saw in heaven his name engraved on one of
the foundations of the city. Here is the difference

The Names of Twelve Tribes of Israel.—

593

GEMS FROM REVELATION
between human and divine judgment.” Haskell, SSP,
345.

The City Lieth Foursquare.—
“The altar of burnt offering, the breastplate of
judgment, the altar of incense, and the Most Holy
Place itself, were all foursquare—the same
dimensions of length and breadth.” PJ

“Foundations are for support, and since the church
was ‘built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets’ with Jesus Christ as ‘the chief corner stone’
(Eph. 2:20-22), it is appropriate that the home of the
church shall rest upon foundations on which are written
‘the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.’”
Bunch, TR, 286.

“And he made the most holy house, the length
whereof was according to the breadth of the house,
twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits:
and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six
hundred talents.” 2 Chron. 3:8.

The Name of the Twelfth Apostle.—
“And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which
knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these
two thou hast chosen, That he may take part of this
ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by
transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.
And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon
Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven
apostles.” Acts 1:24-26.

“Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five
hundred in length, with five hundred in breadth, square
round about.” Ezekiel 45:2.
The Length is as Large as the Breadth.—
“According to this testimony the city is laid out in
a perfect square, measuring equally on all sides. The
measure of the city, John declares, was twelve thousand
furlongs. Twelve thousand furlongs, eight furlongs to
a mile, equal fifteen hundred miles. It may be
understood that this measure is the measure of the
whole circumference of the city, and not merely of
one side. This appears, from Kitto, to have been the
ancient method of measuring cities.
The whole
circumference was taken, and that was said to be the
measure of the city. According to this rule, the New
Jerusalem will be three hundred and seventy-five
miles in length on each side.” Smith, DR, 763.

REVELATION 21:15-17
And he that talked with me had a
golden reed to measure the city, and the
gates thereof, and the wall thereof.
And the city lieth foursquare, and the
length is as large as the breadth: and he
measured the city with the reed, twelve
thousand furlongs. The length and the
breadth and the height of it are equal.
And he measured the wall thereof, an
hundred and forty and four cubits,
according to the measure of a man, that is,
of the angel.

The Length, Breadth and Height of It Are Equal.—
“From this language, the question has arisen
whether the city was as high as it was long and broad.
The word rendered ‘equal’ is isos.
From the
definitions given by Liddell and Scott, we learn that
it may be used to convey the idea of proportion: the
height was proportionate to the length and breadth.
Greenfield, in defining one of its cognate words, isotes,
gives to it the sense of ‘equal proportion,’ and refers to
2 Corinthians 8:13,14, as an example where this
definition is quite admissible. And this idea is
strengthened by the fact that the wall was only a
hundred and forty-four cubits high. Taking the cubit
at about twenty-two inches, the length which is most
commonly assigned to the ancient cubit, it would give
only two hundred and sixty-four feet as the height of
the wall.” Smith, DR, 763,764.

He That Talked With Me.—
“One of the seven plague angels. See vs. 9.” PJ.
Measure the City.—
“The city in all its details represents salvation;
also the people within its jasper walls, represent the
salvation of God.” Haskell, SSP, 344.
“Behold, there was a man, whose appearance was
like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his
hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.
“And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold
with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine
heart upon all that I shall shew thee; for to the intent that
I might shew them unto thee art thou brought hither:
declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel. And
behold a wall on the outside of the house round about,
and in the man’s hand a measuring reed of six cubits
long by the cubit and an hand breadth: so he measured
the breadth of the building, one reed; and the height, one
reed.” Ezekiel 40:3-5.

“The following from Thomas Wicks, author of
Lectures on the Apocalypse, presents the same idea:
‘The language, however, will bear another meaning,
which is far more natural. It is not that the length and
breadth and height were severally equal to each other,
but equal with themselves; that is, the length was
everywhere the same, and the breadth everywhere
the same, and the height the same. It was perfect and
symmetrical in all its proportions.’” Smith, DR (1897),
571.

594

REVELATION 21

And the foundations of the wall of the
city were garnished with all manner of
precious stones. The first foundation was
jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a
chalcedony; the fourth, an emerald;
The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius;
the seventh, chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl;
the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a
chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the
twelfth, an amethyst.

“Another interpretation permits isos to retain its
normal meaning but observes that that the word here
translated height (hupsos) may mean not only ‘height’
but also ‘the high part,’ ‘the top,’ ‘the summit,’ ‘the
crown.’ If hupsos is understood in this sense, John
means that the distance around the top of the wall is
the same as that around the bottom.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 892.
Saints Stand on the Walls of Zion.—
“Jesus closes the gates of the city, and this
vast army [of Satan] surround it, and place themselves
in battle array, expecting a fierce conflict. Jesus and all
the angelic host and all the saints, with the glittering
crowns upon their heads, ascend to the top of the wall
of the city. Jesus speaks with majesty, saying, ‘Behold,
ye sinners, the reward of the just! And behold, My
redeemed, the reward of the wicked!’ The vast
multitude behold the glorious company on the walls of
the city. And as they witness the splendor of their
glittering crowns and see their faces radiant with glory,
reflecting the image of Jesus, and then behold the
unsurpassed glory and majesty of the King of kings and
Lord of lords, their courage fails.” Early Writings,
293,294.

Foundations Of the Wall of the City.—
“According to Heb. 11:10, the foundations are
beneath the entire city and not the walls only. On each
foundation is engraved the name of the apostle-king
ruling over the tribe or nation to whom belongs that
portion of the city adjacent to their gate. The crystal
clearness of the golden streets makes it possible for
the inhabitants of the city to see the precious stone
foundations of the city and the names of the apostlekings emblazoned on them, each one under the
portion of the city belonging to the nation over which
he rules. The twelve colors of the foundations probably
represent the characteristics of the twelve nations and
their rulers, the character distinctions being the reason
for the twelve tribal divisions. These twelve stones are
almost identical with the twelve stones in the
breastplate of the high priest which represented the
twelve tribes of Israel. See Ex. 28:17. This is further
proof that these stones and their colors represent
character.” Bunch, TR, 285,286.

REVELATION 21:18
And the building of the wall of it was of
jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto
clear glass.
The Wall of it Was of Jasper.—
“The building of the wall was of jasper. Jasper is a
precious stone usually described as of ‘a beautiful green
color, sometimes clouded with white or spotted with
yellow.’ This we understand to be the material of the
main body of the wall built upon the twelve foundations
hereafter described. And let it be remembered that
this jasper wall was ‘clear as crystal’ (verse 11),
revealing all the glories within.” Smith, DR, 764.

“In fact, 8 of the 12 stones mentioned [in Rev.
21:19,20] are found in the breastplate (cf. Exod. 28:1720; 398-14). But whereas each stone represented one of
the 12 tribes, each foundation stone bears the name of
an apostle (21:14).” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR,
258.
“Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span
shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the
breadth thereof.
“And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even
four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a
topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row.
And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire,
and a diamond. And the third row a ligure, an agate,
and an amethyst. And the fourth row a beryl, and an
onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their
inclosings.
“And the stones shall be with the names of the
children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like
the engravings of a signet; every one with his name
shall they be according to the twelve tribes.” Exodus
28:16-21.
“The twelve foundations are presumably laid
side by side; otherwise the lower ones would be
invisible. They attract John’s special attention because

Pure Gold.—
“The structure of the city appears to have the
transparency of glass. Its flashing beauty doubtless
changes with every ray of light that fall upon it.”
7SDA Bible Commentary, 893.
“Many people have ruined their happiness in this
life in their search for gold. If only they had known that
there is an abundance of it in the New Jerusalem, they
might have been willing to wait patiently for it. When
Jesus was here on earth, He possessed no gold, yet He
had the genuine thing which people suppose gold will
buy—happiness.” Wieland, GIR, 168.

REVELATION 21:19,20
595

GEMS FROM REVELATION
of their order and composition. Each one is made out of
a different jewel! See Rev. 21:19,20. Here is another
like with the Old Testament.
“The Old Testament high priest was outfitted with
a costly breastpiece bearing precious stones engraved
with the names of the twelve tribes. See Ex. 28:15-21.
The stones in the breastpiece were laid in a square,
three stones in each of four rows. Many of the stones
in the breastpiece and in the city foundations are the
same.” Maxwell, God Cares, 533.

colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.
And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of
carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.”
Isaiah 54:11-12.
“And he garnished the house with precious
stones for beauty.” 2 Chronicles 3:6.
“As a wise master builder, Jeremiah at the very
beginning of his lifework sought to encourage the men
of Judah to lay the foundations of their spiritual life
broad and deep, by making thorough work of
repentance. Long had they been building with material
likened by the apostle Paul to wood, hay, and stubble,
and by Jeremiah himself to dross. ‘Refuse silver shall
men call them,’ he declared of the impenitent nation,
‘because the Lord hath rejected them.’ Jeremiah
6:30, margin. Now they were urged to begin building
wisely and for eternity, casting aside the rubbish of
apostasy and unbelief, and using as foundation
material the pure gold, the refined silver, the
precious stones—faith and obedience and good
works—which alone are acceptable in the sight of a
holy God.” Prophets & Kings, 409,410.

“Over the ephod was the breastplate, the most
sacred of the priestly vestments. This was of the same
material as the ephod. It was in the form of a square,
measuring a span, and was suspended from the
shoulders by a cord of blue from golden rings. The
border was formed of a variety of precious stones,
the same that form the twelve foundations of the
City of God. Within the border were twelve stones set
in gold, arranged in rows of four, and, like those in the
shoulder pieces, engraved with the names of the tribes.”
Patriarchs & Prophets, 351.
“Before entering the City of God, the Saviour
bestows upon His followers the emblems of victory and
invests them with the insignia of their royal state. The
glittering ranks are drawn up in the form of a hollow
square about their King, whose form rises in majesty
high above saint and angel, whose countenance beams
upon them full of benignant love.” Great Controversy,
645,646.

REVELATION 21:21
And the twelve gates were twelve
pearls: every several gate was of one pearl:
and the street of the city was pure gold, as it
were transparent glass.

Garnished With All Manner of Precious Stones.—
“The foundation, composed entirely of precious
stones, is beautiful beyond description; but besides this,
it is ornamented, or garnished, with all manner of
precious stones.” Haskell, SSP, 345.

Twelve Gates Were of Twelve Pearls.—
“The beautiful city of God, built of materials most
precious here on earth, is very appropriately described
as having gates of pearl. But more than that, the
scripture says that each gate is of a single pearl.
Iridescent and glowing with the beautiful colors
reflected from the foundations, these portals swing wide
to welcome the redeemed to their eternal home.”
Smith, DR, 766.

“By His Spirit he hath garnished the heavens.”
Job 26: 13.
“It is the walls of the foundations, which have
inscribed in them the names of the 12 apostles of the
Lamb, that are garnished with precious stones. The
Holy Spirit has garnished these walls with ‘precious
stones’—those who have chosen to follow the Lamb
through the ministry of the Spirit in the twelve apostles
and their spiritual descendants.” PJ

“Each gate is a single pearl. The pearl, as we
know it, is formed by the life fluid of the oyster
covering a foreign substance. The pearls of heaven
represent the abundant righteousness of Christ called
forth by sin; but which, flowing full and free, covers
every blemish in the character to which it is applied.”
Haskell, SSP, 346.

“Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual
house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.” 1 Peter
2:5.

“Christ Himself is the pearl of great price. In
Him is gathered all the glory of the Father, the fullness
of the Godhead. He is the brightness of the Father’s
glory and the express image of His person. The glory of
the attributes of God is expressed in His character.
Every page of the Holy Scriptures shines with His light.
The righteousness of Christ, as a pure, white pearl,

“That our daughters may be as corner stones,
polished after the similitude of a palace.” Psalm
144:12.
“O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not
comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair

596

REVELATION 21
has no defect, no stain. No work of man can improve
the great and precious gift of God. It is with-out a flaw.
In Christ are ‘hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge.’ Col. 2:3. He is ‘made unto us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.’ 1 Cor. 1:30. All that can satisfy the
needs and longings of the human soul, for this world
and for the world to come, is found in Christ. Our
Redeemer is the pearl so precious that in comparison all
things else may be accounted loss.” Christ’s Object
Lessons, 115.

The Street of the City Was Pure Gold.—
“In this verse, as also in verse 18, the city is
spoken of as built of gold, pure, like unto clear glass,
that is, transparent glass. Think for a moment what the
appearance of a street so paved would be. The gorgeous
palaces on either side would be reflected beneath, and
the boundless expanse of the heavens above would also
appear below; so that to the person walking those
golden streets it would appear that both himself and
the city were suspended between the infinite heights
above and the unfathomable depths below, while the
mansions on either side of the street, having equal
powers of reflection, would marvelously multiply
both palaces and people, and conspire to render the
whole scene novel, pleasing, beautiful, and grand
beyond conception.” Smith, DR, 766,767.
“Transparent gold would make a poor paving
material unless there were something beautiful on which
it rested and that could be seen through the pavement.
The foundation material of our cement pavements is
very unsightly, but is always invisible. But not so with
the streets of the New Jerusalem. There is something
very beautiful to look at beneath the golden
pavements of the streets of the celestial city, and this
is the reason for their transparency.” Bunch, TR,
285.

Jesus is the pearl of great price
“The foundations are different, but the gates are all
alike. There is but one way, only one way to enter.
Jesus is the way. The pearl was esteemed among the
ancients as the gem of greatest value. It was the only
precious stone that the art of man and his skill could
not improve. They could give fresh luster to the
emerald and sapphire but not so to the pearl. So with
‘the truth and the way.’” Burnside, RWU, 229.

“Do you seek gold, the riches of this world? We
read that the streets of the city are paved with pure gold,
and that the gates of the city are of gold set with pearls.
The riches obtained here may be consumed. There are
many ways in which you may be robbed of your earthly
treasure. Christ says: ‘Lay up for yourselves treasures
in heaven.’ There no thief shall approach; no moth or
rust shall corrupt. Thus, if you lay up your treasures
there, you will have an imperishable treasure which
you can be in no danger of losing.” Signs, 1/31/1878.

“I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he
shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find
pasture.” John 10:9.
“Pearls are produced by suffering.… Slowly,
and patiently, the oyster begins to build layer upon layer
of a plastic, milky substance which at last covers up the
cutting edges of the sand, leaving a lovely coating over
all, which hardens to become a beautiful pearl. Thus
the trial is conquered and the misfortune turned to
blessing. All who enter that fair city will pass through a
gate of pearl, a symbol of suffering. By the abundant
grace of God they have turned their trials into
triumphs.” Anderson, UR, 204

REVELATION 21:22
And I saw no temple therein: for the
Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the
temple of it.
I Saw No Temple Therein.—
“Before his fall man worshiped God face to face
and therefore had no need of a temple.… The
redeemed will see and worship God face to face in the
celestial city and no other temple for worship will be
needed.” Bunch, TR, 286.

“We must through much tribulation, enter into the
kingdom of God.” Acts 14:22..
Every Several Gate.—
“Several—Strong’s Greek Dict. #1520, heis: one.”

“From eternal ages it was God's purpose that
every created being, from the bright and holy seraph
to man, should be a temple for the indwelling of the
Creator. Because of sin, humanity ceased to be a
temple for God. Darkened and defiled by evil, the heart
of man no longer revealed the glory of the Divine One.
But by the incarnation of the Son of God, the purpose of

Every Several Gate Was of One Pearl.—
“Each gate was made up of a different type of
pearl.” Michaelson, Write the Vision, Vol. 1, 385.

597

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Heaven is fulfilled. God dwells in humanity, and
through saving grace the heart of man becomes
again His temple. God designed that the temple at
Jerusalem should be a continual witness to the high
destiny open to every soul. But the Jews had not
understood the significance of the building they
regarded with so much pride. They did not yield
themselves as holy temples for the Divine Spirit.”
Desire of Ages, 161.

the Son. ‘Now we see through a glass, darkly.’ 1
Corinthians 13:12. We behold the image of God
reflected, as in a mirror, in the works of nature and in
His dealings with men; but then we shall see Him face
to face, without a dimming veil between. We shall
stand in His presence and behold the glory of His
countenance.” Great Controversy, 676.

REVELATION 21:23
And the city had no need of the sun,
neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the
glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is
the light thereof.

“The Temple of Jerusalem, as well as the
tabernacle in the wilderness, represented God’s realm in
the middle of man’s domain. Because of sin both
domains were differentiated and separated. To bridge
the gap, mediation between God and man was
necessary. Now, in the New Jerusalem the world of
God and the world of men have become one and the
same.
Mediation is no longer necessary.
Communication is open. God talks directly with
man, and man with God. The communion of love is
perfect. Therefore, the temple has to disappear.
“The true temple is the presence of God among
His people. God is no more separated from man. God
is no more in a place reserved to Him alone. The place
where God is and the place where man is have become
the same. The new city is the encounter place of God
and man, without barriers, and forever.” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 261.

The City Had No Need of the Sun, Nor the Moon.—
“The sun shall be no more thy light by day;
neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto
thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting
light, and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go
down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the
Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy
mourning shall be ended.” Isaiah 60:19,20.
“The light of the sun will be superseded by a
radiance which is not painfully dazzling, yet which
immeasurably surpasses the brightness of our noontide.
The glory of God and the Lamb floods the Holy City
with unfading light. The redeemed walk in the sunless
glory of perpetual day.” Great Controversy, 676.

“This does not mean that there will be no temple.
It means that the location of the temple has been
altered. Originally it was within the city. However,
in Ezekiel’s vision the temple is shown as being
outside the city. Apparently it is the same when the
reign of sin ceases, because John reveals that the saints,
represented by the number 144,000, ‘are before the
throne of God and serve him day and night in his
temple.’ Rev. 7:15. Undoubtedly, the temple will serve
a different function in the Hereafter because sin is no
more, and priestly services are no more. Christ will be,
not the priest-king, but King of kings.” Cooke, #33,
21,22.

“All, all who keep the commandments of God, will
enter in through the gates into the city and have right to
the tree of life and ever be in the presence of the lovely
Jesus, whose countenance shines brighter than the
sun at noonday.” Early Writings, 51.
“It is in the city alone, probably, that there is no
night. There will of course be days and nights in the
new earth, but they will be days and nights of
surpassing glory. In speaking of this time, the prophet
says, ‘Moreover, the light of the moon shall be as the
light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be
sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that
the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and
healeth the stroke of their wound.’ Isaiah 30:26. But
if the light of the moon in that state is as the light of the
sun, how can there be said to be night there? The light
of the sun shall be sevenfold, so that although the night
is as our day, the day will be sevenfold brighter, making
the contrast between day and night there as marked,
perhaps as at the present time.
Both will be
surpassingly glorious.” Smith, DR, 767,768.

Lord God Almighty & the Lamb Are the Temple.—
“With the temple is naturally associated the idea of
sacrifices and mediatorial work, but when the city is
located upon the earth, there will be no such work to be
performed. Sacrifices and offerings, and all mediatorial
work based thereon, will be forever past. Hence there
will be no need of the outward symbol of such work.
But the temple in old Jerusalem, besides being a place
for sacrificial worship, was the beauty and glory of the
place. As if to anticipate the question that might
arise as to what would constitute the ornament and
glory of the new city if there was to be no temple
therein, the prophet answers, ‘The Lord God Almighty
and the Lamb are the temple of it.’” Smith, DR, 767.

“In the New Jerusalem, there is no veil, no temple;
but God and Christ are the light of it. The veiling of
Jehovah’s glory is likewise typified by the sun and
moon in our own heavens. The light of these bodies

“(Rev. 21:22 quoted.) The people of God are
privileged to hold open communion with the Father and

598

REVELATION 21
seems intense to mortal eyes; but in the new earth, the
sun will shine with a light seven times brighter than
today and the moon will be as our sun. Even then,
their light is hidden by the glory of celestial rays.
Day and night, that light of life shines forth
throughout eternity.” Haskell, SSP, 347.

Glory of God & The Lamb Are the Light Thereof.—
“No candlestick, no church, shines of itself. From
Christ emanates all its light. The church in heaven
today is only the complement of the church on earth; but
it is higher, grander—perfect.
The same divine
illumination is to continue through eternal ages. The
Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the light
thereof. No church can have light if it fails to diffuse
the glory it receives from the throne of God.”
(Manuscript 1a, 1890). 6BC 1118.

“Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the
light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be
sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the
LORD bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth
the stroke of their wound.” Isaiah 30:26.

“In this present kingdom of grace Christ is the
spiritual light of the world, the sun of righteousness. In
the kingdom of glory, Christ is the literal light of the
world as is also the Father. That vast city of
approximately 350 miles square will have no need of
artificial lighting. The light of God’s glory will diffuse
throughout the whole city and in every dwelling.”
Cooke, #33-UR, 22.

“All nature, in its surpassing loveliness, will offer
to God a constant tribute of praise and adoration. The
world will be bathed in the light of heaven. The years
will move on in gladness. The light of the moon will be
as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun will be
sevenfold greater than it is now.” 8 Testimonies, 42.
PARALLELS BETWEEN
ISAIAH 60
AND REVELATION 21,22
‘Thy gates shall be open
‘The gates of it shall not
be shut at all by day for
continually. They shall
there shall be no night
not be shut day nor
there.’ Vs. 25.
night.’ Vs. 11.
‘That men may bring to
‘They shall bring the
glory and honor of the
thee the forces [mar.
nations into it.’ Vs. 24.
wealth] of the Gentiles
[or nations].’ Vs. 11.
‘That their kings may be
‘The kings of the earth do
bring their glory into it.’
brought.’ Vs. 11.
Vs. 26.
‘Violence shall no more
‘And there shall be no
be heard in thy land,
more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying,
wasting or destruction
within thy borders.’ Vs. neither …pain.’ Vs. 4.
‘There shall be no more
18.
curse.’ Vs. 22:3.
‘The sun shall no more
‘The city had no need of
Thy light by day, neither the sun, neither of the
moon to shine in it.’ Vs.
for brightness shall the
moon give light to thee.’ 23.
Vs. 19.
‘The Lord shall be to thee ‘The glory of God did
an everlasting light, and
lighten it and the Lamb is
the light thereof.’ Vs. 23;
thy God the glory.’ Vs.
22:5.
19.
‘The days of thy
‘And God shall wipe
mourning shall be ended.’ away all tears from their
eyes.’ Vs. 4.
Vs. 20.
‘Thy people shall be all
‘There shall in no wise
righteous.’ Vs. 21.
enter into it anything
that defileth, neither
abomination or makes a
lie.’ Vs. 27.
‘They shall inherit the
‘[The saints] shall reign
land forever.’ Vs. 21.
forever and ever.’ 22:5.
From: Cooke, #33-UR, 23,24.

“In the first creation the light appeared before the
appearing of the sun and the moon; in the new creation
the glory of God expands to eclipse any other
material source of light.… God’s light shines through
Christ.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 261.
“As Christ walked and talked with His disciples
during His ministry on this earth, so will He teach us in
the school above, leading us beside the river of living
waters and revealing to us truths that in this life must
remain hidden mysteries because of the limitations of
the human mind, so marred by sin.” Counsels to
Parents, Teachers, and Students, 209.

REVELATION 21:24
And the nations of them which are
saved shall walk in the light of it: and the
kings of the earth do bring their glory and
honour into it.
Nations and Kings.—
“The nations are the nations of the saved, and in
the new-earth state we are all kings in a certain sense.
We possess a ‘kingdom,’ and are to ‘reign’ forever and
ever.
“But it appears from some of our Saviour’s
parables, as in Matt.25:21,23, that some will occupy a
special sense the position of rulers, and may thus be
spoken of as kings of the earth in connection with the
nations of the saved. These bring their glory and honor
into the city, when on the Sabbaths and new moons they
there come up to worship before God. (Isaiah 66:23.)”
Smith, DR, 768.
“There will be no earthly nations saved as such,
except the one ‘holy nation’ of spiritual Israel which
is comprised of saints from every nation. …Because

599

GEMS FROM REVELATION
God’s kingdom is a place of perfect order, undoubtedly
the saved will be organized into appropriate groups—
‘the nations of the …saved.’” Cooke, #33-UR, 22.

guardian from his earliest moment; the angel who
watched his steps, and covered his head in the day of
peril; the angel who was with him in the valley of the
shadow of death, who marked his resting place, who
was the first to greet him in the resurrection morning—
what will it be to hold converse with him, and to learn
the history of divine interposition in the individual
life, of heavenly cooperation in every work for
humanity!
“All the perplexities of life’s experience will
then be made plain. Where to us have appeared only
confusion and disappointment, broken purposes and
thwarted plans, will be seen a grand, overruling,
victorious purpose, a divine harmony.” Education,
305.

“What kings are these? This description is
borrowed from Isaiah 60 where the prophet foretold
how ancient Israel would have become the center of the
kingdom of God on earth, were she faithful. However,
the prediction will be fulfilled to spiritual Israel in the
last days in a spiritual sense. It will also have a literal
fulfillment in the earth made new. Much of the
imagery used by Isaiah is borrowed by the Revelator
in Revelation 21 and 22.
“And the Gentiles [nations] shall come to thy
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.” Isaiah
60:3.

“Many seem to have the idea that this world and
the heavenly mansions constitute the universe of God.
Not so. The redeemed throng will range from world
to world, and much of their time will be employed in
searching out the mysteries of redemption. And
throughout the whole stretch of eternity, this subject
will be continually opening to their minds. The
privileges of those who overcome by the blood of the
Lamb and the word of their testimony are beyond
comprehension.” (Review & Herald, 3/9/1886). 7BC,
990.

“The church triumphant will be divided into
twelve tribal or national divisions, just as the church
militant has always been divided according to the
twelve leading characteristics of her members. See Rev.
7:4-8. The twelve nations of the redeemed will be
ruled over by the twelve apostle kings in fulfillment
of the promise of Jesus. See Mt. 19:27,28; Luke
22:28-30. These are ‘the nations of them which are
saved’ and the ‘kings of the earth’ which enter the city
through the twelve gates as described in Rev. 21:24-26.
The citizens of each nation will pass through the gate of
the nation to which they belong as indicated by the
name of the tribe inscribed on or above the various
gates.
“…The twelve nations will together compose a
central united kingdom ruled over by the second Adam
who will be the ‘KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF
LORDS.’ The central throne will be ‘the throne of
David’ on which ‘the Son of David’ will reign forever,
and ‘of the increase of His government and peace
there shall be no end.’ See Isa. 9:6,7. Then will be
fulfilled Isa. 26:1,2: ‘In that day shall this song be
sung in the land of Judah; We have a strong city;
salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.
Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which
keepeth the truth may enter in.’ ” Bunch, TR,
284,285.

Do Bring Their Glory and Honor Into It.—
“Angels were all about us as we marched over the
sea of glass to the gate of the city. Jesus raised His
mighty, glorious arm, laid hold of the pearly gate,
swung it back on its glittering hinges, and said to us,
‘You have washed your robes in My blood, stood
stiffly for My truth, enter in.’ We all marched in and
felt that we had a perfect right in the city.” Life
Sketches, 66.

REVELATION 21:25
And the gates of it shall not be shut at
all by day: for there shall be no night there.
The Gates Of It Shall Not Be Shut At All By Day.—
“Therefore thy gates shall be open continually;
they shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring
unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings
may be brought.” Isaiah 60:11.

“Unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in His own blood, And hath made us kings and
priests unto God and His Father.” Rev. 1:5,6.

There Shall Be No Night There.—
“In the City of God ‘there shall be no night.’
None will need or desire repose. There will be no
weariness in doing the will of God and offering praise to
His name. We shall ever feel the freshness of the
morning and shall ever be far from its close. ‘And they
need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord
God giveth them light.’ Revelation 22:5. The light of
the sun will be superseded by a radiance which is not
painfully dazzling, yet which immeasurably surpasses

Shall Walk In The Light of It.—
“The statement, [Rev. 21:24 last part quoted],
refers to the Lamb and the glory of God, source for light
for the Holy City. This recalls the pillar of fire that
lighted Israel’s way through the wilderness to the
Promised Land (Exod. 13:21).” Biblical Research
Inst., 2SOR, 268.
“Every redeemed one will understand the ministry
of angels in his own life. The angel who was his

600

REVELATION 21
the brightness of our noontide. The glory of God and
the Lamb floods the Holy City with unfading light. The
redeemed walk in the sunless glory of perpetual
day.” Great Controversy, 676.

shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that is
among the children of Israel.” Ezekiel 44:9.
“These are they which were not defiled with
women; for they are virgins.” Rev. 14:4.

“The disappearing of night is …mentioned twice
(21:25; 22:5). Why this insistence? We know how
important the light motif is in the Johannine writings.
Light can symbolize knowledge and truth. To say that
there is no more night means also that the mystery of
God (10:7) will be revealed, the revelation of Christ
will be fully accomplished (1:1), and all that now is
dark and obscure will become, finally, definitively
clear.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 262.

“But all cannot enter. Some are left outside with
their children, whose characters have not been
transformed by submission to the will of God. A hand
is raised, and the words are spoken, ‘You have
neglected home duties. You have failed to do the work
that would have fitted the soul for a home in heaven.
You cannot enter.’ The gates are closed to the
children because they have not learned to do the will
of God, and to parents because they have neglected
the responsibilities resting upon them.” (Manuscript
31, 1909). Child Guidance, 13.

REVELATION 21:26,27
And they shall bring the glory and
honour of the nations into it.
And there shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever
worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but
they which are written in the Lamb’s book
of life.

“Unclean, neglected corners in the house will tend
to make impure, neglected corners in the soul. Perfect
cleanliness, plenty of sunlight, careful attention to
sanitation in every detail of the home life, are
essential to freedom from disease and to the
cheerfulness and vigor of the inmates of the home.
“Heaven is pure and holy, and those who pass
through the gates of the city of God must here be
clothed with inward and outward purity.” My Life
Today, 129.

The Glory and Honor of the Nations.—
“What glory and honor? The redeemed will not
exist in a state of inactivity in the better land. As the
author of the Great Controversy has so beautifully
described it:
“ ‘Immortal minds will contemplate with neverfailing delight the wonders of creative power, the
mysteries of redeeming love. There will be no cruel,
deceiving foe to tempt to forgetfulness of God. Every
faculty will be developed, every capacity increased.
The acquirement of knowledge will not weary the mind
or exhaust the energies.
There the grandest
enterprises may be carried forward, the loftiest
aspirations reached, the highest ambitions realized;
and still there will arise new heights to surmount,
new wonders to admire, new truths to comprehend,
fresh objects to call forth the powers of mind and
soul and body. All the treasures of the universe will
be open to the study of God’s redeemed.’ GC, 677.

“Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man
defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for
the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.” 1Cor.
3:16,17.
“No man can be a true minister of righteousness,
and yet be under the inspiration of sensual appetites. He
cannot indulge the habit of using tobacco, and yet win
souls to the platform of true temperance. The cloud of
smoke coming from his lips has no salutary effect upon
liquor drinkers. The gospel sermon must come from
lips undefiled by tobacco smoke. With pure, clean lips
God’s servants must tell the triumphs of the cross. The
practice of using liquor, tobacco, tea, and coffee
must be overcome by the converting power of God.
There shall nothing enter into the kingdom of God
that defileth.” (Manuscript 86, 1897). Temperance,
69.

Nothing That Defiles Shall Enter In.—
“Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk
in the law of the LORD.” Psalm 119:1.
“And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, even every one that is written among the
living in Jerusalem.” Isaiah 4:3.
“Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put
on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city:
for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the
uncircumcised and the unclean.” Is. 52:1.
“Thus saith the Lord GOD; No stranger,
uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh,

“All who enter the City of God will enter through
the strait gate—by agonizing effort; for ‘there shall in
no wise enter into it anything that defileth.’
Revelation 21:27. But none who have fallen need give
up to despair. Aged men, once honored of God, may
have defiled their souls, sacrificing virtue on the altar of
lust; but if they repent, forsake sin, and turn to God,
there is still hope for them. He who declares, ‘Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life,’ also gives the invitation, ‘Let the wicked forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and

601

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“When we become children of God, our names
are written in the Lamb’s book of life, and they
remain there until the time of the investigative
judgment. Then the name of every individual will be
called, and his record examined, by Him who declares,
‘I know thy works.’ If in that day it shall appear that
all our wicked deeds have not been fully repented of,
our names will be blotted from the book of life, and our
sins will stand against us.” (Signs, 9/6/1885). 7BC,
987.

let him return unto the Lord, and He will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, for He will
abundantly pardon.’ Rev. 2:10; Isaiah 55:7. God
hates sin, but He loves the sinner. ‘I will heal their
backsliding,’ He declares; ‘I will love them freely.’
Hosea 14:4.” Prophets & Kings, 84.
Or Maketh a Lie.—
“The character of those who enter the city is also
indicated by the character of those excluded. Three
times it is repeated that all liars will be excluded
from the heavenly city and kingdom. …It is evident
from many Scriptures that God especially hates lying.
See Prov. 6:6-19. The telling of a lie was the first sin
ever committed by him who is the father of lies. Lying
was the chief cause of the fall of Lucifer and his angels
and also man. Those who enter the kingdom of God
will get complete victory over lying. See Zeph. 3:13;
Rev. 14:5.” Bunch, TR, 287.

“As the people of God afflict their souls be-fore
Him, pleading for purity of heart, the command is
given, ‘Take away the filthy garments’ from them,
and the encouraging words are spoken, ‘Behold, I have
caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will
clothe thee with change of raiment.’ The spotless
robe of Christ’s righteousness is placed upon the tried,
tempted, yet faithful children of God. The despised
remnant are clothed in glorious apparel, nevermore to
be defiled by the corruptions of the world. Their
names are retained in the Lamb’s book of life,
enrolled among the faithful of all ages. They have
resisted the wiles of the deceiver; they have not been
turned from their loyalty by the dragon’s roar. Now
they are eternally secure from the tempter’s devices.
Their sins are transferred to the originator of sin. And
the remnant are not only pardoned and accepted, but
honored. ‘A fair miter’ is set upon their heads. They
are to be as kings and priests unto God.” 5
Testimonies, 475,476.

“Judgment also will I lay to the line, and
righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow
the hiding place.” Isaiah 28:17.
“In pretending that they had given all, Ananias and
Sapphira lied to the Holy Spirit, and, as a result, they
lost this life and the life that is to come. The same God
who punished them, today condemns all falsehood.
Lying lips are an abomination to Him. He declares
that into the Holy City ‘there shall in no wise enter...
anything that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh
abomination, or maketh a lie.’ Revelation 21:27. Let
truth telling be held with no loose hand or uncertain
grasp. Let it become a part of the life. Playing fast and
loose with truth, and dissembling to suit one’s own
selfish plans, means shipwreck of faith.
‘Stand
therefore, having your loins girt about with truth.’
Ephesians 6:14. He who utters untruths sells his soul
in a cheap market. His falsehoods may seem to serve in
emergencies; he may thus seem to make business
advancement that he could not gain by fair dealing; but
he finally reaches the place where he can trust no one.
Himself a falsifier, he has no confidence in the word
of others.” Acts of the Apostles, 75.

Shall Enter.—
“But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok,
that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the
children of Israel went astray from me, they shall
come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall
stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood,
saith the Lord GOD:
They shall enter into my
sanctuary, and they shall come near to my table, to
minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.”
Ezekiel 44:15,16.

Written in the Lamb’s Book of Life.—
“The book of life contains the names of all who
have ever entered the service of God. Jesus bade His
disciples: ‘Rejoice, because your names are written
in heaven.’ Luke 10:20. Paul speaks of his faithful
fellow workers, ‘whose names are in the book of life.’
Phil. 4:3. Daniel, looking down to ‘a time of trouble,
such as never was,’ declares that God’s people shall be
delivered, ‘everyone that shall be found written in the
book.’ And the revelator says that those only shall
enter the city of God whose names ‘are written in the
Lamb’s book of life." Dan. 12:1; Rev. 21:27.” Great
Controversy, 480,481.

602

REVELATION 22

REVELATION 22
“One of the seven plague angels. See ch. 21:9.”

REVELATION 22: 1-21
1 And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.
2 In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river,
was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and
yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for
the healing of the nations.
3 And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and
of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him:
4 And they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their
foreheads.
5 And there shall be no night there; and they need no candle,
neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and
they shall reign for ever and ever.
6 And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true: and
the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his
servants the things which must shortly be done.
7 Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings
of the prophecy of this book.
8 And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I
had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the
angel which shewed me these things.
9 Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy
fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them
which keep the sayings of this book: worship God.
10 And he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy
of this book: for the time is at hand.
11 He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.
12 And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to
give every man according as his work shall be.
13 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first
and the last.
14 Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may
have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates
into the city.
15 For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers,
and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a
lie.
16 I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things
in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the
bright and morning star.
17 And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that
heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And
whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.
18 For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the
prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God
shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book:
19 And if any man shall take away from the words of the book
of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are
written in this book.
20 He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly.
Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.
21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

PJ.
The River of Water of Life.—
“In Eden the tree of life grows on the banks of the
river of life. As long as Adam and Eve ate of the fruit of
that tree, life was eternal. The waters were life-giving.
This virtue has been lost be the rivers of earth, through
the curse of sin, yet every flowing river is a reminder to
man, of the river of life which proceeds from the throne
of God. The source of this river is God—the
fountain, or head waters of all truth; and flowing
from Him, who is infinite and eternal, it signifies the
spread of truth through the earth. In Eden that water
typified Christ; and there, they communed with Him as
freely as they drank of the clear flowing waters.
Rivulets from the throne have always watered the earth,
but there never have been channels sufficiently strong
for an over abundant flow. On the new earth, that river
will be restored. Christ Himself will lead His people to
the fountain of living waters. ‘Thou shalt make them
drink of the river of Thy pleasures. For with Thee is
the fountain of life.’ ‘Ho, every one that thirsteth.
‘The Spirit and the bride say, Come. …Let him that
is athirst come.’ Jesus said: ‘Whosoever drinketh of
the water that I shall give him shall never thirst.’ ‘If
thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to
thee, Give Me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of
Him, and He would have given thee living water.’
(Ps. 36:8; Is. 55:1; Rev. 22:17; John 4:10,14).” Haskell,
SSP, 351,352.
“ ‘If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and
drink. He that believeth on Me, as the Scripture
hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water.’ ‘This,’ said John, ‘spake He of the Spirit,
which they that believe on Him should receive.’ John
7:37-39. The refreshing water, welling up in a parched
and barren land, causing the desert place to blossom,
and flowing out to give life to the perishing, is an
emblem of the divine grace which Christ alone can
bestow, and which is as the living water, purifying,
refreshing, and invigorating the soul. He in whom
Christ is abiding has within him a never-failing fountain
of grace and strength. Jesus cheers the life and
brightens the path of all who truly seek Him. His love,
received into the heart, will spring up in good works
unto eternal life. And not only does it bless the soul in
which it springs, but the living stream will flow out in
words and deeds of righteousness, to refresh the
thirsting around him.
“The same figure Christ had employed in His
conversation with the woman of Samaria at Jacob’s
well: ‘Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall

REVELATION 22:1,2
And he shewed me a pure river of
water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out
of the throne of God and of the Lamb.
He Shewed Me.—

603

GEMS FROM REVELATION
throne. Secondly, the sparkling waters that emerge
from beneath the throne.
What an impressive
demonstration of the creative power of God. Thirdly,
the tree of life.” Cooke, #33-UR, 27.

give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall
give him shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life.’ John 4:14. Christ combines the
two types. He is the rock, He is the living water.
“The same beautiful and expressive figures are
carried throughout the Bible. Centuries before the
advent of Christ, Moses pointed to Him as the rock of
Israel’s salvation (Deuteronomy 32:15); the psalmist
sang of Him as ‘my Redeemer,’ ‘the rock of my
strength,’ ‘the rock that is higher than I,’ ‘a rock of
habitation,’ ‘rock of my heart,’ ‘rock of my refuge.’
In David’s song His grace is pictured also as the cool,
‘still waters,’ amid green pastures, beside which the
heavenly Shepherd leads His flock. Again, ‘Thou shalt
make them,’ he says, ‘drink of the river of Thy
pleasures. For with Thee is the fountain of life.’
Psalms 19:14; 62:7; 61:2; 71:3 (margin); 73:26
(margin); 94:22; 23:2; 36:8, 9. And the wise man
declares, ‘The wellspring of wisdom [is] as a flowing
brook.’ Proverbs 18:4. To Jeremiah, Christ is ‘the
fountain of living waters;’ to Zechariah, ‘a fountain
opened ...for sin and for uncleanness.’ Jeremiah
2:13; Zechariah 13:1.
“Isaiah describes Him as the ‘rock of ages,’ and
‘the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.’ Isaiah
26:4 (margin); 32:2. And he records the precious
promise, bringing vividly to mind the living stream that
flowed for Israel: ‘When the poor and needy seek
water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for
thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel
will not forsake them.’ ‘I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground;’ ‘in
the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in
the desert.’ The invitation is given, ‘Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters.’ Isaiah 41:17;
44:3; 35:6; 55:1. And in the closing pages of the Sacred
Word this invitation is echoed. The river of the water of
life, ‘clear as crystal,’ proceeds from the throne of God
and the Lamb; and the gracious call is ringing down
through the ages, ‘Whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely.’ Revelation 22:17.” Patriarchs &
Prophets, 412,413.

“Afterward he brought me again unto the door of
the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under
the threshold of the house eastward.” Ezekiel 47:1.
Rain From Heaven.—
“The rain from heaven to earth seems to connect
with the river in heaven. See Psalm 46:4, 65:4, Deut.
11:1-15. Compare the river flowing through the New
Jerusalem with the river flowing through Babylon.” PJ.

REVELATION 22:2
In the midst of the street of it, and on
either side of the river, was there the tree of
life, which bare twelve manner of fruits,
and yielded her fruit every month: and the
leaves of the tree were for the healing of the
nations.
The Street of It.—
“Although the word ‘street’ is here used in the
singular number, with the definite article ‘the’ before it,
it is not supposed that there is but one street in the city;
for there are twelve gates, and there must of course be a
street leading to each gate. But the street here spoken of
is the street by way of distinction, the main street, or, as
the original word signifies, the broad way, the great
avenue.” Smith, DR, 771.
In the Midst of the Street of It.—
“The tree of life is in the midst of this street; but is
on either side of the river of life. Therefore the river of
life is also in the midst of the street of the city. This
river proceeds from the throne of God. The picture thus
presented before the mind is this: The glorious throne
of God at the head of this broad way, or avenue; out
of that throne the river of life, flowing lengthwise
through the center of the street; and the tree of life
growing on either side, forming a high and
magnificent arch over that majestic stream, and
spreading its life-bearing branches far away on
either side. How wide this broad street is, we have no
means of determining, but it will be at once perceived
that a city three hundred and seventy-five miles square,
would have an ample space for its great avenue.” Smith,
DR, 771.

“And it shall come to pass, that every thing that
liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall
come, shall live: and there shall be a very great
multitude of fish, because these waters shall come
thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall
live whither the river cometh.” Ezekiel 47:9.
“Medical missionary work and the gospel
ministry are the channels through which God seeks to
pour a constant supply of His goodness. They are to be
as the river of life for the irrigation of His church.”
Bible Echo, 8/12/1901.

The Tree of Life On Either Side of the River.—
“But how can the tree of life be but one tree, and
still be on either side of the river? It is evident that
there is but one tree of life. From Genesis to Revelation
it is spoken of as but one—the tree of life. To be at
once on both sides of the river, it must have more than
one trunk, in which case it must be united above in

Proceeding Out of the Throne.—
“Revelation describes the New Jerusalem from the
external view. Revelation 22 now describes the city
from within. The first and central object is the

604

REVELATION 22
There is no power that can prohibit any soul from taking
of its fruit.
All may eat, and live forever.”
6Testimonies, 19.

order to form but one tree.” Smith, DR, 771,772.
“Why should such a tree be looked upon as
unnatural or impossible, since we have an illustration of
it here upon earth? The banyan tree of India is of
precisely the same nature in this respect. Of this tree the
Encyclopedia Americana thus speaks: ‘The Ficus
indica (Indian fig, or banyan tree) has been celebrated
from antiquity from its letting its branches drop and take
root in the earth, which in their turn become trunks, and
give out other branches, a single tree thus forming a
little forest.’ In just this way the tree of life could
extend and support itself.” Smith, DR (1897), 577.

Which Bare 12 Manner of Fruits...Every Month.—
“The tree of life bears twelve kinds of fruit, and
yields its fruit every month. This fact throws light upon
the declaration in Isa.66:23, that all flesh shall come up
‘from one new moon to another’ to worship before the
Lord of hosts. The Greek phrase in the verse before us
is kata mena hekaston, ‘each month.’ The Septuagint
has here men ek menos ‘from month to month.’ The
redeemed come up to the holy city from month to
month to partake of the fruit of the tree of life.”
Smith, DR, 772.

“The fruit of the tree of life in the Garden of Eden
possessed supernatural virtue. To eat of it was to live
forever. Its fruit was the antidote of death. Its
leaves were for the sustaining of life and immortality. But through man’s disobedience death entered
the world. Adam ate of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, the fruit of which he had been forbid-den
to touch. This was his test. He failed, and his
transgression opened the floodgates of woe upon our
world.
“The tree of life was a type of the one great Source
of immortality. Of Christ it is written, ‘In Him was
life; and the life was the light of men.’ He is the
fountain of life. Obedience to Him is the life-giving,
vivifying power that gladdens the soul. Through sin
man shut himself off from access to the tree of life.
Now, life and immortality are brought to light
through Jesus Christ....” Medical Ministry, 233,234.

“Every month [Isa. 66:23] the redeemed come to
the tree of life to eat of its fruit. When one considers the
innumerable multitude of God’s people, what an
abundance of fruit must be produced by this tree.”
Cooke, #33-UR, 27.
Necessary to Preserve Immortal Life.—
“The purpose of this tree seems to be to assure the
saints life without interruption. Its fruit is produced
each month. This seems to be the reason for the
monthly visit to the city at the time of the new moon.
Isaiah 66:23. Some have thought that the fruit of
this tree contains all the essential elements to
perpetuate life. Before sin man had free access to the
tree of life. Because of disobedience man was driven
from his garden home and angels were stationed at the
tree of life lest sinful man should continue to eat of its
fruit and become immortal.” Metcalf, GPDR, 175.

“It has been noticed that the word used in
Revelation 22:2 for ‘tree’ is xulon, ‘wood,’ and not the
usual word which in the NT is dendron. Now, xulon,
which usually means ‘wood’ (cf. Rev. 18:12,13), is
often used in the New Testament for the cross, and
always, in Revelation, for the ‘tree of life’ (cf. 2:7;
22:2,14,19). If this is an allusion to the cross, ‘the tree
of life’ would be one of the most beautiful images
ever possible for the gospel: the tree would be the
perfect reminder that life reaches man only through the
redemptive sacrifice of Jesus.” Biblical Research Inst.,
2SOR, 267.

“Man is not naturally immortal. Nor does he
possess an immortal soul. Therefore it is necessary to
perpetuate immortality. The chosen source is the tree of
life. This is a continual reminder to the redeemed that
even in the sinless, immortal state they are still
dependent upon God for life.” Cooke, #33-UR, 28.
“The tree of life is a representation of the
preserving care of Christ for His children. As Adam
and Eve ate of this tree, they acknowledged their
dependence upon God. The tree of life possessed the
power to perpetuate life, and as long as they ate of it,
they could not die. The lives of the antediluvians were
protracted because of the life-giving power of this tree,
which was transmitted to them from Adam and Eve.”
(Review & Herald, 1/26/1897). 7BC, 988.

“Out of the throne came a pure river of water, and
on either side of the river was the tree of life. On one
side of the river was a trunk of a tree, and a trunk on the
other side of the river, both of pure, transparent gold.
At first I thought I saw two trees. I looked again,
and saw that they were united at the top in one tree.
So it was the tree of life on either side of the river of
life. Its branches bowed to the place where we stood,
and the fruit was glorious; it looked like gold mixed
with silver.” Early Writings, 17.

“After the entrance of sin, the heavenly
Husbandman transplanted the tree of life to the Paradise
above; but its branches hang over the wall to the
lower world. Through the redemption purchased by the
blood of Christ, we may still eat of its life-giving
fruit.” (Signs, 3/31/1909) 7BC, 989.

“The word of truth, ‘It is written,’ is the gospel
we are to preach. No flaming sword is placed before
this tree of life. All who will may partake of it.

Its Leaves Are For the Healing of the Nations.—

605

GEMS FROM REVELATION
“Literally, the service of the nations. This
cannot be understood as implying that any will enter the
city in a diseased or deformed condition to need
healing; for then the conclusion would follow that there
will always be persons there in that condition, as we
have no reason to understand that the service of the
leaves, whatever it is, will not be perpetual, like the
use of the fruit. But the idea of disease and deformity
in the immortal state is contrary to the express
declarations of Scripture. ‘The inhabitant shall not
say, I am sick.’ Is. 33:24.” Smith, DR, 772.

5BC, 1134.
“(Rev. 2:7 quoted.) Must we wait until we are
translated before we eat of the leaves of the tree of
life? He who receives into his heart the words of
Christ knows what it means to eat the leaves of the
tree of life. (John 6:33-63 quoted.)
“When the believer, in the fellowship of the Spirit,
can lay his hand upon truth itself, and appropriate it, he
eats the bread that comes down from heaven. He enters
into the life of Christ, and appreciates the great sacrifice
made in behalf of the sinful race.
“The knowledge that comes from God is the
bread of life. It is the leaves of the tree of life which
are for the healing of the nations. The current of
spiritual life thrills the soul as the words of Christ
are believed and practiced. Thus it is that we are
made one with Christ. The experience that was weak
and feeble becomes strong. It is eternal life to us if we
hold the beginning of our confidence firm unto the end.
“All truth is to be received as the life of Jesus.
Truth cleanses us from all impurity, and prepares
the soul for Christ's presence. Christ is formed
within, the hope of glory.” (Manuscript 103, 1902).
7BC, 957.

“The statement that the leaves of the tree of life are
‘for the healing of the nations’ (22:2) is problematic.
In a world where death and suffering have disappeared,
is there any need for healing? (Cf. Ezek. 47:12.) In
order to answer this question we must also remember
that man, even after resurrection, remains a creature.
He lives because God’s life is imparted, moment
after moment, to him.
“Even while being with God, man is still man, and
God is still God. Man depends on God for subsisting.
He will be constantly dependent on God’s life. The
leaves of the tree of life will remind man that he
needs to be continuously ‘healed’ of his finitude.
Even though fully integrated in the body of Christ, man
will never be Christ. Man will be able to look to God
face to face, but will never be divinized. He will never
be God. He will always be a creature, and God will
always be the Creator. Man will reign but never alone,
always with God.” Biblical Research Inst., 2SOR, 267.

“The Word of God is our sanctification and
righteousness, because it is spiritual food. To study it
is to eat the leaves of the tree of life. Nothing is more
uplifting to God’s servants than to teach the Scriptures
just as Christ taught them. The Word of God contains
divine nourishment, which satisfies the appetite for
spiritual food.” (Letter 17, 1902) Evangelism, 138.

“And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this
side and on that side, shall grow all trees for meat,
whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof
be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit according to
his months, because their waters they issued out of the
sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and
the leaf thereof for medicine.” Ezekiel 47:12.

“In them [the promises of God’s word] He is
speaking to us individually, speaking as directly as if we
could listen to His voice. It is in these promises that
Christ communicates to us His grace and power.
They are leaves from that tree which is ‘for the
healing of the nations.’ Rev. 22:2.
Received,
assimilated, they are to be the strength of the character,
the inspiration and sustenance of the life. Nothing else
can have such healing power. Nothing besides can
impart the courage and faith which give vital energy
to the whole being.” Ministry of Healing, 122.

“All the war and strife of nations have come
because man ate not of the fruit of the tree of life. The
whole controversy of six thousand years originated
when man ate of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil. That tree will not be found in the earth
made new, and the fires of the last days will consume all
nations who have continued to eat of its fruit. ‘The
scars and bruises’ (Ezek. 47:12, mar.) caused by
eating its fruit will be healed by the leaves of the tree
of life.” Haskell, SSP, 352,353.

REVELATION 22:3
And there shall be no more curse: but
the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be
in it; and his servants shall serve him:

“For the leaders in Israel to extend a knowledge of
the Scriptures in all their borders is to promote spiritual
health; for God’s Word is a leaf from the tree of life.”
(Manuscript 14, 1903). 2BC, 1039.

There Shall Be No More Curse.—
“The curse that Heaven placed upon the world
in the beginning was threefold.
“1. The curse upon the ground as a result of
Adam’s sin. This prevented the soil from giving forth
of its fullness in regard to production. [Gen. 3:17].
“2. The curse upon Cain because of the murder of

“Especially will the sick be comforted by hearing
the Word; for in giving the Scriptures God has given
to mankind a leaf from the tree of life, which is for
the healing of the nations.” (Manuscript 105, 1901).

606

REVELATION 22
his brother [Gen. 4:11]. The Hebrew may read, ‘Thou
art more cursed than the earth.’
“3. The curse upon the earth at the Flood because
of the moral corruption of the race by which ‘the world
that then was’ became ‘the heavens and the earth
which are now.’ [Gen. 8:21; 6:1-7; 2 Peter 3:6,7.]
“ ‘The curse did not come all at once… Since the
Food, as the human family have forgotten God…the
curse has rested heavier and heavier upon men and
upon the beasts. The trees and all vegetation also have
felt the effects of the curse.’ Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 4, 192.

And they shall see his face; and his
name shall be in their foreheads.
His Face.—
“The word ‘His,’ in the sentence, ‘And they shall
see his face,’ refers to the Father; for He is the one
whose name is in their foreheads. That it is the Father,
we learn from chapter 14:1. This will be a fulfillment of
the promise in Matt.5:8, ‘Blessed are the pure in
heart; for they shall see God.’” Smith, DR, 773.
They Shall See His Face.—
“According to the Scriptures, no sinful mortal has
ever seen God’s face. God did not show Himself to the
prophets, nor to the priests in the temple. He was
present, but never visible. … Only God’s name was
known. He always acted through His Word. He was
‘heard’ but not ‘seen.’ Now sight joins hearing, and
God’s presence is fully experienced by man.” Biblical
Research Inst., 2SOR, 262,263.

“And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no
more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely
inhabited.” Zech. 14:11.
“But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all
his commandments and his statutes which I command
thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon
thee, and overtake thee.” Dt. 28:15.

“We behold the image of God reflected, as in a
mirror, in the works of nature and in His dealings with
men; but then we shall see Him face to face, without a
dimming veil between.
We shall stand in His
presence and behold the glory of His countenance.”
Great Controversy, 677.
“In the heavenly school we shall have opportunity
to attain, step by step, to the greatest heights of learning.
There, as children of the heavenly King, we shall ever
dwell with the members of the royal family; there we
shall see the King in His beauty and behold His
matchless charms.” Counsels to Parents, Teachers,
and Students, 208.
“Face exhibits character. Our heavenly Father is
absolute perfection. What, then, must the Father’s face
be like? Beautiful faces have a magnetic attraction.
How then, will the saints be affected when they ‘see his
face.’
We suggest that so awe-inspiring, so
impressive, so moving, so overwhelming is God’s
face that the saints will be unable to contain
themselves. They will burst forth into uninhibited
praise.” Cooke, #33-UR, 29,30.

No More Sin, No More Curse
The Throne of God and of the Lamb.—
“This language proves that the great God, the
Father, is referred to, as well as the Son.” Smith, DR,
772.

“Christ took with Him to the heavenly courts His
glorified humanity. To those who receive Him He gives
power to become the sons of God, that at last God may
receive them as His, to dwell with Him throughout
eternity. If during this life they are loyal to God, they
will at last ‘see His face; and His name shall be in
their foreheads.’ Revelation 22:4. And what is the
happiness of heaven but to see God? What greater joy
could come to the sinner saved by the grace of Christ
than to look upon the face of God and know Him as
Father?” Ministry of Healing, 421.

His Servants Shall Serve Him.—
“‘His servants shall serve Him.’ Rev. 22:3. The
life on earth is the beginning of the life in heaven;
education on earth is an initiation into the principles of
heaven; the lifework here is a training for the lifework
there. What we now are, in character and holy
service, is the sure foreshadowing of what we shall
be.” Education, 307.

REVELATION 22:4

“The central theme of the Bible, the theme about

607

GEMS FROM REVELATION
which every other in the whole book clusters, is the
redemption plan, the restoration in the human soul of
the image of God. From the first intimation of hope in
the sentence pronounced in Eden to that last glorious
promise of the Revelation, ‘They shall see His face;
and His name shall be in their foreheads’ (Rev.
22:4), the burden of every book and every passage of
the Bible is the unfolding of this wondrous theme—
man’s uplifting—the power of God, ‘which giveth us
the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.’ 1
Corinthians 15:57.
“He who grasps this thought has before him an
infinite field for study. He has the key that will
unlock to him the whole treasure house of God’s
word.” Education, 126.

another, nor over other worlds. It is probably, rather, a
figure of the felicity of the redeemed. No longer will
they be under the oppressive hand of some persecuting
power. They will enjoy the freedom and abundance
of kings.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 896.
“And hast made us unto our God kings and
priests: and we shall reign on the earth.” Rev. 5:10.
“To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne.” Rev. 3:21.

REVELATION 22:6
And he said unto me, These sayings are
faithful and true: and the Lord God of the
holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto
his servants the things which must shortly
be done.

His Name Shall Be in Their Foreheads.—
“Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and the
name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem,
which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I
will write upon him my new name.” Revelation 3:12.

To Shew Unto His Servants.—
“The Bible was designed to be a guide to all who
wish to become acquainted with the will of their Maker.
God gave to men the sure word of prophecy; angels
and even Christ Himself came to make known to
Daniel and John the things that must shortly come to
pass.
Those important matters that concern our
salvation were not left involved in mystery. They were
not revealed in such a way as to perplex and mislead the
honest seeker after truth. Said the Lord by the prophet
Habakkuk: ‘Write the vision, and make it plain,
...that he may run that readeth it.’ Habakkuk 2:2.
The word of God is plain to all who study it with a
prayerful heart. Every truly honest soul will come to
the light of truth. ‘Light is sown for the righteous.’
Psalm 97:11. And no church can advance in holiness
unless its members are earnestly seeking for truth as for
hid treasure.” Great Controversy, 521,522.

“And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount
Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand,
having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.”
Rev. 14:1.
“All who enter [the New Jerusalem] will have on
the robe of Christ’s righteousness, and the name of
God will be seen in their foreheads. This name is the
symbol which the apostle saw in vision, and signifies
the yielding of the mind to intelligent and loyal
obedience to all of God’s commandments.” Son &
Daughters, 370.

REVELATION 22:5
And there shall be no night there; and
they need no candle, neither light of the
sun; for the Lord God giveth them light:
and they shall reign for ever and ever.

Things Which Must Shortly Be Done.—
“The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave
unto him, to shew unto his servants things which must
shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his
angel unto his servant John.” Rev. 1:1.

There Shall Be No Night There.—

“In the City of God ‘there shall be no night.’
None will need or desire repose. There will be no
weariness in doing the will of God and offering praise to
His name. We shall ever feel the freshness of the
morning and shall ever be far from its close.” Great
Controversy, 676.

REVELATION 22:7
Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he
that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of
this book.

For the Lord God Giveth Them Light.—
“The entrance of thy words giveth light; it
giveth understanding unto the simple.” Ps. 119:130.

Behold, I Come Quickly.—
“Christ Himself, through whom all these
revelations have come, repeats the promise which has
been the hope of men through the ages, ‘Behold, I come
quickly.’” Smith, DR, 773.

They Shall Reign.—
“This does not mean they will reign over one

608

REVELATION 22
“It was not the will of God that the coming of
Christ should be thus delayed. God did not design that
His people, Israel, should wander forty years in the
wilderness. He promised to lead them directly to the
land of Canaan, and establish them there a holy, healthy,
happy people. But those to whom it was first
preached, went not in ‘because of unbelief’ (Heb.
3:19). Their hearts were filled with murmuring,
rebellion, and hatred, and He could not fulfill His
covenant with them.
“For forty years did unbelief, murmuring, and
rebellion shut out ancient Israel from the land of
Canaan. The same sins have delayed the entrance of
modern Israel into the heavenly Canaan. In neither case
were the promises of God at fault. It is the unbelief,
the worldliness, unconsecration, and strife among
the Lord’s professed people that have kept us in this
world of sin and sorrow so many years.” Selected
Messages, Vol. 1, 67-69.

“Verse 7 proves that Christ is the speaker, a fact
which it is of especial importance to bear in mind in
connection with verse 14.” Smith, DR (1897), 578.
I Come Quickly.—
“ And from Patmos, Christ speaks to us by the
beloved John: ‘Blessed is he that readeth, and they that
hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things
which are written therein: for the time is at hand’
(Rev. 1:3). ‘The Lord God of the holy prophets sent his
angel to shew unto his servants the things which must
shortly be done. Behold, I come quickly; blessed is
he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book’
(Rev. 22:6, 7).
“The angels of God in their messages to men
represent time as very short. Thus it has always been
presented to me. It is true that time has continued
longer than we expected in the early days of this
message. Our Saviour did not appear as soon as we
hoped. But has the word of the Lord failed? Never! It
should be remembered that the promises and
threatenings of God are alike conditional.
“God had committed to His people a work to be
accomplished on earth. The third angel’s message was
to be given, the minds of believers were to be directed
to the heavenly sanctuary, where Christ had entered to
make atonement for His people. The Sabbath reform
was to be carried forward. The breach in the law of
God must be made up.
The message must be
proclaimed with a loud voice, that all the inhabitants of
earth might receive the warning. The people of God
must purify their souls through obedience to the
truth, and be prepared to stand without fault before
Him at His coming.
“Had Adventists, after the great disappointment in
1844, held fast their faith, and followed on unitedly in
the opening providence of God, receiving the message
of the third angel and in the power of the Holy Spirit
proclaiming it to the world, they would have seen the
salvation of God, the Lord would have wrought
mightily with their efforts, the work would have been
completed, and Christ would have come ere this to
receive His people to their reward.
“But in the period of doubt and uncertainty that
followed the disappointment, many of the advent
believers yielded their faith. Dissensions and divisions
came in. The majority opposed with voice and pen the
few who, following in the providence of God, received
the Sabbath reform and began to proclaim the third
angel’s message. Many who should have devoted their
time and talents to the one purpose of sounding warning
to the world, were absorbed in opposing the Sabbath
truth, and in turn, the labor of its advocates was
necessarily spent in answering these opponents and
defending the truth. Thus the work was hindered, and
the world was left in darkness. Had the whole
Adventist body united upon the commandments of
God and the faith of Jesus, how widely different
would have been our history!

Blessed is He That Keepeth the Sayings of the
Prophecy of This Book.—
“To keep the sayings of the prophecy of this book
is to obey the duties brought to view in connection
with the prophecy, as, for instance, in chapter 14:9-12.”
Smith, DR, 773.

“This is the sixth beatitude and goes with the
seventh in vs. 14—a blessing on those who keep
the commandments (sayings) of God.” PJ.

REVELATION 22:8,9
And I John saw these things, and heard
them. And when I had heard and seen, I
fell down to worship before the feet of the
angel which shewed me these things.
Then saith he unto me, See thou do it
not: for I am thy fellowservant, and of thy
brethren the prophets, and of them which
keep the sayings of this book: worship God.
I Fell Down To Worship Before the Feet of Angel.—
“The angel from heaven came to John in
majesty, his countenance beaming with the excellent
glory of God. He revealed to John scenes of deep and
thrilling interest in the history of the church of God and
brought before him the perilous conflicts which Christ’s
followers were to endure. John saw them passing
through fiery trials, made white and tried, and, finally,
victorious overcomers, gloriously saved in the kingdom
of God. The countenance of the angel grew radiant with
joy and was exceeding glorious, as he showed John the
final triumph of the church of God. As the apostle
beheld the final deliverance of the church, he was
carried away with the glory of the scene and with deep
reverence and awe fell at the feet of the angel to

609

GEMS FROM REVELATION
worship him. The heavenly messenger instantly raised
him up and gently reproved him, saying, ‘See thou do it
not: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that
have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.’ The angel
then showed John the heavenly city with all its
splendor and dazzling glory, and he, enraptured and
overwhelmed, and forgetful of the former reproof of
the angel, again fell to worship at his feet. Again the
gentle reproof was given, ‘See thou do it not for I am
thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the prophets,
and of them which keep the sayings of this book:
worship God.’” Early Writings, 230,231.

worthy of less consideration than these. But God does
not so regard this book....
“The book of Revelation opens to the world what
has been, what is, and what is to come; it is for our
instruction upon whom the ends of the world are come.
It should be studied with reverential awe. We are
privileged in knowing what is for our learning....
“The Lord Himself revealed to His servant John
the mysteries of the book of Revelation, and He designs
that they shall be open to the study of all.” (Review
& Herald, 9/31/1897). 7BC, 954.
“The book of Revelation must be opened to the
people. Many have been taught that it is a sealed book;
but it is sealed only to those who reject light and truth.
The truth it contains must be proclaimed, that people
may have an opportunity to prepare for the events which
are so soon to transpire. The third angel’s message
must be presented as the only hope for the salvation
of a perishing world.” (Letter 87, 1896). Evangelism,
195.

I am Thy Fellowservant.—
“The words of the angel, ‘I am Gabriel, that
stand in the presence of God,’ show that he holds a
position of high honor in the heavenly courts. When he
came with a message to Daniel, he said, ‘There is none
that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael
[Christ] your Prince.’ Dan. 10:21. Of Gabriel the
Saviour speaks in the Revelation, saying that ‘He sent
and signified it by His angel unto His servant John.’
Rev. 1:1. And to John the angel declared, ‘I am a
fellow servant with thee and with thy brethren the
prophets.’ Rev. 22:9, R. V. Wonderful thought—that
the angel who stands next in honor to the Son of God is
the one chosen to open the purposes of God to sinful
men.” Desire of Ages, 99.

“The words ‘seal not’ are a negative statement that
means, in substance, ‘Publish the sayings of the
prophecy of this book far and wide.’” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 896.
“This book must not be sealed to God’s people
even after probation closes.” PJ.
[In Rev. 10], “The book that was sealed was not
the book of Revelation, but that portion of the prophecy
of Daniel which related to the last days. The Scripture
says, ‘But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and
seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased’
(Dan. 12:4).
When the book was opened, the
proclamation was made, ‘Time shall be no longer.’
(See Rev. 10:6.) The book of Daniel is now unsealed,
and the revelation made by Christ to John is to come
to all the inhabitants of the earth. By the increase of
knowledge a people is to be prepared to stand in the
latter days.” Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 105.

Them Which Keep the Sayings of This Book.—
“Those who keep the commandments of God. See
vs. 14, and Rev. 14:12.” PJ.

REVELATION 22:10
And he saith unto me, Seal not the
sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the
time is at hand.
Seal Not the Prophetical Sayings of This Book.—
“The fulfilling of the prophecies of Revelation
commenced in John’s day. Therefore nothing in
Revelation is to be sealed or kept secret as far as God’s
people are concerned.” Cooke, #33-UR, 31.

For The Time Is At Hand.—
“Let no more time be lost in dwelling on the many
things which are not essential and which have no
bearing upon the present necessities of God’s people.
Let no more time be lost in exalting men who know
not the truth, ‘for the time is at hand.’ There is no
time now to fill the mind with theories of what is
popularly called ‘higher education.’ The time devoted
to that which does not tend to assimilate the soul to the
likeness of Christ is so much time lost for eternity. This
we cannot afford, for every moment is freighted with
eternal interests. Now, when the great work of
judging the living is about to begin, shall we allow
unsanctified ambition to take possession of the heart and
lead us to neglect the education required to meet the
needs in this day of peril?” 6 Testimonies, 130.

“In verse 10 John is told not to seal the sayings of
the prophecy of this book. The popular theology of
our day says that the book is sealed. One of two
things follows from this: either John disobeyed his
instructions, or the theology above referred to is
viewing the matter with closed eyes, in ‘the spirit of
deep sleep.’ (Read Isa. 29:10-14.)” Smith, DR, 773.
“Many have entertained the idea that the book of
Revelation is a sealed book, and they will not devote
time and study to its mysteries. They say that they are
to keep looking to the glories of salvation, and that the
mysteries revealed to John on the Isle of Patmos are

610

REVELATION 22
Thess.1:8), will be visited with swift destruction from
Him who then comes in flaming fire to take vengeance
on his foes.” Smith, DR, 773.

“Brethren, to whom the truths of God’s word have
been opened, what part will you act in the closing
scenes of this world’s history? Are you awake to these
solemn realities? Do you realize the grand work of
preparation that is going on in heaven and on earth? Let
all who have received the light, who have had the
opportunity of reading and hearing the prophecy, take
heed to those things that are written therein; ‘for the
time is at hand.’ Let none now tamper with sin, the
source of every misery in our world. No longer remain
in lethargy and stupid indifference. Let not the destiny
of your soul hang upon an uncertainty. Know that you
are fully on the Lord’s side.” 6 Testimonies, 404,405.

“Jesus is in His holy temple and will now accept
our sacrifices, our prayers, and our confessions of faults
and sins and will pardon all the transgressions of Israel,
that they may be blotted out before He leaves the
sanctuary. When Jesus leaves the sanctuary, then
they who are holy and righteous will be holy and
righteous still; for all their sins will then be blotted
out, and they will be sealed with the seal of the living
God. But those that are unjust and filthy will be unjust
and filthy still; for then there will be no Priest in the
sanctuary to offer their sacrifices, their confessions, and
their prayers before the Father’s throne. Therefore what
is done to rescue souls from the coming storm of wrath
must be done before Jesus leaves the most holy place of
the heavenly sanctuary.” Early Writings, 48.

“The Lord is proving and testing His people.
Angels of God are watching the development of
character and weighing moral worth. Probation is
almost ended, and you are unready. Oh, that the word
of warning might burn into your souls! Get ready! get
ready! Work while the day lasts, for the night
cometh when no man can work.” 2 Testimonies, 401.

“Those who refuse to be hewed by the prophets
and fail to purify their souls in obeying the whole truth,
and who are willing to believe that their condition is far
better than it really is, will come up to the time of the
falling of the plagues, and then see that they needed
to be hewed and squared for the building. But there
will be no time then to do it and no Mediator to plead
their cause before the Father. Before this time the
awfully solemn declaration has gone forth, ‘He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy,
let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him
be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy
still.’ I saw that none could share the ‘refreshing’
unless they obtain the victory over every besetment,
over pride, selfishness, love of the world, and over
every wrong word and action. We should, therefore, be
drawing nearer and nearer to the Lord and be earnestly
seeking that preparation necessary to enable us to stand
in the battle in the day of the Lord. Let all remember
that God is holy and that none but holy beings can ever
dwell in His presence.” Early Writings, 71.

“We have no time to lose. We know not how
soon our probation may close. At the longest, we
have but a brief lifetime here, and we know not how
soon the arrow of death may strike our hearts. We
know not how soon we may be called to give up the
world and all its interests. Eternity stretches before us.
The curtain is about to be lifted. But a few short years,
and for everyone now numbered with the living the
mandate will go forth: ‘He that is unjust, let him be
unjust still: ...and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy
still.’ Revelation 22:11. Are we prepared?” Ministry
of Healing, 454.

REVELATION 22:11
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still:
and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still:
and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him
be holy still.

“When the third angel’s message closes, mercy no
longer pleads for the guilty inhabitants of the earth. The
people of God have accomplished their work. They
have received ‘the latter rain,’ ‘the refreshing from
the presence of the Lord,’ and they are prepared for
the trying hour before them. Angels are hastening to
and fro in heaven. An angel returning from the earth
announces that his work is done; the final test has been
brought upon the world, and all who have proved
themselves loyal to the divine precepts have received
‘the seal of the living God.’ Then Jesus ceases His
intercession in the sanctuary above. He lifts His hands
and with a loud voice says, ‘It is done;’ and all the
angelic host lay off their crowns as He makes the
solemn announcement: ‘He that is unjust, let him be
unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy
still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.’

Probation Closed.—
“Vs. 11 proves that probation closes, and the
cases of all are unalterably fixed before the coming of
Christ; for in the next verse Christ says, ‘Behold, I
come quickly.’ What presumption, then, to claim, as
some do, that there will be probation even after that
event! Christ’s reward is with him, to give every man
as his work shall be. This is another conclusive proof
that there can be no probation after that event. All
the living wicked, those ‘who know not God,’ the
heathen, and those ‘who obey not the gospel of the
Lord Jesus Christ,’ the sinners of Christian lands (2

611

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Revelation 22:11. Every case has been decided for life
or death.” Great Controversy, 613.

“An erroneous claim is being made by some that
the probation of the …church will close before that of
the world; that those who proclaim the Loud Cry of
Rev. 18 are sealed at the commencement of the Latter
Rain and at that time their probation closes etc. There is
no scriptural or Spirit of Prophecy evidence for this
view whatsoever….” Cooke, #11-UR, 40,41.

He That is Unjust, Let Him Be Unjust Still.—
“He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful
also in much: and he that is unjust in the least is unjust
also in much.” Luke 16:10.

“When Jesus ceases to plead for man, the cases
of all are forever decided. This is the time of
reckoning with His servants. To those who have
neglected the preparation of purity and holiness, which
fits them to be waiting ones to welcome their Lord, the
sun sets in gloom and darkness, and rises not again.
Probation closes; Christ's intercessions cease in heaven.
This time finally comes suddenly upon all, and those
who have neglected to purify their souls by obeying the
truth are found sleeping.” 2 Testimonies, 191.

He That is Filthy, Let Him Be Filthy Still.—
“But fornication, and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as
becometh saints; Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking,
nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving
of thanks.” Eph. 5:3,4.
“God has shown me that He gave His people a
bitter cup to drink, to purify and cleanse them. It is a
bitter draught, and they can make it still more bitter by
murmuring, complaining, and repining. But those who
receive it thus must have another draught, for the first
does not have its designed effect upon the heart. And if
the second does not effect the work, then they must
have another, and another, until it does have its
designed effect, or they will be left filthy, impure in
heart. I saw that this bitter cup can be sweetened by
patience, endurance, and prayer, and that it will have
its designed effect upon the hearts of those who thus
receive it, and God will be honored and glorified.”
Early Writings, 47.

“The Lord is proving and testing His people.
Angels of God are watching the development of
character and weighing moral worth. Probation is
almost ended, and you are unready. Oh, that the word
of warning might burn into your souls! Get ready! get
ready! Work while the day lasts, for the night cometh
when no man can work. The mandate will go forth:
He that is holy, let him be holy still; and he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still. The destiny of all will be
decided. A few, yes, only a few, of the vast number
who people the earth will be saved unto life eternal,
while the masses who have not perfected their souls in
obeying the truth will be appointed to the second death.
O Saviour, save the purchase of Thy blood! is the cry of
my anguished heart.” 2 Testimonies, 401,402.

He That is Righteous, Let Him Be Righteous Still.—
“Little children, let no man deceive you: he that
doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous.” 1 John 3:7.

“When Jesus rises up in the most holy place,
and lays off His mediatorial garments, and clothes
Himself with the garments of vengeance in place of the
priestly attire, the work for sinners will be done. The
period of time will then have come when the mandate
will go forth: [Rev. 22:11,12 quoted.]
“…All will be tested before Jesus leaves His
position in the most holy place. The probation of all
closes when the pleading for sinners is ended and the
garments of vengeance are put on.” 2 Testimonies, 691.

He That is Holy, Let Him Be Holy Still.—
“Holiness is not rapture: it is an entire surrender of
the will to God; it is living by every word that proceeds
from the mouth of God; it is doing the will of our
heavenly Father; it is trusting God in trial, in darkness
as well as in the light; it is walking by faith and not by
sight; it is relying on God with unquestioning
confidence, and resting in His love.” Acts of the
Apostles, 51.
“Those who are distrustful of self, who are
humbling themselves before God and purifying their
souls by obeying the truth these are receiving the
heavenly mold and preparing for the seal of God in their
foreheads. When the decree goes forth and the stamp is
impressed, their character will remain pure and
spotless for eternity.” 5 Testimonies, 216.

REVELATION 22:12
And, behold, I come quickly; and my
reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be.

“When the Lord comes, those who are holy will be
holy still. Those who have preserved their bodies
and spirits in holiness, in sanctification and honor,
will then receive the finishing touch of immortality.” 2
Testimonies, 355.

Quickly.—
“[The] period of unmingled wrath is the
‘quickly’ of Rev. 22:12. In verse 11, the True witness
declares ‘[verse 11 quoted]’. This must be at the very
point of time when the last warning and invitation shall
cease, and Jesus no longer offers his blood to save
sinners. The destinies of all are fixed, yet Jesus has not

One Close of Probation For All.—

612

REVELATION 22
then come as will be seen by the next verse. [verse 12
quoted]. Here, then, is the period of the third event
under the sounding of the seventh angel, which is, ‘and
thy wrath is come.’ It is after the message of the
third angel, and the work of the sealing angel are
closed, and before the second coming of Christ.”
White, James, The Seventh Angel, R&H, 3/7/1854.

work will have been determined, and to every one of
Christ’s followers the reward will have been
apportioned according to his deeds.
“It is while men are still dwelling upon the earth
that the work of investigative judgment takes place in
the courts of heaven. The lives of all His professed
followers pass in review before God. All are examined
according to the record of the books of heaven, and
according to his deeds the destiny of each is forever
fixed.” Christ’s Object Lessons, 310.

Behold, I Come Quickly.—
“This same King is sending forth His servants
today. He is inviting His guests, saying, ‘Come, for all
things are now ready.’ The Lord of the marriage is
soon coming: behold, He is at the door. Delay not to
open the door, lest He turn away from receiving you
and you enter not into the marriage feast. Open the
door and receive the Master, that you may enter into the
mansions of everlasting rest and never fading glory
prepared for all those that love Him. Who will make
ready for the coming of Him who hath said, ‘Behold, I
come quickly; and My reward is with Me, to give to
every man according as his work shall be’ (Rev.
22:12).” Sermons & Talks, Vol. 1, 6,7.

“Let not the idea prevail for a moment that a man’s
power to command high wages is a measure of his value
in the sight of God as a worker. In the eyes of the world
a man’s value is estimated by, ‘How much is he worth
in property?’ But heaven’s books register his worth
in proportion to the good he has accomplished with
the means he has had entrusted to him. In the fear
and love of God, with his talents wholly sanctified to
advance the glory of God, man can and will show his
true value. Only when the reward is given to every man
as his work shall be estimated in the judgment, can it be
known how much he has sent before him to heaven.”
Selected Messages, Vol. 2, 193.

“‘The great day of the Lord is near, it is near,
and hasteth greatly.’ Jesus says: ‘Behold, I come
quickly.’ We should keep these words ever in mind,
and act as though we do indeed believe that the
coming of the Lord is nigh, and that we are pilgrims
and strangers upon the earth.” 5 Testimonies, 266.

“ ‘Behold, I come quickly,’ Christ declares; ‘and
My reward is with Me, to give every man according
as his work shall be.’ Revelation 22: 12. The Lord at
His coming will scrutinize every talent; He will demand
interest on the capital He has entrusted. By His own
humiliation and agony, by His life of toil and His death
of shame, Christ has paid for the service of all who
have taken His name and profess to be His servants.
All are under deepest obligation to improve every
capability for the work of winning souls to Him. ‘Ye
are not your own,’ He says; ‘for ye are bought with a
price;’ therefore glorify God by a life of service that
will win men and women from sin to righteousness. 1
Corinthians 6:19, 20. We are bought with the price of
Christ’s own life, bought that we may return to God His
own in faithful service.” 9 Testimonies, 104.

A Present Help.—
“God is our refuge and strength, a very
present help in trouble.” Psalm 46:1.
My Reward is With Me.—
“Behold, the Lord GOD will come with strong
hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his
reward is with him, and his work before him.” Isaiah
40:10. [See also Isaiah 62:11.]
“Whenever He comes to us, His reward is with
Him. He does not leave it in heaven, but gives it to
us every day. Daily He gives us confidence and light
and blessing. Daily our hearts beat in unison with His
great heart of infinite love.” (Manuscript 116, 1902).
4BC, 1145.
“Though we cannot earn our way to heaven,
nevertheless God will reward us for every effort put
forth for His cause.” Cooke, #33-UR, 32,33.

“He that is to come says, ‘Behold, I come
quickly; and My reward is with Me, to give every
man according as his work shall be.’ Every good
deed done by the people of God as the fruit of their
faith, will have its corresponding reward. As one star
differeth from another star in glory, so will believers
have their different spheres assigned them in the
future life.” Testimonies to Ministers, 428,429.

To Give Every Man According As His Work Shall
Be.—
“Before the final reward is given, it must be
decided who are fitted to share the inheritance of the
righteous. This decision must be made prior to the
second coming of Christ in the clouds of heaven; for
when He comes, His reward is with Him, ‘to give every
man according as his work shall be.’ Rev. 22:12.
Before His coming, then, the character of every man’s

“Although we have no merit in ourselves, in the
great goodness and love of God we are rewarded as
if the merit were our own. When we have done all the
good we can possibly do, we are still unprofitable
servants. We have done only what was our duty. What
we have accomplished has been wrought solely
through the grace of Christ, and no reward is due to us
from God on the ground of our merit. But through the
merit of our Saviour every promise that God has made

613

GEMS FROM REVELATION
will be fulfilled, and every man will be rewarded
according to his deeds.” Miller, Evidence, 316.

Blessed.—
“Of the seven beatitudes found in the Revelation,
this is the final one.” Anderson, UR, 209.

REVELATION 22:13
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end, the first and the last.

Blessed Are They That Do His Commandments.—
“Verse 14, as before noticed, is the language of
Christ. The commandments of which He speaks are
His Father’s.
“Reference here must be to the ten commandments
as delivered on Mount Sinai. He pronounces a blessing
upon those who keep them. Thus in the closing
chapter of the word of God, and near the very close
of the last testimony which the faithful and true
Witness there left for his people, he solemnly
pronounces a blessing upon those who keep the
commandments of God. Let those who believe in the
abolition of the law, candidly consider the decisive
bearing of this important fact.
“Instead of the reading, ‘Blessed are they that do
his commandments,’ some translations, including the
Revised Version, have, ‘Blessed are they that wash their
robes.’ On this point Alford has this note: ‘The
difference in the readings is curious, being in the
original that between poiountes tas entolas autou, and
plunontes tas stolas auton, either of which might easily
be mistaken for the other.’ (Henry Alford, The New
Testament for English Readers, note on Rev. 22:14,
Vol. II, part II, p.1100.) In view of the fact that the
words and letters in these two phrases are so strikingly
alike, it is not surprising, that this difference of reading
is found. But there seems to be good evidence that the
first is the original, from which the latter is a variation
by the error of transcribers. Thus the Syriac New
Testament, one of the very earliest translations from the
original Greek, reads according to the Authorized
Version. And Cyprian, whose writings antedate any
extant Greek manuscript, quotes the text as reading,
‘Blessed are they that do his commandments.’ We may
therefore safely consider this as the genuine reading.”
Smith, DR, 775,776.

Alpha and Omega.—
“These are the first and last letter of the Greek
alphabet, used as descriptive of the Lord as the Creator
of all things and as the beginning and final revelation
of God to men.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 896.
“When the students of prophecy shall set hearts to
know the truths of Revelation, they will realize what an
importance is attached to this search. Christ Jesus is the
Alpha and the Omega, the Genesis of the Old
Testament, and the Revelation of the New. Both
meet together in Christ. Adam and God are reconciled
by the obedience of the second Adam, who
accomplished the work of overcoming the temptations
of Satan and redeeming Adam’s disgraceful failure and
fall.” 6BC, 1092.
“All the great truths of the Scriptures center in
Christ; rightly understood, all lead to Him. Let Christ
be presented as the alpha and omega, the beginning
and the end, of the great plan of redemption.”
Evangelism, 485.
“In the Revelation all the books of the Bible meet
and end.” Acts of the Apostles, 585.
The Beginning and the End.—
“Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which
doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the
race that is set before us,
“Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith.” Hebrews 12:1,2.
“Being confident of this very thing, that he which
hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the
day of Jesus Christ.” Philemon 1:6.

“The antinomians dislike this verse and press for
the translations from the Sinaiticus and Alexandrinus
manuscripts, but these manuscripts are notorious for
their many corruptions.
“The entrance of the saints into the city and to the
tree of life is after the Second Advent. Eternal life is
given at the Resurrection and Translation of the saints.
We suggest that the privilege of entry into the city and
eating of the tree of life, is part of the saints’ reward and
therefore, the word ‘commandments’ would be more
fitting, for the reward is according to works.
“The word ‘commandments’ also agrees with
vs.7 and 9. ‘Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.’ Vs.7. ‘And them that keep the
sayings of this book.’ Vs.9.
“The following verse confirms that v.14 refers to
commandment keeping because it shows that those
outside the city are commandment breakers.” Cooke,

The First and the Last.—
“The working out of the plan of salvation from the
first to last is bound up in Christ Jesus. The three titles
of this verse gather up the activities of Christ in relation
to man’s salvation.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 897.

REVELATION 22:14
Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may have right to
the tree of life, and may enter in through
the gates into the city.
614

REVELATION 22
“Let those who break God’s law and teach others
to do so, denounce us as fallen from grace because we
keep all ten of his immutable precepts, it will not harm
us. We have the satisfaction of knowing, that while
they curse, Jesus has pronounced a blessing. Says the
true Witness, the only Begotten of the Father, ‘Blessed
are they that do his [the Father’s] commandments,
that they may have right to the tree of life, and may
enter in through the gates into the City.’ Rev. 22: 14.
“Think ye that the commandment-keepers will be
sorry, and mourn when the pearly gates of the Golden
City of God are swung back upon their glittering hinges,
and they are welcomed in? No, never. They will then
rejoice, that they are not under the bondage of the law,
but that they have kept God’s law, and therefore are free
from it. They will have right to the tree of life, a
right to its healing leaves.” Review & Herald,
6/10/1852.

#33-UR, 33,34.
“There was no arbitrary choice on the part of God
by which Esau was shut out from the blessings of
salvation. The gifts of His grace through Christ are free
to all. There is no election but one’s own by which any
may perish. God has set forth in His word the
conditions upon which every soul will be elected to
eternal life—obedience to His commandments,
through faith in Christ. God has elected a character in
harmony with His law, and anyone who shall reach the
standard of His requirement will have an entrance into
the kingdom of glory. Christ Himself said, ‘He that
believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he
that believeth not the Son shall not see life.’ John
3:36. ‘Not everyone that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that
doeth the will of My Father which is in heaven.’
Matthew 7:21. And in the Revelation He declares,
(Revelation 22:14 quoted). As regards man’s final
salvation, this is the only election brought to view in
the word of God.” Patriarchs & Prophets, 207,208.

That They May Have Right To The Tree Of Life.—
“Obedience through Jesus Christ gives to man
perfection of character and a right to that tree of life.
The conditions of again partaking of the fruit of the
tree are plainly stated in the testimony of Jesus Christ
to John: (Rev. 22:14 quoted.)” (Manuscript 72, 1901).
1BC, 1086

“There is no discord between the Old Testament
and the New. …The dim glory of the Jewish age has
been succeeded by the brighter, clearer glory of the
Christian age. But not once has Christ stated that His
coming destroyed the claims of God’s law. On the
contrary, in the very last message to His church, by
way of Patmos, He pronounces a benediction upon
those who keep His Father’s law: (Rev. 22:14
quoted.)” (ST July 29, 1886) 6BC, 1095.

“The Son of God here presents the doing of the
commandments of God as the condition of a right to
the tree of life.
The transgression of God’s
commandments deprived man of all right to the tree of
life. Christ died, that by virtue of his blood, obedience
to God’s law might make man worthy of the heavenly
benediction, and grant him a right again to the tree of
life.” Spiritual Gifts, Vol. 3, 88.

“To ‘fear God and keep His commandments’ is
‘the whole duty of man,’ or ‘the duty of all men’
(R.V.). Eccl. 12:13,14. This is because the law of God
is not only the standard of righteousness, but also the
standard of the judgment. See Deut. 6:25; James 2:1012. The Decalogue is the divine rule of life because it is
the transcript of the character of the Lawgiver. The
very purpose of the gospel is to bring men and women
into conformity to the law of God. See Rom. 8:1-4.
The new covenant writes the principles of this law in
the mind and on ‘the fleshy tables of the heart,’ so
that the Christian does ‘by nature the things contained
in the law.’ See Heb. 8:10-12; 2 Cor. 3:2,3; Rom.
2:14,15.” Bunch, TR, 297.

And May Enter In.—
“We must through much tribulation enter into
the kingdom of God.” Acts 14:22.
“I saw that we sensed and realized but little of the
importance of the Sabbath, to what we yet should
realize and know of its importance and glory. I saw we
knew not what it was yet to ride upon the high places of
the earth and to be fed with the heritage of Jacob. But
when the refreshing and latter rain shall come from the
presence of the Lord and the glory of His power we
shall know what it is to be fed with the heritage of Jacob
and ride upon the high places of the earth. Then shall
we see the Sabbath more in its importance and glory.
But we shall not see it in all its glory and importance
until the covenant of peace is made with us at the voice
of God, and the pearly gates of the New Jerusalem
are thrown open and swing back on their glittering
hinges and the glad and joyful voice of the lovely
Jesus is heard richer than any music that ever fell on
mortal ear bidding us enter. [I saw] that we had a
perfect right in the city for we had kept the
commandments of God, and heaven, sweet heaven is
our home.” Selected Messages, Vol. 3, 260,261.

“It is the white robe of Christ’s righteousness that
gives the sinner admittance into the presence of the
heavenly angels. Not the color of his hair, but his
perfect obedience to all God’s commandments, opens
to him the gates of the Holy City.” (Letter 207, 1899).
7BC, 920,921.
“(Rev. 22:14 quoted.)
Obedience to God’s
commandments is the price of heaven, and obedience to
their parents in the Lord is the all-important lesson for
children to learn.” Child Guidance, 224.

615

GEMS FROM REVELATION
lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy
dogs which can never have enough, and they are
shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their
own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.”
Isaiah 56:10,11

“There is no such thing as our entering the
heavenly portals through indulgence and folly,
amusement, selfishness, but only by constant
watchfulness and unceasing prayer.” (Letter 47, 1893).
6BC 1094.

“‘Give not that which is holy unto the dogs,’
Matthew 7:6. Jesus here refers to a class who have no
desire to escape from the slavery of sin. By
indulgence in the corrupt and vile their natures have
become so degraded that they cling to the evil and will
not be separated from it.” Thoughts From the Mount of
Blessing, 129.

The Gate.—
“The gates are each made of one pearl, symbolic
of Christ Himself, the pearl of great price.” PJ
Through the Gates.—
“Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go
into them, and I will praise the Lord: this gate of the
Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.” Psalm
118:19,20.

“Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware
of the concision.” Phil. 3:2.

“Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation
which keepeth the truth may enter in.” Isaiah 26:2.

Whoremongers.—
“All fornicators will be outside the City of God.”
Testimonies to Ministers, 431.

“Look up, look up, and let your faith continually
increase. Let this faith guide you along the narrow
path that leads through the gates of the city of God
into the great beyond, the wide, unbounded future of
glory that is for the redeemed.” Prophets & Kings, 732.

Idolaters.—
“Those who allow a covetous spirit to take
possession of them cherish and develop those traits of
character which will place their names on the record
books of heaven as idolaters. All such are classed
with thieves, revilers, and extortioners, none of whom,
the word of God declares, shall inherit the kingdom of
God.” (Review & Herald, 12/1/1896). Counsels on
Stewardship, 26.

“Those who have been disloyal will see the
inconsistency of their uniting with the loyal to honor
and magnify the law of God, which they have educated
themselves to disregard. They have regarded the law
of God as null and void, and should they be trusted
to come through the gates into the city? They then
find that they have no passport, nothing in them that can
change their life sentiments.” Review & Herald,
9/20/1898.

Whosoever Loveth And Maketh a Lie.—
“Lying lips are abomination to the Lord.”
Proverbs 12:22.
“Falsehood and deception of every cast is sin
against the God of truth and verity. The word of God is
plain upon these points. Ye shall not ‘deal falsely,
neither lie one to another.’ ‘All liars shall have their
part in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death.’ God is a God
of sincerity and truth. The word of God is a book of
truth. Jesus is a faithful and true witness. The church
is the witness and ground of the truth. All the
precepts of the Most High are true and righteous
altogether. How, then, must prevarication and any
exaggeration or deception appear in His sight? For the
falsehood he uttered because he coveted the gifts which
the prophet refused, the servant of Elisha was struck
with leprosy, which ended only with death.
“Even life itself should not be purchased with
the price of falsehood. By a word or a nod the martyrs
might have denied the truth and saved their lives. By
consenting to cast a single grain of incense upon the idol
altar they might have been saved from the rack, the
scaffold, or the cross. But they refused to be false in
word or deed, though life was the boon they would
receive by so doing. Imprisonment, torture, and
death, with a clear conscience, were welcomed by
them, rather than deliverance on condition of deception,

REVELATION 22:15
For without are dogs, and sorcerers,
and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh
a lie.
For Without.—
“When once the master of house is risen up, and
hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without,
and to know at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto
us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you
not whence ye are.” Luke 13:25.
Dogs.—
“Dogs have compassed Me: the assembly of the
wicked have enclosed Me: they pierced My hands and
My feet. I may tell all My bones: they look and stare
upon Me. They part My garments among them, and cast
lots upon My vesture.” Ps. 22:16-18.
“His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant,
they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping,

616

REVELATION 22
falsehood, and apostasy. By fidelity and faith in Christ
they earned spotless robes and jeweled crowns. Their
lives were ennobled and elevated in the sight of God
because they stood firmly for the truth under the most
aggravated circumstances.
“Men are mortals. They may be sincerely pious
and yet have many errors of understanding and many
defects of character, but they cannot be Christ’s
followers and yet be in league with him who ‘loveth
and maketh a lie.’ Such a life is a fraud, a perpetual
falsehood, a fatal deception. It is a close test upon the
courage of men and women to be brought to face their
own sins and to frankly acknowledge them. To say,
‘That mistake must be charged to my account,’
requires a strength of inward principle that the world
possesses in but a limited degree. But he who has the
courage to say this in sincerity gains a decided victory
over self and effectually closes the door against the
enemy.” 4 Testimonies, 336,337.

bringing the commandments of God to their
remembrance. I can hardly describe to you the way in
which this has been presented to me. The Lord says in
Rev. 22:16: ‘I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify
unto you these things in the churches.’ Have any of
you seen this angel? The messengers from heaven are
close beside those who stand before the people,
holding forth the word of life.” Spalding & Magan,
22.
“My God hath sent His angel, and hath shut the
lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me.” Dan. 6:22.
To Testify to You These Things in the Churches.—
“Jesus testifies these things in the churches,
showing that the whole book of Revelation is given to
the seven churches, which is another incidental proof
that the seven churches are representatives of the church
through the entire gospel dispensation.” Smith, DR,
776.

“You have indulged in novel and story reading
until you live in an imaginary world. The influence
of such reading is injurious to both the mind and the
body; it weakens the intellect and brings a fearful tax
upon the physical strength. At times your mind is
scarcely sane because the imagination has been
overexcited and diseased by reading fictitious stories.
…If the imagination is constantly overfed and
stimulated by fictitious literature, it soon becomes a
tyrant, controlling all the other faculties of the mind and
causing the taste to become fitful and the tendencies
perverse.” 4 Testimonies, 497

“(Rev. 22:16-20 quoted.) We see from these
words the necessity of sacredly cherishing every ray
of light that the Lord Jesus sends to His church on the
earth. The efficiency of any church depends upon its
entire consecration. The church is not to conform to
any one man’s mind or judgment or will, or depart in
the slightest particular from the teachings of the Word.”
Australasian Union Conf. Record, 10/7/1907.
I Am The Root and Offspring of David.—
“Jesus is the Root of David through His divinity.
“All things were made by him; and without him was not
any thing made that was made. John 1:3.
“He is the Offspring of David in His humanity.
‘Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was
made of the seed of David according to the flesh.’
Romans 1:3.

“The black balls which were thrown after the
saints were the reproachful falsehoods put in
circulation concerning God’s people by those who
love and make a lie. We should take the greatest care
to live a blameless life, and abstain from all appearance
of evil, and then it is our duty to move boldly
forward, and pay no regard to the reproachful
falsehoods of the wicked.” 1 Testimonies, 353.

“Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of
the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and
his sepulcher is with us unto this day. Therefore being a
prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath
to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the
flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne.”
Acts 2:29,30.

REVELATION 22:16
I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify
unto you these things in the churches. I am
the root and the offspring of David, and the
bright and morning star.

“The truths of the third angel’s message have been
presented by some as a dry theory; but in this message
is to be presented Christ the Living One. He is to be
revealed as the first and the last, as the I AM, the Root
and the Offspring of David, and the bright and
morning Star. Through this message the character of
God in Christ is to be manifested to the world.” 6
Testimonies, 20.

I Jesus.—
“Revelation is signed by Christ with His own
autograph. It is the only book of the Bible personally
autographed by Christ Jesus our Lord.” Burnside,
RWU, 237.

“Jesus humbled himself, clothing his divinity
with humanity, in order that he might stand as the head
and representative of the human family, and by both
precept and example condemn sin in the flesh, and give

I Jesus Have Sent Mine Angel.—
“The Spirit of the Lord will awaken the conscience
and the understanding of those with whom you work,

617

GEMS FROM REVELATION
the lie to Satan’s charges. He was subjected to the
fiercest temptations that human nature can know, yet he
sinned not; for sin is the transgression of the law. By
faith he laid hold upon divinity, even as humanity
may lay hold upon infinite power through him.
Although tempted upon all points even as men are
tempted, he sinned not. He did not surrender his
allegiance to God, as did Adam.” Signs, 1/16/1896.

strengthened to behold the living glories of that city and
live, and should be permitted to gaze upon its dazzling
beauty, and be assured that we had a perfect right to
enter therein, and revel in its glory forever and ever,
would it not then say to us, Come, with a persuasion
which no power could resist? Who of us, in view of
this, could turn away, and say, I have no desire for an
inheritance there?
“But though we cannot now look upon that city,
the unfailing word of God has promised it, and that is
sufficient to inspire us with implicit and living faith; and
through the channel of that faith it says to us, Come.
Come, if you would inherit mansions where sickness,
sorrow, pain, and death can never enter; if you would
have a right to the tree of life, and pluck its immortal
fruit, and eat and live; if you would drink of the water
of the river of life, that flows from the throne of God,
clear as crystal. Come, if you would obtain through
those glittering gates of pearl an abundant entrance into
the eternal city; if you would walk its streets of
transparent gold; if you would behold its glowing
foundation stones; if you would see the King in his
beauty on his azure throne. Come, if you would sing
the jubilee song of millions, and share their joy. Come,
if you would join the anthems of the redeemed with
their melodious harps, and know that your exile is
forever over, and this is your eternal home. Come, if
you would receive a palm of victory, and know that you
are forever free. Come, if you would exchange the
furrows of your careworn brow for a jeweled crown.
Come, if you would see the salvation of the ransomed
myriads, the glorified throng which no man can number.
Come, if you would drink from the pure fountain of
celestial bliss, if you would shine as the stars forever in
the firmament of glory, if you would share in the
unutterable rapture that fills the triumphant hosts as they
behold before them unending ages of glory ever
brightening and joys ever new. The bride does say,
Come. Who of us can resist the invitation?” Smith,
DR, 778,779.

The Bright and Morning Star.—
“He is the bright and morning star, and leads the
universe; He heralds a new day, when time will be no
more, and eternity will be unbroken. The new day is
about to begin; it is ushered in by the marriage supper
of the Lamb.” Haskell, SSP, 360,361.
“He (Christ) is the bright and morning Star,
shining amid the moral darkness of this sinful, corrupt
world. He is the Light of the world, and all who give
their hearts to Him will find peace, rest, and joy.”
(Letter 115, 1905) Medical Ministry, 109.
“We have also a more sure word of prophecy;
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light
that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and
the day star arise in your hearts.” 2Peter 1:19.

REVELATION 22:17
And the Spirit and the bride say, Come.
And let him that heareth say, Come. And
let him that is athirst come. And whosoever
will, let him take the water of life freely.
And the Spirit Says, Come.—
“God says, ‘Come,’ the Spirit says, ‘Come,’ the
Bride says, ‘Come,’ and whosoever heareth says,
‘Come.’ Oh, that more will with consistent godly life
and with the words of their lips say, ‘Come.’ ...It is not
only by precept, but by example that you carry the
living example with you that heaven is worth
something, that Christianity is worth striving for.”
Manuscript 10, 8/2/1891.

“But now they desire a better country, that is, an
heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called
their God: for he hath prepared for them a city.”
Hebrews 11:16.

“There is power in the word, ‘Come’; for the
Spirit breathes it, and whatever is God-breathed is.
Here is the same experience that Peter had on the
stormy sea. The Master said, ‘Come,’ and while the
disciple believed the waves formed a solid footing.
When he doubted he began to sin. Today the Spirit
says, ‘Come’; and he who believes in the power of God
unto salvation, will be carried through by the one word,
‘come.’ It is a living word, like the word spoken during
creation week.” Haskell, SSP, 361,362.

Let Him that Heareth Say, Come.—
“We have heard of the glory, of the beauty, of
the blessings, of that goodly land, and we say, Come.
We have heard of the river with its verdant banks, of the
tree with its healing leaves, of the ambrosial bowers that
bloom in the Paradise of God, and we say, Come.
Whosoever will, let him come, and take of the water of
life freely.” Smith, DR, 779.
“Not upon the ordained minister only rests the
responsibility of going forth to fulfill this commission.
Everyone who has received Christ is called to work for
the salvation of his fellow men. ‘The Spirit and the
bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say,

The Bride Says, Come.—
“The bride also says, Come. But the bride is the
city, and how does that say, Come? If we could be

618

REVELATION 22
Come.’ Rev. 22:17. The charge to give this invitation
includes the entire church. Everyone who has heard the
invitation is to echo the message from hill and valley,
saying, ‘Come.’
“It is fatal mistake to suppose that the work of
soul-saving depends alone upon the ministry. The
humble, consecrated believer upon whom the Master of
the vineyard places a burden for souls is to be given
encouragement by the men upon whom the Lord has
laid larger responsibilities. Those who stand as leaders
in the church of God are to realize that the Saviour’s
commission is given to all who believe in His name.
God will send forth into His vineyard many who
have not been dedicated to the ministry by the laying
on of hands.” Acts of the Apostles, 110.

the sins of the whole world (1 John 2:2). The false
doctrine that certain ones are elected to be lost is
denied by the revelator’s statement.” 7SDA Bible
Commentary, 898.
“Thus are all invited to come. The Lord’s love for
mankind would not be satisfied in merely preparing the
blessings of eternal life, opening the way to them, and
announcing that all might come who would; but he
sends out an earnest invitation to come. He sets it
forth as a favor done to himself if persons will come and
partake of the infinite blessings provided by his infinite
love. His invitation, how gracious! how full! how free!
None of those who are finally lost will ever have
occasion to complain that the provisions made for
their salvation were not sufficiently ample. They can
never reasonably object that the light given to show
them the way of life was not sufficiently clear. They
can never excuse themselves on the ground that the
invitations and entreaties that Mercy has given them to
turn and live, were not sufficiently full and free.”
Smith, DR, 777.

“The singular number designates the
individual. Men will be saved as individuals, not as
churches or congregations.
Salvation is strictly
personal.” 7SDA Bible Commentary, 898.
“ ‘The Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let
him that heareth say, Come.’ Rev. 22:17. Everyone
who hears is to repeat the invitation. Whatever one’s
calling in life, his first interest should be to win souls
for Christ.
He may not be able to speak to
congregations, but he can work for individuals. To
them he can communicate the instruction received from
his Lord. Ministry does not consist alone in preaching.
Those minister who relieve the sick and suffering,
helping the needy, speaking words of comfort to the
desponding and those of little faith.” Desire of Ages,
822.

“In the power of the Spirit the delegated servants
of Christ are to bear witness for their Leader. The
yearning desire of the Saviour for the salvation of
sinners is to mark all their efforts. The gracious
invitation, first given by Christ, is to be taken up by
human voices and sounded throughout the world:
‘Whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely.’ Rev. 22:17. The church is to say: ‘Come.’
Every power in the church is to be actively engaged on
the side of Christ.” 9 Testimonies, 43.

Let Him That Is Athirst Come.—
“As you thirst for the water of life, ask Christ for
it, and He will give you to drink of the water of life
freely. He will be to you a well of water, springing up
into everlasting life.” (Letter 9, 1899). Evangelism,
682.

Let Him Take the Water of Life Freely.—
“Christ is able to save to the uttermost because He
ever liveth to make intercession for us. All that man
can possibly do toward his own salvation is to accept
the invitation, ‘Whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely’ (Rev. 22:17). No sin can be
committed by man for which satisfaction has not been
met on Calvary. Thus the cross, in earnest appeals,
continually proffers to the sinner a thorough expiation.”
Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 343.

“He who seeks to quench his thirst at the fountains
of this world will drink only to thirst again. Everywhere
men are unsatisfied. They long for something to supply
the need of the soul. Only One can meet that want.
The need of the world, ‘The Desire of all nations,’ is
Christ. The divine grace which He alone can impart, is
as living water, purifying, refreshing, and invigorating
the soul.
“Jesus did not convey the idea that merely one
draft of the water of life would suffice the receiver.
He who tastes of the love of Christ will continually
long for more; but he seeks for nothing else. The
riches, honors, and pleasures of the world do not attract
him. The constant cry of his heart is, More of Thee.”
Desire of Ages, 187.

“And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto
him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life
freely.” Rev. 21:6.
“Christ presents to us who are athirst the water of
life, that we may drink freely; when we do this we have
Christ within us as a well of water springing up into
everlasting life. Then our words are full of moisture.
We are prepared to water others.” 6 Testimonies, 51.

Whosoever Will.—
“The offer is universal. No one is excluded from
the possibilities of salvation. Christ is a propitiation for

REVELATION 22:18,19
For I testify unto every man that
619

GEMS FROM REVELATION
God’s requirements, have become signboards, pointing
in the wrong direction, into false paths, which lead to
transgression and death.” Fundamentals of Christian
Education, 386.

heareth the words of the prophecy of this
book, If any man shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book:
And if any man shall take away from
the words of the book of this prophecy, God
shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the holy city, and from the
things which are written in this book.

“(Rev. 22:18,19 quoted.) Such are the warnings
which God has given to guard men against changing
in any manner that which He has revealed or
commanded. These solemn denunciations apply to all
who by their influence lead men to regard lightly the
law of God. They should cause those to fear and
tremble who flippantly declare it a matter of little
consequence whether we obey God’s law or not. All
who exalt their own opinions above divine revelation,
all who would change the plain meaning of Scripture to
suit their own convenience, or for the sake of
conforming to the world, are taking upon themselves a
fearful responsibility. The written word, the law of
God, will measure the character of every man and
condemn all whom this unerring test shall declare
wanting.” Great Controversy, 268.

Warning Not to Add or Take Away.—
“Ye shall not add unto the word which I
command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from
it, that ye may keep the commandments of the LORD
your God which I command you.” Deut. 4:2.
“What thing soever I command you, observe to do
it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.”
Deut. 12:32.
“What is it to add to, or take from, the book
of this prophecy? Let it be borne in mind that it is the
book of this prophecy, or the Revelation, which is the
subject of remark; hence the words concerning adding
to or taking from have exclusive reference to this book.
Nothing can be called an addition to this book except
something added to it with the intention of having it
considered as a genuine part of the book of Revelation.
To take from the book would be to suppress some
portion of it. As the book of Revelation could not be
called an addition to the book of Daniel, so if God
should see fit to make further revelations to us by his
Spirit, it would be no addition to the book of
Revelation, unless it should claim to be a part of that
book.” Smith, DR, 781.

God Shall Add Unto Him the Plagues.—
“Since the seven last plagues fall on those who
reject the threefold message that closes the gospel
mission in the earth, they are the special objects of this
terrible malediction. The eternal destiny of all mankind
depends on their attitude toward God’s final warning
message. There is no salvation for those who reject
it, or who attempt to nullify or explain away the
great truths which it is based.” Bunch, TR, 298.
God shall Remove His Part Out of Book of Life.—
“When we become children of God, our names are
written in the Lamb’s book of life, and they remain
there until the time of the investigative Judgment. Then
the name of every individual will be called, and his
record examined by Him who declares, ‘I know thy
works.’ If in that day it shall appear that all our
wicked deeds have not been fully repented of, our
names will be blotted from the book of life, and our
sins will stand against us. If the professed believer
becomes self-confident, if in word or spirit he breaks
the least precept of God’s holy law, he misrepresents
Jesus, and in the Judgment the awful words will be
spoken, ‘Blot out his name from the book of life; he
is a worker of iniquity.’ But the Father pities the selfdistrustful, God-fearing soul, harassed though he may
be with doubts and temptations. Jesus pleads for him,
and confesses his name before the Father and his holy
angels.” Signs, 8/6/1885.

“This was doubtless a warning to copyists of
succeeding centuries to be exceedingly careful not to
change a word. But it is also a warning to all
interpreters. One who misapplies the message of this
book imperils his own soul.” Anderson, UR, 208.
“Let not ministers preach their own suppositions.
Let them search the Scriptures earnestly, with a solemn
realization that if they teach for doctrine the things
that are not contained in God’s Word, they will be as
those represented in the last chapter of Revelation.”
Evangelism, 214.
“For human agents to misconstrue and put a
forced, half truthful, and mystical construction upon
the oracles of God, is an act which endangers their own
souls, and the souls of others. (Rev. 22:18, 19 quoted.)
Those who, by their human construction, shall make
the Scripture to utter that which Christ has never
placed upon it, weaken its force, making the voice of
God in instruction and warnings to testify falsehood,
to avoid the inconvenience incurred by obedience to

Three Punishments.—
“The guilty one in this case will suffer three
major losses: (1) the loss of immortality, and the
consequent suffering of eternal death; (2) loss of any
part in the corporate life of the city of the new earth; (3)
loss of all the blessings and promises of the Revelation.
A complete and staggering loss is here presented that
nothing in this life can even remotely compensate for.”

620

REVELATION 22
Lord’s Prayer this age-long hope is expressed in the
petition, ‘Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, on
earth, as it is in heaven.’ This prayer cannot be fully
answered till the King comes to set up His kingdom of
glory. In this prayer and the final plea of John, the
prophets and saints of all ages make a united request for
the Lord to come and bring an end to the reign of sin.
For that great event all creation has long been waiting
and longing.” Bunch, TR, 299.

7SDA Bible Commentary, 898.

REVELATION 22:20
He which testifieth these things saith,
Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so,
come, Lord Jesus.
Surely I Come Quickly.—
“The coming of the Lord has been in all ages
the hope of His true followers. The Saviour’s parting
promise upon Olivet, that He would come again, lighted
up the future for His disciples, filling their hearts with
joy and hope that sorrow could not quench nor trials
dim. Amid suffering and persecution, the ‘appearing
of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ’ was
the ‘blessed hope.’ When the Thessalonian Christians
were filled with grief as they buried their loved ones,
who had hoped to live to witness the coming of the
Lord, Paul, their teacher, pointed them to the
resurrection, to take place at the Saviour’s advent. Then
the dead in Christ should rise, and together with the
living be caught up to meet the Lord in the air. ‘And
so,’ he said, ‘shall we ever be with the Lord.
Wherefore comfort one another with these words.’ 1
Thess. 4:16-18.
“On rocky Patmos the beloved disciple hears the
promise, ‘Surely I come quickly,’ and his longing
response voices the prayer of the church in all her
pilgrimage, ‘Even so, come, Lord Jesus.’ Revelation
22:20.” Great Controversy, 302.

“For we know that the whole creation groaneth
and travaileth in pain together until now. And not only
they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
body.” Romans 8:22,23.
“And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our
God; we have waited for him, and he will save us:
this is the LORD; we have waited for him, we will be
glad and rejoice in his salvation.” Isaiah 25:9.

REVELATION 22:21
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.
Grace.—
“The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all. Amen.” Rom. 16:24. (See also Rom. 1:7; 16:20; 1
Cor. 16:23; 2 Cor. 13:14; Gal. 6:18; Phil. 4:23; 1 Thess.
1:1; 5:28.)

Even So, Come, Lord Jesus.—
“This exclamation is John’s response to the
testimony of Jesus, who assures the apostle that He is
coming quickly. John was probably reminded of that
night in the upper room, more than half a century
before, when he heard Jesus declare, ‘I will come
again’ (John 14:3), and of that day a few weeks later,
on the Mount of Olives, when he had heard the angels
say, ‘this same Jesus, which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have
seen him go into heaven’ (Acts 1:11). Now, while in
holy vision, John is given one last assurance that his
blessed Lord is to return, and that, quickly. This
assurance comes from the lips of his Master Himself,
the faithful and true witness. His heart thrills at the
words, and with eager anticipation he looks forward to
the day when in reality, not in vision, he will see his
blessed Lord face to face.” 7SDA Bible Commentary,
898,899.

“By disobeying the commands of God, man fell
under the condemnation of his law. This fall called for
the grace of God to appear in behalf of sinners. We
should never have learned the meaning of this word
‘grace’ had we not fallen. God loves the sinless angels,
who do his service, and are obedient to all his
commands; but he does not give them grace. These
heavenly beings know naught of grace; they have
never needed it; for they have never sinned. Grace is
an attribute of God shown to undeserving human
beings. We did not seek after it, but it was sent in
search of us. God rejoices to bestow this grace upon
every one who hungers for it. To every one he presents
terms of mercy, not because we are worthy, but because
we are so utterly unworthy.
Our need is the
qualification which gives us the assurance that we shall
receive this gift.
“But God does not use his grace to make his law
of none effect, or to take the place of his law…. God’s
grace and the law of his kingdom are in perfect
harmony; they walk hand in hand. His grace makes
it possible for us to draw nigh to him by faith. By
receiving it, and letting it work in our lives, we testify to
the validity of the law; we exalt the law and make it
honorable by carrying out its living principles through
the power of the grace of Christ; and by rendering pure,

“The first recorded words of man after the fall,
in answer to the Question of God, ‘Where art thou?’
were, ‘I heard thy voice in the garden, and was
afraid.’
The last recorded cry of Adam’s
descendants is, ‘Even so, come, Lord Jesus.’
Between this cry of distress and expression of hope, is
the reign of sin and the story of redemption. In the

621

GEMS FROM REVELATION
whole-hearted obedience to God’s law, we witness
before the universe of heaven, and before an apostate
world that is making void the law of God, to the power
of redemption.” Review & Herald, 9/15/1896.

grace of Christ that sin is discerned in its hateful nature
and finally driven from the soul temple. It is through
grace that we are brought into fellowship with Christ, to
be associated with Him in the work of salvation. Faith
is the condition upon which God has seen fit to promise
pardon to sinners; not that there is any virtue in faith
whereby salvation is merited, but because faith can lay
hold of the merits of Christ, the remedy provided for
sin. Faith can present Christ’s perfect obedience instead
of the sinner’s transgression and defection. When the
sinner believes that Christ is his personal Saviour, then
according to His unfailing promises, God pardons his
sin and justifies him freely. The repentant soul realizes
that his justification comes because Christ, as his
Substitute and Surety, has died for him, is his atonement
and righteousness.” Faith & Works, 100.

“For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he
became poor, that ye through his poverty might be
rich.” “For he hath made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him.” 2Corinthians 8:9; 5:21.
“God’s grace is ever working upon the human
heart; and when it is received, the evidence of its
reception will appear in the life and character of the
recipient, for spiritual life will be seen developing
from within. The grace of Christ in the heart will
always promote spiritual life, and spiritual advancement
will be made.” Bible Echo, 4/15/1892.

“For the grace of God that bringeth salvation
hath appeared to all men, Teaching us that, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly, in this present world;
Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus
Christ.” Titus 2:11-13.

“Without the grace of Christ, the sinner is in a
hopeless condition; nothing can be done for him; but
through divine grace, supernatural power is
imparted to the man and works in mind and heart
and character. It is through the impartation of the
.

622

GEMS FROM REVELATION—WORKS CITED (CONTINUED)

WORKS CITED IN

GEMS FROM REVELATION
Anderson, Roy Allen. Unfolding the
Revelation. Mountain View, CA:
Pacific Press Publishing
Association, 1961.
Anderson, Roy Allen. Unfolding
Daniel’s Prophecies. Mountain
View, CA: Pacific Press Publishing
Association, 1975.
Andrews, John N. The Three
Messages of Revelation 14. Battle
Creek, MI: Review& Herald Pub.,
1892. (Reprinted by TEACH
Services, Inc., Brushton, NY,1998.)
Andrews, John N. The Judgment.
Its Events and Their Order.
Oakland, CA: Pacific Press
Publishing Company, 1890.
(Reprinted by LOA , 1997).
Batchelor, Doug. Amazing Facts
Newsletter, p. 1, June, 2005. P.O.
Box 1058, Roseville, CA 95678
Bates, Joseph. Seal of the Living
God. New Bedford, (Mass.):
Benjamin Lindsey, Printer.
1849. (Reprinted by Leaves-ofAutumn Books, Inc., P.O. Box 440,
Payson, AZ, 2000).
Bates, Joseph. Waymarks and
Highheaps. 1847. (Reprinted by
Leaves-of-Autumn Books, Inc., P.O.
Box 440, Payson, AZ, 2000).
Bates, Joseph. Autobiography of
Joseph Bates. Lighthouse
Publishing, Inc: Abrams, WI
54101, Version 1, 1998. (CD).
Battistone, Joseph J. God’s Church
in a Hostile World. Washington,
D.C.: Review and Herald
Publishing Association, 1989.

Biblical Research Institute, Gen.
Conf. of SDA. Symposium on
Revelation—Book I and II. Silver
Spring, MD 20904. Holbrook,
Frank B., Editor, 1992.
Bohr, Stephen P. Notes on
Revelation 10. Download from
internet.
Bunch, Taylor G. The Seven
Epistles of Christ. Washington
D.C.: Review and Herald Pub.
Association, 1947. (Reprinted by
Leaves-of-Autumn Books, Inc.,
Payson, AZ, 1999).
Bunch, Taylor G. The Revelation.
(Reprinted by Leaves-of-Autumn
Books, Inc., Payson, AZ, 1999).
Burnside, G. Revelations Wonders
Unfolded. Reprinted by Leaves-ofAutumn Books, Inc.: Payson, AZ,
1999.
Clark, Jerome L.. 1844: Religious
Movements, Vol. 1.
Cooke, Austin. Understanding
Revelation. 33 booklets. Character
Building Books. P.O. Box 35946,
London, N17 7WG, England.
Crews, Joe. Three Unclean Spirits
Unmasked. Downloaded from web:
amazingfacts.org/items
Dalrymple, Gwynne. “The Church
of Laodicea,” Signs of the Times,
11/14/1933.
Edson, Hiram. Manuscript.
Document File, 588.
Ferrell, Vance. WayMarks Tract
758, May, 1997.

Bible Readings for the Home.
Review & Herald Pub. Ass.,
Takoma Park, Wash. D.C., 1941.

Feyerabend, Henry. Revelation
Verse by Verse. Miracle Press Ltd.
Canada. 1989.

Bible Readings for the Home.
Harvestime Books.

Fitch, Charles. The Midnight Cry,
Letter from Charles Fitch, March 14,
1844.

643

Gibbon, Edward. Rise and Fall of
the Roman Empire, Vol. 4, p. 363.
Gilbert, F.C.. Messiah in His
Sanctuary, Leaves of Autumn,
Payson, AR, 1985.
Goldstein, Clifford. 1844 Made
Simple, Boise, Idaho, Pacific Press
Pub. Ass., 1988.
Hardinge, Leslie, Ed. The Book of
Revelation: A Collection of Ellen
G. White Quotations. Washington
Missionary College, Dept. of
Religion. (Reprinted by Leaves-ofAutumn Books, Inc.: Payson, AZ,
1995.)
Haskelll, Stephen N. The Story of
the Seer of Patmos. Nashville,
Tennessee: Southern Publishing
Association, 1905. (Reprinted by
TEACH Services, Inc., Brushton,
NY, 1995.)
Haskelll, Stephen N., The Cross And
Its Shadow. Adventist Heritage
Library, Version 1, Lighthouse
Digital Library. CD.
Hawkins, Gerald. Splendor in the
Sky. Harper & Bros: NY, NY.
1961.
Hayward, James L., Sr.. The Time
of the End. American Christian
Ministries, 2009.
Heiks, Heidi. AD 538 Source Book,
Teach Services, 2010.
Henry, Matthew. Matthew Henry’s
Commentary on the Whole Bible.
Vol. 6. Old Tappan, New Jersey:
Fleming H. Revell Company.
Jones, A.T. Great Nations of Today,
Jones, Patrick. ‘Jericho, the Roman
Empire, and the Seven Trumpets,’
Our Firm Foundation, September,
2004, pgs.9,10.

WORKS CITED
Knight, George. The Apocalyptic
Vision and the Neutering of
Adventism. Review and Herald,
Hagerstown, MD, 2008
LaRondelle, Hans. Light for the
Last Days, Pacific Press, 1999.
Litch, Josiah. “THE ELEVENTH
OF AUGUST, 1840. Fall of the
Ottoman Empire,” Signs of the
Times, February 1, 1841, Vol. 1, No.
21, front-page, Boston.
Lord, Daniel A., Immaculate
Conception Novena, ‘Ninth Day,’
1947, p.11. (Imprimatur—Francis
Cardinal Spellman, Archbishop,
NY).
Loughborough, John N. The Great
Second Advent Movement. Sothern
Pub. Ass. 1905.
Magan, Percy T. The Vatican and
the War. Nashville, Tennessee.
Southern Pub. Ass. 1915.
Mansell, Donald Ernest. Open
Secrets of the Anti-Christ. Pacific
Press, Idaho, 2002.
Maxwell, C. Mervyn, Ph.D., God
Cares, Vol. 2. Boise, Idaho. Pacific
Press Publishing Ass., 1985.

Revelation 16. Unpublished.
Nelson, Lawrence. The Antichrist,
Middleton, Idaho, CHJ Publishing,
1996.
Newton, Sir Isaac. Observations
Upon the Prophecies of Daniel and
the Apocalypse of St. John. The
Ages Digital Library Commentary.
Nichol, Francis D. The Seventh-day
Adventist Bible Commentary. Vol.
7. Wash., D.C.: Review & Herald
Pub. Association, 1957.
Olsen, V. Norskov. Papal
Supremacy and American
Democracy. Loma Linda University
Press, Loma Linda, CA, 1987.
Paulien, Jon. What the Bible Says
About the End-Time. Hagerstown,
MD 21740: Review & Herald Pub.
Association, 1994,1998.
Peck, Sarah Elizabeth. The Path to
the Throne of God. 205 Cold
Springs Rd., Angwin, California
94508: Educational Felt Aids.
Pickle, Bob. The Seven Trumpets of
Revelation. 1354 Country Road 21,
Halstad, MN 56548: 2004
Prewitt, Eugene. Worship Talk,
Covington, KY. December, 2003.

Meltzer, Milton, They Came in
Chains—The Story of the Slave
Ships, Benchmark Books, Marshall
Cavendish, NewYork, 2000, p. 31.

Price, George MacCready. Time of
the End. Nashville, Tennessee:
Southern Pub. Assn., 1967.

Metcalf, Harold E., The Great
Prophecies of Daniel and the
Revelation. Atlanta, Georgia, 1980.

Rafferty, James. Prophetic Insights.
Light Bearers Resource Center,
1994.

Michaelson, Victor. Write the
Vision, Make It Plain. Vols. 1 and
2. Self-Published. 1986.

Rosenvold, Lloyd. The Seven Seals
and the Seven Trumpets. Hope,
Idaho: Rosenvold Pub., Inc., 1993.

Miller, Roger. Understanding
Revelation in One Day.

Seventh-day Adventist Bible
Commentary, The. (See under
“Nichol, Francis D.”).

Miller, William. Evidence From
Scripture and History of the Second
Coming of Christ, about the Year
1843. Boston: Published by Joshua
V. Himes, 1842. (Reprinted by
Leaves-of-Autumn books, Inc., P.O.
Box 440, Payson, AZ, 2003.)

Seventh-Day Adventist Publ. Ass.,
Steam Press of the. An Exposition
of the Seven Trumpets of Revelation
8 & 9. Battle Creek, MI. 1875.
Skeete, John. Commentary on

623

Smith, Uriah. Daniel and the
Revelation. Hagerstown, MD:
Review & Herald Publishing Assn.,
(Revised 1944, 1972 by Southern
Pub. Assn.).
Standish, Russell R. & Colin D.
Two Beast, Three Deadly Wounds,
& Fourteen Popes. Rapidan, VA
22733: Hartland Publications,
2001.
Steel, Duncan. Eclipse: The
Celestial Phenomenon That Changed
the Course of History. Washington,
D.C.: Joseph Henry Press, 2001.
Straw, SR., Walter E. Studies in
Revelation. Concord, Tennessee:
Little Creek School, 1947.
Strong, James, S.T.D., LL.D., A
Concise Dictionary of the Greek
Testament. World Bible Publishers,
Inc.: Iowa Falls, Iowa.
Swearingen, Marc Alden. Tidings
Out of the Northeast. Remnant
Publications, 2006.
Thiele, Edwin R., Outline Studies in
Revelation. Pacific Union College.
Angwin, CA.
Treiyer, Alberto R. Apocalypse:
The Seals and the Trumpets. 2005.
United Bible Societies, Web Site,
6/2005.
Walsh, Mary. The Wine of Roman
Babylon. Leaves of Autumn Books,
P.O. Box 440, Payson, AZ 85541.
Were, Louis F.. 144,000 Sealed!
When? Why? LMN Publishing
International, Inc.: St. Maries, ID
83861, 2002
Were, Louis F.. The King of the
North at Jerusalem. LMN
Publishing International, Inc.: St.
Maries, ID 83861, 2002
Were, Louis F.. The Kings That
Come From the Sunrising. Reprint
1988, by H.K. LaRondelle.

GEMS FROM REVELATION—WORKS CITED (CONTINUED)
Were, Louis F.. The Woman and
the Beast in the Book of Revelation.
Reprint 1983, copyright 1983, 1003:
H.K. LaRondelle. Sarasota, FL
34243

White, Ellen G.
Books

Acts of the Apostles, The
Adventist Home, The
Appeal to the Youth, An.
Battle Creek Letters
Bible Commentary, EGW
Comments, Vols. 1 to 7.
Bible Echo, The (Date).
Counsel on Diet and Foods
Child Guidance
Colporteur Ministry
Counsels on Health
Christ’s Object Lessons
Counsels on Stewardship
Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and
Students
Counsels to Writers and Editors.
Desire of Ages, The
Education
Ellen White 1888 Materials, The
Evangelism
Early Writings
Faith and Works
Faith I Live By, The
Fundamentals of Christian
Education.
Great Controversy Between Christ
and Satan, The
Gospel Workers
Historical Sketches of the Foreign
Missions of the Seventh-day
Adventists (1886)
Practical Addresses.
Last Day Events
Letters, (Number, Date)
Life Sketches of Ellen G. White
Loma Linda Messages.
Manuscripts, (Number, Date)
Manuscript Releases, Vol. 1-21.
Maranatha
Medical Ministry
Ministry of Healing, The
My Life Today
Messages to Young People
Mount of Blessing, Thoughts From
The
My Life Today
Our High Calling
Pamphlet PH028
Pamphlet SpTB17a, “The Unwise
Use of Money and The Spirit of
Speculation, 1911.

Patriarchs and Prophets, The Story
of
Prophets and Kings, The Story of
Retirement Years, The.
SDA Bible Commentary, The
Selected Messages, Vol. 1, 2, 3.
Sermons and Talks, Vol. 1,2.
Sketches From the Life of Paul
Sons and Daughters of God
Southern Work, The
Spalding and Magan Collection
Special Testimonies for Ministers
and Workers, No. 7 (1897)
Special Testimonies for Ministers
and Workers, No. 10 (1897)
Spiritual Gifts, vol. 1 to 4.
Spirit of Prophecy, Vol. 3, 4.
Steps to Christ
This Day With God
Temperance
Testimonies to Ministers and
Gospel Workers
Testimonies for the Church, vol. 1-9
Undated Manuscript 66.
Upward Look
Journals and Pamphlets
Day-Star, The, 3/14/1846.
General Conference Daily Bulletin,
The
Home Missionary, The
Lake Union Herald, 12/23/1908.
The Advent Review and Sabbath
Herald
Signs of the Times
Word to the Little Flock, A
(pamphlet)
Youth Instructor
***
White, James. Bible Adventism.
SDA Publishing Ass.: Battle Creek,
MI, unknown date. (Reprinted by
Leaves-of-Autumn books, Inc., P.O.
Box 440, Payson, AZ, 2003.)
White, James. Life’s Incidents. The
Seventh-Day Adventist Publishing
Association: Battle Creek, MI,
1868.
White, James. “The Seven
Churches.” The Advent Review and
Sabbath Herald , 16 Oct., 1856.
White, James. “The Seven Seals.”
The Advent Review and Sabbath
Herald, April 25, 1865.
White, James. “The Seventh

624

Angel.” The Advent Review and
Sabbath Herald: Rochester, Thirdday, March 7, 1854.
White, James. “War and the
Sealing.” The Advent Review and
Sabbath Herald. April 25, 1865.
White, James. “The 144,000.” The
Advent Review, Vol. 1, No. 4,
September, 1850,
White, James et. al.. The Biblical
Institute, Lesson 21, “The Seven
Seals,” 1877.
White, James, The Sounding of the
Seven Trumpets of Rev. 8 & 9.
Adventist Heritage Library CDRom, Lighthouse Pub. Inc., Abrams,
WI, 54101.
White, et. al., Word to the Little
Flock, A.
Wieland, Robert J., The Gospel in
Revelation, Glad Tidings Publishers,
Paris, OH, 1989.
Wyley, J. A.. The History of
Protestantism, Vol. 1, Reprinted by
Mourne Missionary Trust, Kilkeel,
Northern Ireland, 1985.
Zurcher, J. R. Christ of the
Revelation. Nashville, Tennessee:
Southern Publishing Association,
1980.

